=== Page 2 ===
BONATTI
ON
MUNDANE ASTROLOGY

Treatises 4, 8.1,
&
 10
of Guido Bonatti’s
Book of Astronomy

Translated by Benjamin N. Dykes, Ph.D.
From the 1491 and 1550 Latin Editions

The Cazimi Press
Minneapolis, Minnesota
2010

2

=== Page 3 ===
Published and printed in the United States of America
by the Cazimi Press
621 5
th
 Avenue SE #25, Minneapolis, MN 55414

© 2010 by Benjamin N. Dykes, Ph.D.

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or
introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior
written permission of both the copyright owner and the above publisher of this
book.

The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any
other means without the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by
law. Please purchase only authorized electronic editions and do not participate in
or encourage electronic piracy of copyrighted materials. Your support of the
author’s rights is appreciated.
Kindle Edition ISBN-13: 978-1-934586-34-1

3

=== Page 4 ===
PUBLISHER’S NOTE:

This reprint of Treatises 4, 8.1, and 10 of Guido Bonatti’s
Book of
Astronomy
 has been excerpted from the out-of-print 1
st
 edition, published
in 2007. The text reflects the original pagination for each Treatise, and has
not been revised or updated to reflect new translation conventions or
citations in more recent translations. The Table of Arabic Terms has been
removed (a more recent version can be found at:
www.bendykes.com/reviews/study.php).
Students should also consult
Works of Sahl & Māshā’allāh
 (2008),
which contains much mundane material, now translated into English.
Dr. Benjamin N. Dykes
The Cazimi Press
May, 2010

4

=== Page 5 ===
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Book Abbreviations:
Table of Figures
TREATISE 4: CONJUNCTIONS
Chapter 1: On the exposition of certain terms used by astrologers
Chapter 2: In what way the supercelestial bodies are moved,
according to the diverse motions of the planets
Chapter 3: On the conjunction of Saturn and Mars
Chapter 4: On the fourth conjunction, of Saturn and Jupiter
Chapter 5: On the fifth conjunction, of the Sun with other planets
Chapter 6: On the sixth conjunction
Chapter 7: On the combust and incombust hours
following the
conjunction of the Sun and Moon,
which certain people call
Albuim
 or
Albuith
Chapter 8: On discovering the degree of the Ascendant of a
nativity,
or of some question, or of some beginning,
of which
some information is thought to be uncertain
TREATISE 8.1: MUNDANE REVOLUTIONS
Preface
Chapter 1: How the Lord of the Year may be found
Chapter 2: On the discovery of the significator of the king
Chapter 3: When the Lord of the Ascendant is the Lord of the
Year,

whence is known the condition of the king, and of
his allies,
and the common people, and certain men both
religious and secular
Chapter 4: What the Lord of the Year or Revolution would
signify
in the places in which it fell at the hour of the revolution
Chapter 5: On the knowledge of the accidents which are going to
come in the year, and in which parts they ought to happen
Chapter 6: How the earth is divided into two primary divisions
Chapter 7: How it is divided according to
three other following
divisions
Chapter 8: How the earth is divided into seven other divisions
Chapter 9: How the condition of the Sun is to be viewed
in a
revolution of the year, if it were diurnal
Chapter 10: How one must look at the condition of the Moon
if
the revolution were nocturnal
Chapter 11: What every one of the seven planets would signify
in the Ascendant, in a revolution of the year
Chapter 12: On Saturn and Mars, if they were impeded in a
5

=== Page 6 ===
revolution
when they are above the earth
Chapter 13: On the planets when they enter
into the degrees of
their exaltation
Chapter 14: How the condition of the king and the nobles
and
the populace should be considered–of what sort
their condition is
going to be
Chapter 15: Why the king will go on a pilgrimage,
if he were
going to go on a pilgrimage
Chapter 16: Why it will be feared for the person of the king,
if
his significator were under the rays
Chapter 17: On those things which ought to come to the king
in
a revolution of the year
Chapter 18: On the conjunction of the two malefics
(namely of
Saturn and Mars) with a planet in the degree
of its own
exaltation: what would be signified from that
Chapter 19: When the Sun and Moon are joined to one of the
planets
or are being separated from them: what they would
signify
Chapter 20: On the condition of the king with those placed under
him
 .
Chapter 21: On the peculiar and particular condition of the king
Chapter 22: What the significator of the king
would signify in
the angle of a house
Chapter 23: If the significator of the king, or any other planet,
were to have escaped from impediment, and were to go
to its
own exaltation
Chapter 24: To know when the revolution lasts
through the
whole year, and when through half the year,
and when through a
quarter of the year
Chapter 25: On the knowledge of the accidents
which are going
to come in the climes,
at the hour of the revolution
Chapter 26: What the Lord of the Year and the significator of the
king would signify when they were well disposed in the
revolution
Chapter 27: On the knowledge of the planetary significators
in
the revolution of the year, both of the significator of the king
and
certain others
Chapter 28: On the condition of the king and on the condition
of
his substance, and on the condition of his own soldiers or allies
Chapter 29: On the impediments of the malefics and on their
6

=== Page 7 ===
aspects, what they would signify, and how the impediments and
the impeding ones might be known
Chapter 30: What the retrogradation of the significator of the
king
and of the Lord of the Year or the significator of the rustics,
signifies
Chapter 31: What Mars and Saturn would signify
if they were
badly disposed in the revolution of the year
Chapter 32: If the Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon
and the
other significators were impeded: what would follow from that
Chapter 33: When war is signified in the revolution of the year:
from whom it comes or will be incited
Chapter 34: Which of the planets would signify wars
in the
revolution of the year, and which of them is the dispositor
Chapter 35: When war is signified in the revolution of the year;
and if it were, when victory is signified; and when flight or
defeat;
and when peace (or the extinction of the war)
Chapter 36: How it should be elected for one wanting to go to
war
Chapter 37: Through what men or peoples the fight
or war will
come to be
Chapter 38: Whether the captain of the adversary is young or old
Chapter 39: If the significator of the war were pacified
with the
Lord of the Year: what will follow from thence
Chapter 40: What the malefic planets would signify
if they were
in human signs in the revolution
Chapter 41: On the matter which introduces fear in the
revolution
of the year, and what the malefics would signify in
the angles
Chapter 42: If the Lord of the sign in which the Lord of the Year
is,
were to aspect him, or if he did not aspect him: what it would
signify
Chapter 43: On the revolution of the year,
if it were in the setting
of the Sun
Chapter 44: If the Lord of the Ascendant were impeded
in a
revolution of the year: what would follow from that
Chapter 45: What will follow from the conjunction of the two
malefics with the Lord of the Year, or with the significator of the
king
Chapter 46: How the bodies of the king and the common people
must be looked at in the revolution of the year
7

=== Page 8 ===
Chapter 47: Which planets would signify kings and kingdoms,
and on the impediments of the four angles
Chapter 48: If the Moon or Mercury were the Lord of the Year
or the significator of the king, and is aspected by the malefics:
what would follow from that; and on the Part of Fortune and its
Lord
Chapter 49: On the committing of the disposition of the Lord of
the Year to the significator of the king: what would follow from
thence
Chapter 50: On the conjunction of the Head of the Dragon
with
Saturn, and on the conjunction of the Tail with Mars,
and what
would follow from thence
Chapter 51: On the conjunction of Mars and Saturn with the Tail
Chapter 52: On the conjunction of the two malefics
(namely
Saturn and Mars) with some planet in the degree
of its own
exaltation: what would follow from thence
Chapter 53: On the Lord of the fourth, if it were in
the house of
pilgrimage at the hour of the revolution:
what it would signify
Chapter 54: What it would signify if one of the planets
commits
its own disposition to another in the revolution
Chapter 55: If some planet were the Lord of the Year:
what it
would signify in every sign, and in every triplicity,
and first
concerning Saturn
Chapter 56: On the corporal conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter
Chapter 57: If Mars were joined to Saturn in the revolution,
and
he were of good condition: what it would signify
Chapter 58: If the Sun were joined to Saturn in the revolution,
and they were both of good condition
Chapter 59: If Venus were joined to Saturn in the revolution,
and
they were of good condition
Chapter 60: On Mercury, if he were joined to Saturn in the
revolution,
and they [were] of good condition
Chapter 61: On the conjunction of the Moon with Saturn
in the
revolution, and [if] they are both of good condition
Chapter 62: What Saturn would signify in every sign,
and in
every triplicity, and in every house, whether he were
the Lord of
the Year or not
Chapter 63: On Leo
Chapter 64: On Sagittarius
Chapter 65: On Taurus and its triplicity
8

=== Page 9 ===
Chapter 66: If the Moon suffered eclipse
Chapter 67: On Virgo
Chapter 68: On Capricorn
Chapter 69: On Gemini and its triplicity, if Saturn were in it
Chapter 70: On Libra, if Saturn were in it
Chapter 71: On Aquarius, if Saturn were in it
Chapter 72: On Cancer and its triplicity, if Saturn were
the Lord
of the Revolution, and were in it or its triplicity
Chapter 73: On Scorpio, if Saturn were in it
Chapter 74: If Saturn were in Pisces
Chapter 75: What Saturn would signify in any house in the
revolution
of the year, or of the world, or of nativities, or
questions,
whether he is Lord of the Year or not
Chapter 76: On the conjunction of Saturn and Mars–
what it
would signify in a revolution
Chapter 77: What Jupiter would signify in a revolution,
in every
sign and in every triplicity (if he were the Lord of the Year),
and
in every house (whether he were the Lord of the Year or not)
Chapter 78: On his location in Leo
Chapter 79: On his location in Sagittarius
Chapter 80: What Jupiter would signify in every revolution of
the year,
whether of the world or a nativity or a question,
whether he is
the Lord of the Year or not
Chapter 81: What Mars would signify if he were the Lord of the
Year,
in any triplicity and in each sign; and in each house,
whether he is the Lord of the Year or not
Chapter 82: If Mars were in Leo
Chapter 83: If Mars were in Sagittarius
Chapter 84: On another wicked signification of Mars
Chapter 85: On Mars in Taurus–what he would signify
Chapter 86: On Mars, if he were in Virgo
Chapter 87: On Mars in Capricorn
Chapter 88: On Gemini and its triplicity
Chapter 89: If Mars were in Libra
Chapter 90: If Mars were in Aquarius
Chapter 91: On Mars in Cancer and its triplicity
Chapter 92: On Mars in Scorpio
Chapter 93: If Mars were in Pisces
Chapter 94: On the Sun, if he were the Lord of the Year–
what he
would signify
9

=== Page 10 ===
Chapter 95: What the Sun would signify in every house
in a
revolution of years, nativities, and years of the world,
and in
nativities, whether he is the Lord of the Year or not
Chapter 96: On Venus, if she were the Lady of the Year–
what
she would signify
Chapter 97: What Venus would signify in every house in a
revolution
of the year, whether she were Lady of the Year or not
Chapter 98: What Venus would signify in every sign in a
revolution
Chapter 99: On Mercury, if he were the Lord of the Year–
what
he would signify
Chapter 100: What Mercury would signify in every house in a
revolution of the world, whether in a nativity or in the revolution
of a nativity, whether he is the Lord of the Year or not
Chapter 101: On the Moon, if she were the Lady of the
Year–
what she would signify
Chapter 102: What the Moon would signify in a revolution of
the year
of the world or [in a] nativity in every house, or in the
revolution
of a nativity, whether she is Lady of the Year or not
Chapter 103: What the Head and Tail and comets would signify
in a revolution of the year, both of the world and of nativities
Chapter 104: On Comets
Chapter 105: What the Head of the Dragon and the Tail would
signify
in every house, both in revolutions and in nativities or
questions
Chapter 106: What the Tail would signify in the houses
Chapter 107: What the [malefic] fixed stars would signify in
revolutions of years, and nativities, and what they would do in
them
Chapter 108: On the peculiar nature
of the aforesaid [malefic]
stars in every house
Chapter 109: What the fortunate fixed stars would signify in
nativities
and questions and the revolutions of years
Chapter 110: On the peculiar nature of these [benefic] fixed stars
in the twelve houses
Chapter 111: On the varieties of manners
Chapter 112: On the impediments which the Lord
of the
ascending sign of the revolution introduces,
if it were impeded
(whether it is the Lord of the Year or not)
Chapter 113: On the impediments which the Lord of the
10

=== Page 11 ===
Midheaven

will introduce, if he were impeded in the
revolution
Chapter 114: How evil or horrible accidents that are going to
come
in that year, may be known at the hour of the revolution
Chapter 115: What the planets would signify in a revolution of
the year
in which an eclipse of the Sun or Moon is supposed to
take place
Chapter 116: How one should proceed concerning the
significators
of the king and the rustics, according to Abū
Ma’shar
TREATISE 10: HEAVY RAINS
Preface
What things are set out in this work
On the knowledge to be had of the benefics and malefics,
and of all
temperate or convertible things
To know when coming rains would be signified, and when not
On the prognostication of rains in general
Which mansions of the Moon are wet, which dry, and which
common…
On the air’s mutation and its variation, and the knowledge of future
heavy rains
A chapter on rains and the mutations of the air
On the hour of showers, heavy rains, and winds
When Saturn prohibits rains
On the application of the Moon with Jupiter
On the application of the Moon with Mars
On the application of the Moon with the Sun
On the application of the Moon with Venus
On the application of the Moon with Mercury
On the application of the Moon with the benefics or malefics
On the four tetragons, or on the four dichotomies or the four figures
In order to know the qualities which will be prolonged more than one
day
On the circles which are made around the Moon and the Sun,
likewise
around the other stars (both the wandering and not-wandering [stars])
….
On comets and tailed stars
On the hurling of the stars
On the significations of diurnal and nocturnal qualities
On the rainbow, if it were to appear, and in what times, and what it
11

=== Page 12 ===
would signify
On the investigation of the year, if there should be rains
On the application of the Moon with Saturn and with the rest of the
planets
On certain extraordinary things
On the accidents whose spaces of time are prolonged for a little while
On the consideration of the places of rains
On the signs and places signifying less rain than the aforesaid signs
In the conjunction of what planets rains are signified
If you wished to know, of some month, whether it would be rainy or
not
On the conjunction of the Moon with the planets,
and on the
conjunction of the other planets individually to each other
BIBLIOGRAPHY

12

=== Page 13 ===
Book Abbreviations:

 Abu ‘Ali al-
Khayyat:

The Judgments of Nativities

JN

 Abū
Ma’shar:

Liber Introductorii Maioris ad Scientiam
Iudiciorum Astrorum (Great Introduction
to the Knowledge of the Judgments of the
Stars)

Gr. Intr.

On Historical Astrology: the Book of
Religions and Dynasties (On the Great
Conjunctions)

OGC

The Abbreviation of the Introduction to
Astrology

Abbr.

The Flowers of Abū Ma’shar

Flowers

 Al-Biruni:

The Book of Instruction in the Elements of
the Art of Astrology

Instr.

 Māshā’allāh:

De Receptione (On Reception)

OR

De Revolutionibus Annorum Mundi
 (
On
the Revolutions of the Years of the World
)

De Rev.
Ann.

 Pseudo-

13

=== Page 14 ===
Ptolemy:

 Ptolemy

Tetrabiblos

Tet.

 Sahl ibn
Bishr:

De Electionibus
 (
On Elections
)

On Elect.

De Quaestionibus
 (
On Questions
)

On
Quest.

Introductorium
 (
Introduction
)

Introduct.

 ‘Umar al-
Tabarī:

Three Books of Nativities

TBN

 Vettius
Valens:

The Anthology

Anth.
14

=== Page 15 ===
Table of Figures
Figure 33: An Ingress by Abū Ma’shar
Figure 36: “One way of [presenting] the mansions of the Moon in a
table”
15

=== Page 16 ===
TREATISE 4:
CONJUNCTIONS

On the consideration of certain conjunctions, and of certain other things which the
astrologer must know and consider

Chapter 1: On the exposition of certain terms used by astrologers
This Treatise is on the more powerful things which there are in a full
consideration of astrology, which would seem to pertain to judgments:
whence it is necessary that you turn your whole mind and your whole
intention to it, in such a way that you do not become given over to other
topics until you understand its purpose. Which if you were to do otherwise,
you will have deceived yourself and wasted your effort and your time; and
perhaps (even if unduly), you will reproach me, affirming that I have said
nothing.
Indeed the beginning of this Treatise is [on] the conjunctions signifying
things which come to be in this world, and these conjunctions are six,
[1]
 of
which the first and greatest of all is [1] the conjunction of Saturn and
Jupiter in the first bound of Aries, or in the beginning of Aries itself. And
this comes to be only once in 960 years, which signifies great events to
come in the world.
[2] The second conjunction of these, comes to pass in the first bound or
degree of any one [member of a] triplicity, like that of the fiery, or the
earthy, or the airy, or the watery; and this comes to be only once every 240
years.
Moreover, they make other conjunctions in each triplicity; and it is
sometimes possible that they make thirteen conjunctions in one triplicity,
in this way: one conjunction ends in the beginning of some triplicity which
begins in another triplicity, indeed near its end, [so] that they could not be
completed in it; whence it is denominated from that triplicity in which it
ends. And it ends in the beginning of it, because the other twelve can all
begin and be ended in that same triplicity, and thus there come to be
thirteen conjunctions in the same one. This happens if one conjunction
would end in the beginning of some triplicity, indeed so that it would not
go beyond 54’ of the first degree of that triplicity. And these thirteen
conjunctions come to be in one triplicity, just as sometimes two
conjunctions of the Sun and Moon come to be in one sign, and in one solar
month. For example, a conjunction of the Sun and Moon was made in the
16

=== Page 17 ===
first degree of Aries, and [thereafter] there was a

conjunction in Saphar
[2]
(which is the second month), which is comprised of 29 days; and before
the Sun had left Aries, another conjunction was made in the thirtieth
degree of Aries (or perhaps in the twenty-ninth), and thus two conjunctions
were made in Aries. Likewise a conjunction was made on the first day of
August, and before the Sun had left August (indeed so that a lunar month
would have been completed)
,
another conjunction of the Sun and Moon
was made on the thirtieth day of August, and so two conjunctions of the
Sun and Moon were made in one month–not that both began in it, but
because both were ended in it. And so it is with the conjunctions of Saturn
and Jupiter when they make thirteen conjunctions in one triplicity.
Afterwards, the conjunction is changed to the triplicity which succeeds
the first, so if the first conjunctions were made in the fiery triplicity, they
are changed to the earthy triplicity, and from the earthy to the airy, and
from the airy to the watery; and again from the watery it reverts back to
the fiery, namely to the triplicity of Aries; and from the triplicity of Aries
to the triplicity of Taurus; from the triplicity of Taurus to the triplicity of
Gemini; and from the triplicity of Gemini to the triplicity of Cancer; again,
from the triplicity of Cancer to the triplicity of Aries, and so on
ad
infinitum
.
Chapter 2: In what way the supercelestial bodies are moved,
according to the diverse motions of the planets
The conjunctions of the superior, perceptibly changeable bodies, come
to be according to the differences of their motions (both natural and in
place); and from thence come to be their effects imperceptibly in inferior
individuals.
[3]
 And these natural motions are considered according to
three divisions, because the divisions are named and considered according
to the order of the successive circles of the seven planets

in this way: of
course the first division is considered according to the motions of the three
superior planets (which are Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars), according to which
you will find sufficiently determined below in the Treatise on nativities.
The second is considered according to the planet in the middle of the other
locations, which is the Sun. The third, if indeed it is considered, is
according to the motions of the three inferiors, which are Venus, Mercury,
and the Moon.
For the first division of the planets (namely that of the superiors), is
threefold, and in a threefold way it impresses upon individual, inferior
17

=== Page 18 ===
things; and this according to three diverse motions, namely the first,
second, and third. The first motion is moved about the middle. The second
is moved from the middle. The third is not moved about the first, nor from
the first, nor about the middle, nor from the middle, but toward the middle.
Whence the first division of the superior planets is considered, and
referred to the first motion, which presides over the middle motion,
because those planets approach the first motion, and are elongated from
the third motion, which is toward the middle motion. And these divisions
of motions are taken to be over individual particulars of which durability is
expected, as are the structures of houses, and similar things which have
beginnings, and whose middle does not come quickly, and whose end
comes long after their beginning. And these things are attributed to Saturn,
which has an affinity with the first motion more than the others. And their
middle is attributed to Jupiter, because just as Jupiter is in the middle
between the other superiors, and located in the middle of them, and among
those motions his motion is in the middle [in terms of speed], therefore the
middle of those things is attributed to him, and even their full completion
is attributed to him, and considered according to the same. And because he
himself is closer to Mars (to whom is attributed the end of things) than is
Saturn, and closer to Saturn (to whom is attributed the beginning of things)
than is Mars, therefore to him is attributed the middle, and the full
completion of things according to the same consideration. Indeed, the end
is attributed to Mars, because he himself is posited at the end of the first
division, and because the end makes for the destruction of things; and on
account of this wars and battles and contentions are attributed to him,
because they make more for consumption, and diminution, and
destruction, than the rest.
For the beginning indicates the being of things, indeed the middle their
perfection; the end the destruction of the same. And because the multitude
of diverse motions are multiplied, and diversity between humans, and
discord of their wills, and accordingly wars and contentions arise, which
make for the destruction of things, and make their ends. And whatever
may be said by certain ignorant persons about their own Creator
[4]
 (who
disposed the universe in good order, and did nothing without reason), this
was the reason why these three [significations] were attributed to the three
superior planets, just as [many as there are] principles in the first
signification, surpassing [or preceding] those which come after (in the
second signification, which are signified by the other planets).
And thus by the testimony of the Philosopher
[5]
 the second
[6]
 motion is
moved from the middle, and the third motion moves toward the middle.
18

=== Page 19 ===
And the second, middle motion is naturally attributed to the Sun (who is
the greater luminary) and to his effects; and this motion is from the middle,
by means of a relationship,
[7]
 because he himself has affinity to this
motion; and he is, in the order of the circles, placed circularly in the
middle of the others, and whatever is referred to him is between the first
motion and the third motion. And because his motion is less slow than the
superior ones, and less fast than the inferior ones, for this reason he is said
to be the significator of kings and the wealthy, and of magnates, of those
wanting to be in charge of and rule over others; and because he himself
participates with the first division, and his signification is considered [to
be] stronger in the second one than any other’s; and he succeeds Mars in
the order of circles.
However, the third motion, toward the middle, is attributed to the three
inferior planets, on account of their remoteness from the first motion
which is above the middle motion; and their effects concern things that are
pleasant and which are not expected to last long; and on account of their
fast motion having an affinity with pleasant things, even if in a certain way
they may resemble the first motion, still they have an affinity with the third
motion. And their natural motions are considered according to the three
divisions of the motions of the superior planets. For to Venus is given the
signification of marriage, and the arrangement of the clothing of bodies,
[8]
and of similar things, because of her correlation to Saturn. For just as
Saturn is the first and highest of the three superior planets, and from him
are considered the principles of things of great durability and great age, so
Venus is the first of the three inferior planets, and according to her are
taken into account the beginnings of things of which great durability or
widespread effect
[9]
 is not expected; and she succeeds the Sun in the order
of circles.
Indeed to Mercury is given signification over things signifying the
perfection of things which do not have great durability, like numbers,
writings, and measurements, and sculptures, and the like, of which it is
granted that certain ones do last a long time, but not unless they come to be
[used] for the memory of things, as they improve the forgetfulness of men,
and wherefore his signification is associated with the signification of
Jupiter (and is correlated to him, who signifies the perfection of things
which last a long time). For just as Jupiter is in the middle between the
superior planets, so Mercury is in the middle between the inferior planets,
and succeeds Venus in the order of circles.
Indeed to the Moon is given the signification over movable things, and
things that change themselves quickly, and over pilgrimages, and over all
19

=== Page 20 ===
things acknowledged to change quickly, and whose end comes quickly,
and whose meanings are correlated to the significations of Mars: for just as
Mars is the third and last of the three superior planets, and signifies the end
of things lasting a long time, so the Moon is the third and last of the three
inferior planets and is akin to the third division, to the signification by
Mars; and she signifies the end of things that go on quickly to their end.
And thus the Moon
[10]
 falls in the order of circles, just as will be
explained at length in the Treatise on nativities.
Nor should you believe that these significations were attributed to these
three planets except by reason of the need for those things which natural
necessity impels toward them, just as are the customs of men, and
oppositions, and [social] conditions, and laws, and according to the
particular stories of living people, all of which are perfected by number
and writing; and into whose debt they plainly fall, as much as in them as to
wars, contentions, and journeys, and the rest of the changes which they do
not take up except through perfected motion. And these aforesaid
significations were attributed to the stated three inferiors, because they are
secondary through a relation to the first motion or being, and [it is] on
account of it that they follow from thence.

And wherefore from their (and
others’) significations is had the foreknowledge of their effects which
generally are going to come, according to their course; and through which
[course] we arrive at their particular cognitions, the which aforesaid
conjunctions we would be able to judge if we wished to understand them
correctly (namely [that] of Saturn with Jupiter and Mars in the aforesaid
places). But concerning those motions and what is signified by them, it
will be stated at greater length (and to a finer point) in the Treatise on
nativities.
Chapter 3: On the conjunction of Saturn and Mars
[11]
[3] The third conjunction is the conjunction of Saturn and Mars which
they make at the beginning of Cancer, or in its first degree, or at least in its
first bound–and this happens once every 30 years.
But you could say, “why was only the conjunction which Saturn and
Mars make at the beginning of Cancer considered, when they themselves
are conjoined in the beginnings of the other signs, and likewise of the other
triplicities, just as in the beginning of Cancer?” To which it can be
responded thus, that their conjunction was considered more so in the
beginning of Cancer than elsewhere, because it is worse than all the other
20

=== Page 21 ===
conjunctions they make, even if all the others are bad; and the conjunction
they make in the beginning of Capricorn is less malicious, because they
are received by each other, and their malice is diminished. Capricorn is the
dignity of each, namely the domicile of Saturn and the exaltation of Mars,
while Cancer is the detriment of each, namely of Saturn, and of Mars,
because it is their
[12]
 greatest impediment. And however much more the
malefics are impeded, by that much more they do worse things, and their
malice and detriment is increased. For in the other signs, they do not have
manifest detriment. And even if they harm or offend in the others, still
they do not kill as much as they do in [Cancer]; because then the greatest
changes in the world take place, as well as the greatest accidents, which do
not happen in the other conjunctions they make elsewhere. For kingdoms
are changed, and terrible battles come to be, from which follow killings,
suffocations, shameful captures, the destruction of kingdoms, burning by
fire, and many sheddings of blood, famines, mortalities, sterility,
[13]
 and
many pestilences.
And if they were oriental, the things signified by them will happen
quickly in proportion as they were close to the Sun or removed from him.
And if they were occidental, the things signified by them will be prolonged
and delayed. Whence you will consider the Ascendant of their conjunction,
namely when they come together in [one and the same] minute; and see
the number of degrees of longitude which are between them and the Sun,
from which you will make the signs, namely by giving 30° to each sign. If
a fixed sign were ascending, and they themselves were occidental, they
will signify the years of the arrival of the things they signify, according to
the number of signs in degrees of distance which you come up with
between them and the Sun. And if they were oriental, instead of years put
months. And if the sign were common, and they occidental, instead of
years put months. And if they were oriental, instead of months put weeks.
And if the sign were movable, instead of years put weeks if they were
occidental. Indeed if they were oriental, instead of weeks put days. And
when you give one sign per year, give a month for every 2° 30’, and a
week for every 37’ 30”, and a day for every 5’ 21”, because within these
times the things signified by them will take place, if you have reckoned the
Ascendant of their perfected conjunction well.
However, you must consider there whether the angle of the 1
st
 house is
correct or removed. Because if it were correct (namely, that it is one sign,
and does not make but one house), they will take place according to that
which I told you in the listed, equal times [in the preceding paragraph]. If
however it were removed, it will happen in another way: because if the
21

=== Page 22 ===
angle contained less than 30°, it will delay what is signified–that is, if one
sign were to make two houses (just as often happens). Indeed if it
contained more than 30°, that is, that one sign is included there which will
not be specifically named, or [if] in another way it contains more than 30°,
what is signified will come quickly, and will accelerate.
So, let it be put that the fifth degree of Leo is the 1
st
 house, and the
twenty-seventh degree of that same sign is the 2
nd
 house. In this way that
sign makes two houses, and the thing signified will be delayed by one-
tenth, just as one-tenth of the sign falls in another house;
[14]
 and if more
of it were to fall into it, the thing signified would slow down more; and if
one-ninth of it fell in the other house, its signification would slow by one-
ninth of the time. If one-eighth fell, it would slow down by one-eighth; and
so on with the other parts of the sign. But if one sign were enclosed,
[15]
like if the twenty-eighth degree of Pisces were the 1
st
 house and the third
degree of Taurus were the 2
nd
 house, in this way Aries would be wholly
enclosed in the 1
st
 house; and the thing signified would hasten in
accordance with the amount of degrees which the 1
st
 house contains
beyond 30, and which ought to have been in the 2
nd
 house, which are two
degrees of Pisces and three of Taurus: and thus the thing signified will
hasten by a sixth part of its time, just as one-sixth of one sign falls in that
house beyond what it should have been according to the right size of the
angles. And thus may you understand in the case of any proportion of a
sign. Likewise if there were few degrees [between] them and the Sun, such
that an entire sign could not be made from them (this is when there are less
than 30).
And if the Ascendant [of the Saturn-Mars conjunction in Cancer] were
such a sign that it rises in less than two equal hours, it signifies days. And
if there were between them and the Sun so many degrees that an entire
sign could be made from them, namely if there were 30 [degrees] and the
ascending sign was one which rises in two hours, it signifies months. And
if the ascending sign were such that it rises in more than two hours, it
signifies years, subject to the proportion subsisting in degrees and minutes,
as I said.
One must even know that the things signified by their conjunction often
fall upon those things which are signified by the sign which was ascending
at the hour of the middle of their conjunction, or by its Lord, and so
concerning the sign in which their conjunction is.
And if they were in the eastern part when their conjunction is
completed, namely that they would come together in one [and the same]
minute, or they were conjoined to oriental [eastern?] planets, the things
22

=== Page 23 ===
signified will happen in the eastern part. And if they were in the south,
joined to planets in the south, they will happen in the southern part. And if
they were conjoined to occidental [western?] planets, or they were
western, they will happen in the western part. And if they were not in any
of these parts, but were northern, or were joined to northern planets, they
will happen in the north.
[16]
Cancer, as I said, is the detriment of Saturn and Mars, because it is
opposite Capricorn (which is the domicile of Saturn and the exaltation of
Mars); and every seventh sign from the domicile or exaltation of some
planet, is said to be the detriment of that planet. Aries is opposite Libra
(which is the exaltation of Saturn); but it is not opposite any dignity of
Mars–on the contrary, [Aries] is his dignity.
Taurus is the opposite of Scorpio (which is the domicile of Mars), but is
not the opposite of the domicile or exaltation of Saturn. Whence their
conjunction in the beginnings of the other signs, or other triplicities, are
less than their conjunction in the beginning of Cancer, and less malicious.
Indeed, Gemini is not the opposite of the domicile or exaltation of either of
them.
Chapter 4: On the fourth conjunction, of Saturn and Jupiter
[4] The fourth conjunction is of Saturn and Jupiter, which occurs once
every 20 years, indeed so that [there are] 12 conjunctions in each triplicity.
And that it is true that they make 12 conjunctions in any [given] triplicity,
is made plain by this, if you would attend to its truth: for by the
multiplication of 12 by 20 or 20 by 12 (which is the same thing), they
make 240, and thus they are conjoined in 240 years twelve times in turn,
by making one conjunction every 20 years. And thus they make 48
conjunctions between all the triplicities before they return to the same
point in which they made their first conjunction (whence they make 12
conjunctions in 240 years): for multiplying 240 by 4 makes 960 years; and
then their conjunction returns to the beginning of Aries, or to the
beginning of some other triplicity. And understand this about any place in
which they make some conjunction: they will always return there, once
every 960 years.
Chapter 5: On the fifth conjunction, of the Sun with other planets
23

=== Page 24 ===
[5] But the fifth conjunction is that which the Sun makes with the
planets in his entrance into the first minute of Aries,
[17]
 or of another
planet to him in turn. For it has its [own] significations: sometimes small,
sometimes great, sometimes good, sometimes bad, sometimes middling,
just as is discussed in full in the Treatise on revolutions. For it would be
long and laborious, nor philosophical, if it were touched on here; nor in the
proper order [of topics]. And likewise if the entrance of the Sun into Aries
is considered, and its Ascendant in that hour, and its minute in each year,
in which one of the aforementioned conjunctions (namely of Saturn with
one of the planets discussed), is obliged to take place: because in that that
year the conjunction of the Sun with the planets must show greater things
to be signified than in others.
Chapter 6: On the sixth conjunction
[6] Indeed the sixth conjunction is of the Sun and the Moon in the same
minute, which takes place once at the beginning of each lunar month; and
their opposition, which is in the middle of every lunar month. And they
likewise have diverse things they signify, just as is discussed in the
Treatise on rains; and even certain [significations] in revolutions, which I
will tell you about when it seems expedient.
Chapter 7: On the combust and incombust hours following the
conjunction of the Sun and Moon, which certain people call
Albuim
 or
Albuith
[18]
Some of the ancient sages, from whom I do not wish to deviate, said that
after the conjunction of the Sun and Moon, from the very minute of their
conjunction, there are 12 hours which are called “combust”; and after
those 12 combust hours are 72 hours which are called “incombust”; and
after those 72 incombust ones are 12 combust ones; and so on up to the
degree and minute of the next conjunction that follows. And they said that
the 12 combust hours are divided into three equal parts, by giving to each
part four of these hours. And they said that he who prepares to make war
in the first four hours, or goes to war, ought to fear the death of his body.
And he who prepares in the second four hours to make war, or goes to war,
should fear for his capture, or being wounded, or some blow, [but] without
losing his life. And he who undertakes in the last four hours to make war,
24

=== Page 25 ===
or goes to war, should fear the loss of his substance and of those who were
with him; and he could even lose the persons who help him. And he who
undertakes to plow in the first four hours, or goes to plow, should fear the
loss of the fruits of his hope from that plowing. And he who undertakes to
plow in the second four hours, or who goes to plow, should fear great
detriment in all things that he possesses, and even in his body, [but]
without losing his life. And he who undertakes to plow in the last four
hours, or goes to plow, should fear the diminution of his seeds.
On the
Duodena
 of the Moon
[19]
Moreover there is another division of these hours, which is called the 12
hours of the Sun and the Moon–namely 12 of the Moon. And this is
something very important to observe, namely that you should know the
hour of the conjunction of the Sun and Moon and its minute, and take 12
hours after the conjunction, and divide them into three equal parts, namely
by giving to each part four hours; and to give the first division to the Sun,
who is the first Lord of the first triplicity, namely the fiery one; and the
second you ought to give to the second Lord of the same triplicity, namely
Jupiter; and the third you should give to the third Lord of that triplicity,
which is Saturn; and you ought to judge according to the condition of these
Lords, just as I will explain to you in what follows.
[20]
Then you ought to give the next 12, which you put under the Lords of
the first triplicity, to the second one, namely to the earthy one, by giving
the first four hours to Venus, who is the first Lord of the second triplicity,
namely the earthy one. The second four [go to] the Moon, who is the
second Lord of the same triplicity. [Give] the last four to Mars, who is the
third lord of that triplicity.
Then you ought to give 12 hours to the Lords of the airy triplicity,
namely to the third [triplicity] after the 12 hours you gave to the Lords of
the second triplicity, by giving the first four hours to Saturn, who is the
first Lord of the third triplicity. Give the second four to Mercury, who is
the second Lord of the airy triplicity. Give the last four to Jupiter, who is
the last Lord of the same triplicity.
Then you ought to give another four hours to the Lords of the fourth
triplicity, namely the watery one, by giving the first four hours to Venus,
who is the first Lady of the fourth triplicity. [Give] the second four to
Mars, who is the second lord of the same triplicity. The last four you ought
to give to the Moon, who is the last Lady of the fourth triplicity, namely
the watery one.
25

=== Page 26 ===
And so you ought to do with every Lord of every triplicity, until the
disposition is reverted back to the Sun, and this is continued up to the
degree and minute of the next conjunction that follows. And you will
consider all of these hours according to inequality, and not equality.
[21]
And therefore Ptolemy said, “observe the
duodena
 of the Moon,”
[22]
because this is that
duodena
 of the Moon which he understood. For always
when the Moon is in one of the
duodenae
, her condition and disposition
will be according to the condition of that planet to which is deputed that
third part of the
duodena
 in which the Moon then is. Whence a
duodena
 of
the Moon must be avoided (according to the disposition of that planet to
which are attributed those four hours, who is not to be placed on behalf of
him for whom you elect), if you can ever avoid it, unless it should happen
from the misfortune of someone that the beginning of his war, or his
journey to war, should fall in one of those prohibited combust hours: for he
will have to fear the danger spoken of above.
[23]
 And so much more
strongly do those four hours of the Moon’s
duodenae
 have an effect
[24]
she were badly disposed then: because then there would be no remedy for
him, even if he had a good election for war: only God could avert it.
However, the aforesaid 12 combust hours are to be avoided more,
because [the
duodenae
] are subordinated to [the combust hours]. And thus
12 degrees are connected to each planet, by dividing the
duodenae
themselves equally between the planets; whence are produced 84 stages
between them all. For 12 multiplied by 7 makes 84. Then the eighth
duodena
 reverts back to the Sun, and the divisions of the
duodenae
 come
to be again as was said in the preceding, until they reach the second
conjunction.
Then the wise said that after the aforesaid 12 combust hours, in which it
is not good or useful to do anything mentioned above, there are 72
incombust hours in which one can begin or do what one wants, unless
something else impedes. And [so on] until the following conjunction is
reached. Whence you ought to consider in judgments, and especially to see
in those matters about which I made mention, lest the beginning of some
matter you (or someone else) do or intend to begin, falls in one of those
prohibited hours, be it a journey or something else, and that you avoid it as
much as you can.
Chapter 8: On discovering the degree of the Ascendant of a nativity,
or of some question, or of some beginning, of which some information
is thought to be uncertain
26

=== Page 27 ===
Having spoken about conjunctions, and the combust and incombust
hours, even if it should seem not [to be] in philosophical order, still I will
make mention to you of how to find the degree of the Ascendant of any
beginning for which certainty is not had, provided that some indications
are possessed which seem to show a closeness [to the correct time], even if
they are not very certain, but as though half-certain. Because it happens
sometimes that the mother or female porter or other midwives do not know
the hour of the nativity of the child well; nor even do those who are taking
part in some matter [of an election]
;
 but they have it near to the truth, not
far off, perhaps to the hour, or less than an hour, or thereabouts. Whence
they say “this child was born around the third hour,” or the sixth, or the
ninth, or perhaps they say “around the middle of the night,” or “around
dawn,” or around the first [hour of the] night, just as sometimes laypeople
are accustomed to saying, or as yet others say, “it was around such an hour
as when the banners are given.” Or it might be the beginning of some
building, or some [affairs requiring] management, and things like that.
Then certainty of the hour cannot be provided to you for those judgments;
but [something] near the hour is given to you.
Whence in order that you can find the exact hour of the nativity or
matter, it is necessary that you reckon the planets to the hour as closely as
you can, indeed that you do not depart from what the midwives say (or the
mother, or someone else) by more than one equal hour. And see what sign
ascends then, and consider whether the nativity (or the beginning of
whichever matter it is) is conjunctional or preventional. And look at the
degree in which the conjunction or prevention was made, and consider
which of the planets is stronger and more powerful in the number of
dignities or strengths in that degree, and see how many degrees it has
traversed in the sign in which it is, and you will make the ascending degree
of the sign which seems to ascend then, similar to the degree in which that
planet is, which is the
al-mubtazz
 in the degree of the conjunction or
prevention.
[25]
For example, [suppose] it seemed to you according to the reckoning
which you made for the imprecise hour, that you had initial evidence that
the fourth degree of Aries was the Ascendant, by your estimation, as I said,
because you were able to comprehend concerning the nativity or uncertain
matter; and the conjunction or prevention was in the tenth degree of Aries;
and in this way the Sun is stronger in the degree of the conjunction than
any other planet by his number of dignities, just as was said elsewhere.
Therefore calculate the Sun for that hour, and see in which degree of
27

=== Page 28 ===
whatever sign he is in–let us put it that he is in the seventeenth degree of
Aquarius. Now you must change the Ascendant which you had found first
through your judgment, and make it so that the Ascendant is Aries, the
seventeenth degree (which at first had seemed to be the fourth degree); and
you will verify the Ascendant which you seek. And if you were to find
through your judgment that the Ascendant were greater than the planet that
is
al-mubtazz
 in that sign, reduce it to the quantity of its degrees: like if it
were the twenty-fourth, or more or less, reduce it to the seventeenth just as
the Sun is in its own sign.
[26]
 And understand this in every case, and build
the other houses based on this Ascendant. But because I would make for
you, with the aid of God, a special Treatise on nativities, in which I will
expound all of this to you, I will explain it in detail [later on], and I will
not spend any more time on it here, so that the order [of topics] may be
observed more rightly.
28

=== Page 29 ===
TREATISE 8:
REVOLUTIONS
&
 PARTS

[PART 1:] On the Revolutions of the Years of the World

Preface
Since after a treatment of elections nothing would seem more
appropriate than to treat subsequently of revolutions of the years of the
world, we should deservedly set it apart and produce a special treatise
concerning them.
But first we must look briefly at what a revolution is. A revolution of
the year is the circular course of the Sun from one minute of any degree of
any sign, up to his return to the same point–even though it might otherwise
be defined, just as it seemed to certain people. And this is considered
according to two methods, namely [first] according to the revolution of the
years of a nativity or other inceptions;
[27]
 for, [secondly,] a revolution of
the
year of the world
 is from the entrance of the Sun into the first minute
of Aries, up until he is then revolved and transits circularly through the
whole zodiac, and returns to the same point. However a revolution of the
year of the nativity or of other beginnings, or of some inception, is from
the minute in which the Sun was at the nativity of some native, up until he
then is revolved, and circularly transits the whole zodiac, and returns to the
same point–and the same must be said about all other revolutions.
Indeed a revolution is, among the rest, a very useful thing, and its
significations higher than the rest, [just] as it is powerful and intricate to
discover its certainty
.
[28]
 For through a revolution of the years of the
world is known what is going to be concerning the good and bad in that
year, namely whether the year is going to be tranquil or troublesome; and
whether there are going to be battles or not in the year which you are
revolving. It is said likewise concerning peace. And what the standing of
kings or princes, the wealthy, or great men, is going to be. And likewise
that of the people, and of low-class people, the religious,
[29]
 even every
one in his own nature, of every kind universally according to the
customs
[30]
 of men.
Likewise it is known what is going to be concerning things born of the
ground, whether abundance or lack should be expected from them; and
what their future is going to be from them, whether they will have low or
mediocre prices, just as will be said concerning the Parts in its own place.
[31]
29

=== Page 30 ===
For through the revolution of nativities are known the accidents of any
native in his own year.
[32]
 Whence, if you wished to know the
significations of the revolutions of years, both of the world and of
nativities, you will observe this arrangement according to what I hand
down to you; nor should you neglect this book, but it is necessary for you
to know it and to have it in your mind before all other books, since in order
to know and understand it well would be a great effort,
[33]
 so that by
distinguishing the times you may harmonize the writings, lest perhaps you
believe there to be contrary things in it–because they are not, if you were
to consider well the things which present themselves to you to be
considered. Because even if you find a saying at some time (if such there
were), that “it signifies such-and-such an event,” or “it signifies the
multitude of such-and-such a thing,” and you should find in that same
chapter, “it signifies the scarcity” of that same thing, you should not accept
it as a contrary, but distinguish that you may harmonize. Because one
intention will be general; the other will be particular, and the special
restricts
[34]
 the general. However, it sometimes happens that someone
doing the modifying speaks according to latitude, according to orientality,
or according to occidentality, or according to direct motion, or according
to retrogradation, and the like. For these accidents vary the significations,
nor therefore are the chapters made contrary to one another.
[35]
If you wanted to know the revolution of the year of the world, [know] at
what hour the Sun enters the first minute of the sign of Aries (namely from
the first second of that minute, up to the fourth and more, up to its fifth
second). And if you were to find this with an exact investigation, you will
reckon the planets and the houses to that hour, and to the minute of that
same hour. And you will find the Ascendant as exactly as you can, and you
will construct the twelve houses by their degrees and minutes, and to the
minute of that hour, jut as well and exactly as you can. Likewise you will
reckon all of the planets to the same minute of that hour, and you will
discover most exactly their places, by degrees and minutes, and likewise
the seconds, of every one of them, lest you should fall into any error. And
you will consider their condition (namely how they are disposed), and in
which houses, and in which signs they are. And which of them are direct,
and which retrograde, and which stationary, and which [are] quick in
course, and which slow; and whether any of them are northern or some of
them southern amongst themselves, or from the path of the Sun.
[36]
 For if
a planet were northern from another, he who is northern of the other is said
to go above him,
[37]
 whether he were of the superiors or of the inferiors.
[38]
 And likewise if they were southern, he who was less southern is said
30

=== Page 31 ===
to go above him who is more southern. And [consider] how one of them
aspects the other, or how it is aspected by him; and how one projects his
own rays upon
[39]
 the body or rays of the other, and how they aspect the
angles–because the good aspects signify good; but the bad ones the
contrary. And if you were to do this, you will likewise see what sign is
ascending: because then you could take
the Lord of the Year, and the
signification of the common people generally, from the Lord of the
ascending sign (unless another impedes, which deprives the Lord of the
Ascendant of the rulership of the year). Nor however should you always
believe the Lord of the Ascendant of the revolution will always be the
Lord of the Year absolutely (as some seem to want to say, in order to make
it easier for themselves). But you will take him as I will tell you below.
Chapter 1: How the Lord of the Year may be found
After you were certain to a fine degree concerning the time of the
entrance of the Sun into Aries (as was said), and of the Ascendant of his
entrance, and concerning all the other houses, and the places
[40]
 of the
planets, see which planet is the Lord of the Ascendant, and how it is
disposed, and where it is. For if it were direct, and free from combustion,
and were in the Ascendant
[41]
 by 3º ahead of the line or 4º after,
[42]
 you
should not seek another, because he will be the Lord of the Year or
Revolution; and he will be the significator of the condition of the common
people, and nothing else will be able to deprive him of that rulership. If
indeed he were retrograde, or combust, he already cannot be the Lord of
the Year or Revolution, because a retrograde or combust planet cannot be
the Lord of the Year: for his virtue is annihilated, except for a great reason
(which can happen only most rarely). Then seek the rulership from the
exaltation. For if the ascending sign were the exaltation of some planet,
seek the ruler from him: wherefore if he were in the degree of the
Ascendant, or by 3º ahead or 4º behind,
[43]
 he will be the Lord of the Year
or Revolution and will be the significator of the condition of the common
people, if he were free from the aforesaid impediments. If indeed he were
impeded, as I said regarding the Lord of the Ascendant, he will not be the
Lord of the Year or Revolution.
If by chance it were not the exaltation of some planet, or it were and the
Lord of the exaltation could not be the Lord of the Year,
seek then the
ruler from the Sun (if the revolution were in the day) or from the Moon (if
it were in the night): because the luminary whose authority it was, will be
31

=== Page 32 ===
the Lord of the Year or Revolution, if it were to have some dignity
[44]
 in
the Ascendant.
Which, if again the luminary whose authority it was, could not be the
Lord of the Year, then seek the significator from the Lord of the bound;
which if he were in the Ascendant, by 3º ahead the line or 4º behind,
[45]
and he were free, he will be the Lord of the Year.
And if again the Lord of the bound could not be the Lord of the Year,
then seek the ruler from the Lord of the triplicity, by the aforesaid method
which I have told you regarding the others.
And if it were not one of these–which I told you regarding the Lord of
the domicile, or the exaltation of the Ascendant, or of the bound or the
triplicity, or the luminary whose authority it was (namely the Sun’s in the
day and the Moon’s in the night)–then seek the Ruler [Lord] of the Year or
the Revolution from the Lord of the tenth. And see if the Lord of the 10
th
house were in the tenth, or by 3º ahead or 4º behind, nor were it retrograde
or combust: it will be the Lord of the Year or Revolution, and be the
significator of the common people and the rustics. If however the Lord of
the 10
th
 house were retrograde or combust, or otherwise impeded, so that it
could not be the significator, then seek the ruler from the Lord of the
exaltation of the 10
th
 house, if it were the exaltation of some planet. Which
if he were in the tenth, free from the aforesaid impediments, and were only
by 3º ahead of the line of the 10
th
 house, or by only 4º behind, he will be
the Lord of the Year and the significator of the condition of the common
people. If however it were not the exaltation of some planet, or if it were
and the Lord of the exaltation could not be the Lord of the Year, then seek
from the luminary whose authority it was: because if it were there, and
were to have some dignity there, it will be the Lord of the Year. Again, if
the luminary whose authority it was could not be the Lord of the Year,
then seek the ruler from the Lord of the bound of the degree of the 10
th
house; which if he were in the degree of the 10
th
 house, or by 3º ahead or 4º
behind, and were free from impediments, he will be the Lord of the Year,
and the significator of the condition of the common people. Which if again
the Lord of the bound could not be the Lord of the Year, then seek the
ruler from the Lord of the triplicity of the 10
th
 house; which if it were on
the line of the 10
th
 house, or were by 3º ahead or 4º after, it will be the Lord
of the Year, and the significator of the condition of the common people or
rustics.
If however you could not have the significator from the Ascendant or
from the tenth, seek him from the seventh through the same method which
I have told you concerning the first and the tenth. And if you could not
32

=== Page 33 ===
have him from the seventh, seek him from the fourth by the same method.
And if again you could not have him from the fourth, seek him from the
eleventh by the same method.
[46]
 And if again you could not have him
from the eleventh, seek him from the ninth by the same method. And if
again you could not have him from the ninth, seek him from the fifth
through the same method. And if again you could not have him from the
fifth, seek anew from the third–always by beginning from the Lord of the
domicile, then from the Lord of the exaltation, after that from the luminary
whose authority it is, then from the Lord of the bound, lastly from the Lord
of the triplicity. And it seemed to certain ancients that you could do the
same thing with the Lord of the face.
[47]
And whichever planet you were to find in any of the aforesaid places
(after the failure of the aforesaid significators to have the rulership of the
year),
[48]
 if it were to have some dignity there (and if it were to have only
a face there), and it were free from the impediments, as was said about the
others, it will be the Lord of the Year or Revolution. And if there were
more planets in one of the aforesaid places, the one which was more
authoritative (or the
al-mubtazz
) by the multitude of strengths
[49]
 in that
place, will be the Lord of the Year or Revolution. And if they were equal
in strength, the one which is closer to the line should be preferred. And if
they were oriental, he who is closer to the Sun exceeds the other. And if
both were equidistant to the Moon or the Sun, the one to be preferred will
be he who is changed more quickly from the degree in which he is.
[50]
And if one of the aforesaid planets were to aspect one of the listed houses
by a trine or sextile aspect, by 2º ahead or 3º after,
[51]
 and were to have
some dignity there, he will be the Lord of the Year, after you did not find
the other aforesaid [conditions met].
And if the ascending [sign] were the domicile or exaltation of some
luminary, and [the luminary] were to aspect the Ascendant by a trine or
sextile aspect, by 2º ahead or 3º after, or it were in the second from the
Ascendant, it will be the Lord of the Year. If however it were not so, look
at the Lord of the Ascendant, and the Lord of [the ascending sign’s]
exaltation; and see if the luminary whose authority it was, were in the
domicile of one of them, and aspected him by trine or a sextile aspect, nor
were it cadent from the Ascendant, and were in a strong place: because
he
[52]
 will be the Lord of the Year.
And certain people preferred the luminary whose authority it was, to the
planetary
al-mubtazz
. I however do not see a reason why this should be,
always putting the Ascendant before the tenth and the other houses; and
the 10
th
 before the 7
th
, the 7
th
 before the 4
th
, the 4
th
 before the 11
th
, the 11
th
33

=== Page 34 ===
before the 9
th
, the 9
th
 before the 5
th
, the 5
th
 before the 3
rd
, as was said.
[53]
And if one of the luminaries were not in one of the aforesaid places, see
if the planet in whose domicile the luminary (whose authority it is) is
located, is in one of those places. Because he will be the Lord of the Year
or Revolution, whether he has a dignity there or not. Which if again it were
not so, look at the
Lord of the hour of the revolution: which if he were in
one of the aforesaid places, he will be the Lord of the Year or Revolution,
and the significator of the condition of the common people or the rustics.
And may you always understand [this] concerning any significator, if it
were on the line of the house in which it was, or by 3º ahead or 4º
behind
[54]
–always preferring the Lord of the domicile to the Lord of the
exaltation, and the Lord of the exaltation to the Lord of the bound, the
Lord of the bound to the Lord of the triplicity. For the Lord of the domicile
has five strengths, the Lord of the exaltation has four strengths, the Lord of
the bound has five strengths,
[55]
 the Lord of the triplicity has three
strengths. And even though the Lord of the bound has as many strengths as
the Lord of the domicile does, and more than the Lord of the exaltation
does, still they are preferred on account of their excellence.
Which again if it were not so, know the places of the Lord of the signs
in which the luminaries are, and the place of the Lord of the sign in which
the luminary (whose authority it is) is, and count him with
[56]
 the other
significators.
Wherefore if all of the significators failed to be the Lord of the
Revolution, the one of them who is more authoritative by the multitude of
strengths will take charge as the Lord of the Year, at least until the Lord of
the Ascendant or of the 10
th
 goes direct (if it were retrograde), or escaped
[the Sun’s rays] (if it were combust). Which if again it were not one of
these, the disposition then is reverted to the luminary whose authority it is.
And if the revolution were in the night, and the Moon were under the rays
of the Sun, then the Sun will take charge instead of her.
Abū Ma’shar (with whom it seems to me good and fitting to agree) said
that the significations of the Lord of the bound and the Lord of the
triplicity and the Lord of the hour are to be considered in two places only:
namely in the 1
st
 and in the 10
th
 house. And some believed strongly that he
was self-contradictory, for he says elsewhere that their significations are
considered in all the aforesaid places–but it is not so [that he is self-
contradictory]. Where he says that they are to be considered in the first and
the 10
th
, he understood by their own nature. For where he says that [they
are to be considered] in all other places, he understood accidentally.
[57]
And there are five testimonies of good or evil,
[58]
 and thus both [of these
34

=== Page 35 ===
statements] are to be followed.
Moreover,
[59]
 if the Lord of the bound or the triplicity or hour were in
the Ascendant or in the 10
th
, and the Lord of the Ascendant or the 10
th
 were
in the degree of its own exaltation, or in 1º in front, or 1º in back (nor
could he
[60]
 be the significator), and one of them
[61]
 were to have
rulership of the year, he will gain for himself from the signification of the
Lord of the first: namely the Lord of the triplicity, one-third; indeed the
Lord of the bound will have one-fifth; also the Lord of the hour, one-
seventh–according to how strong they were. Indeed in the other places this
does not happen to them, but rather they decrease their strength in them.
[62]
And however much I were to name places and houses for you, from
which may be known the Lord of the Year or Revolution, I want you to
know that they are not of equal strength. For the Ascendant and the 10
th
exceed the other houses in strength; the 7
th
 is below the 10
th
, the 4
th
 is below
the 7
th
, the 11
th
 is below the 4
th
, the 9
th
 is below the 11
th
, the 5
th
 below the 9
th
,
the 3
rd
 below the 5
th
. Whence according to the house from which the Lord
of the Year was taken, according to that [house] will be the stronger or
weaker significations in that year, or semester, or quarter, in the regions
over which the revolution was. Wherefore it will be necessary for you to
consider according to the part of the clime in which you were, or whose
revolution it was. For it could be a revolution which is not a year, just like
when a year is revolved according to semesters or according to quarters.
[63]
Therefore, what remains are the testimonies by which the significations
are known in these places. They are four, of which the first is the Lord of
the domicile, the second the Lord of the exaltation, the third is
the
luminary whose authority it is, the fourth is the planetary
al-mubtazz
 in the
place from which is taken the revolution by nature, and the place of the
circle in the hour by which the year is revolved. After you could not
operate through the Lord of the Ascendant or the Lord of its exaltation, or
by the luminary whose authority it was, see if one of them were in one of
the angles (after the failure of the aforesaid),
[64]
 and were in the degrees
of the cusp, or by 2º ahead or 3º after,
[65]
 nor were it impeded: it will be
the Lord of the Year. And if the planetary
al-mubtazz
 were impeded, so
that it could not be the significator, then take as the significator the planet
in whose domicile is the luminary (whose authority it is), if it were fit to
receive the signification. And if it were not fit to receive the signification
or the rulership of the year, then the disposition and rulership of the year
reverts to the luminary whose authority it is, after the failure of all the
35

=== Page 36 ===
aforesaid. And if one of the luminaries were to commit its own disposition
to the Lord of the Ascendant, [the Lord of the Ascendant] will be the Lord
of the Year or Revolution (nor will it be necessary for you to look to
another).
After it seems that you have found the Lord of the Year, you will even
see if he were in the domicile of some planet, and were joined to it from a
praiseworthy aspect, wherefore he gives it his own virtue, and makes him
the Lord of the Year, if it were in an optimal place from the Ascendant;
and more strongly so if some luminary (or the Lord of the domicile in
which the luminary is) were to aspect them (or either of them).
[66]
And the Sun could even be the Lord of the Year if he were receiving
and collecting the lights or strengths of the planets–like if the revolution
were in the night, and the planet who ought to be the Lord of the Year
were nocturnal, and were under the rays of the Sun.
And if all the aforesaid [conditions] were missing, the disposition or
rulership of the year will revert to the Lord of the Ascendant, whatever his
condition was, and in whatever place he was.
And because it might be difficult for you to always consider together all
the things that were said, I will abbreviate for you a little rule, and will
recount for you the considerations and methods by which you ought to find
the significator or Lord of the Year or Revolution. And there are twelve
methods and fifty-four considerations.
The first of the methods is that you look to the Lords of the domiciles,
from which the Lord of the Year is sought.
The second is that you look to the Lords of their exaltations.
The third, that you look to the luminary whose authority it is.
The fourth, that you look to the Lords of their bounds.
The fifth, that you look to the Lords of their triplicities.
The sixth, that you look to the
al-mubtazz
 over the places.
The seventh, that you look to the Lord of the hour of the revolution.
The eighth, that you look to the planet in whose domicile is the
luminary whose authority it is.
36

=== Page 37 ===
The ninth, that you look to see if one of the planets aspects the
Ascendant.
The tenth, that you look to see whether the Ascendant of the
revolution is the domicile or exaltation of one of the luminaries, and
the luminary aspects it.
[67]
The eleventh, that you look to see if the luminary (whose authority it
is), is in the domicile of the Lord of the Ascendant or of the Lord of
its exaltation.
The twelfth, that you look to the Lord of the domicile in which the
planet (in whose domicile is the luminary whose authority it is)
is
[68]
–what kind of condition it has.
In the end there could be had other certain methods, but these are
primary and more principal.
Epilogue
Indeed the considerations are fifty-four, as was said:
Of which the first is the Lord of the degree of the Ascendant.
The second is the Lord of the exaltation of the degree of the
Ascendant.
The third is the luminary whose authority it is.
The fourth is the Lord of the bound of the degree of the Ascendant.
The fifth is the Lord of the triplicity of the degree of the Ascendant.
The sixth is the Lord of the degree of the 10
th
 house.
Indeed the seventh is the Lord of [the 10
th
’s] exaltation.
The eighth is the luminary whose authority it is, of the degree of the
37

=== Page 38 ===
10
th
 house.
[69]
The ninth is the Lord of the bound of the degree of the 10
th
 house.
The tenth is the Lord of the triplicity of the degree of the 10
th
 house.
The eleventh is the Lord of the degree of the 7
th
 house.
The twelfth is the Lord of [the 7
th
’s] exaltation.
The thirteenth is the luminary whose authority it is, of the degree of
the 7
th
 house.
[70]
The fourteenth is the Lord of the degree of the bound of the 7
th
 house.
The fifteenth is the Lord of [the 7
th
’s] triplicity.
The sixteenth is the Lord of the degree of the 4
th
 house.
The seventeenth is the Lord of its exaltation.
The eighteenth is the luminary whose authority it was, of the 4
th
house.
[71]
The nineteenth is the Lord of the degree of the bound of the 4
th
 house.
The twentieth is the Lord of [the 4
th
’s] triplicity.
The twenty-first is the [Lord of the] degree of the 11
th
 house.
The twenty-second is the Lord of the degree of [the 11
th
’s] exaltation.
The twenty-third is the luminary whose authority it was, of the 11
th
house.
[72]
The twenty-fourth is the Lord of [the 11
th
’s] bound.
The twenty-fifth is the Lord of [the 11
th
’s] triplicity.
The twenty-sixth is the Lord of the degree of the 9
th
 house.
38

=== Page 39 ===
The twenty-seventh is the Lord of [the 9
th
’s] exaltation.
The twenty-eighth is the luminary whose authority it was, of the
degree of the 9
th
 house.
[73]
The twenty-ninth is the Lord of the bound of the degree of the 9
th
house.
The thirtieth is the Lord of [the 9
th
’s] triplicity.
The thirty-first is the Lord of the degree of the 5
th
 house.
The thirty-second is the Lord of its exaltation.
The thirty-third is the luminary whose authority it was, [of the degree
of the 5
th
 house].
[74]
The thirty-fourth is the Lord of the degree of [the 5
th
’s] bound.
The thirty-fifth is the Lord of the degree of [the 5
th
’s] triplicity.
The thirty-sixth is the Lord of the degree of the 3
rd
 house.
The thirty-seventh is the Lord of [the 3
rd
’s] exaltation.
The thirty-eighth is the luminary whose authority it is, [of the degree
of the 3
rd
 house].
[75]
The thirty-ninth is the Lord of [3
rd
’s] bound.
The fortieth is the Lord of the triplicity of [3
rd
’s] degree.
The forty-first is the planetary
al-mubtazz
 in the degree of the house
from which the Lord of the Year or Revolution is taken.
[76]
The forty-second is the planet which was closer to the line of the
house, if the planets were equal in strength.
The forty-third is the oriental planet which is closer to the Sun.
39

=== Page 40 ===
The forty-fourth is the planet who is changed more quickly from the
degree in which it is, if more [than one planet] were oriental.
[77]
The forty-fifth is the planet who more aspects the degree of the house
signifying the rulership of the year.
[78]
The forty-sixth is when the Ascendant is the domicile or exaltation of
a luminary, and the luminary were to aspect the Ascendant by a trine
or sextile aspect, or were in the 2
nd
.
[79]
The forty-seventh is the planet in whose domicile is the luminary
whose authority it is.
The forty-eighth is if one of the luminaries were to commit its
disposition to the Lord of the Ascendant.
The forty-ninth is when the Lord of the Year commits its disposition
to one of the planets.
The fiftieth is the Lord of the hour of the revolution.
The fifty-first is the Lords of the signs in which the luminaries are.
The fifty-second, the Lord of the sign in which the planet is, in whose
domicile the luminary is.
[80]
The fifty-third, when a planet which ought to have been the
significator, is under the Sun’s rays.
The fifty-fourth is the planet changing figure:
[81]
 and it is he who
more quickly is changed from a sign into [another] sign in the
revolution of the year of the world, or who is oriental and more
quickly becomes occidental, or who goes to the degree in which the
Moon was at that time, or to the ascending degree (apart from the
Moon).
Chapter 2: On the discovery of the significator of the king
40

=== Page 41 ===
After you have found the Lord of the Year or Revolution, which is
called the significator of the common people or the rustics, it remains thus
far for you to find the significator of the king, because it is very
advantageous to consider him in a revolution of the years of the world–
which you could find in this way:
Look at the Lord of the 10
th
 house of the figure of the revolution of the
year which you are revolving, to see whether he is free from combustion,
retrogradation, fall, and the other aforesaid impediments. Which if it were
so, and he were on the cusp of the 10
th
 house, or by 3º ahead or 5º after,
[82]
he will be the significator of the king without a doubt: operate through him
and do not seek another. If however you were to find him impeded by one
of the aforesaid impediments, he already will not be the significator.
Then seek the significator from the Lord of the exaltation of the sign of
the 10
th
 house (if it were the exaltation of some planet); which if he were
free, as I said regarding the Lord of the domicile, and he were on the cusp
of the 10
th
 house, or by 3º ahead or 4º after, he will be the significator of
the king. If however he were impeded, he will not be [the king’s]
significator.
Then seek the significator from the Sun: which if he were free and
sound as I have said regarding the others, and were on the cusp of the 10
th
house, or by 3º ahead or by 5º behind, he will be the significator of the
king. If however it were not so, already he will not be the significator.
Then seek him from the planet which is the
al-mubtazz
 in the sign of the
10
th
 house by having a greater multitude of dignities.
[83]
 Which if he were
on the cusp of the 10
th
 house, or by 3º ahead or 5º after, free and sound, he
will be the significator of the king. If however he were impeded, he could
not be the significator.
Indeed Abū Ma’shar preferred the Sun to the Lord of the exaltation.
If indeed you did not find any one of them, then seek the significator
from the planet which is on the cusp of the 10
th
 house, or by 3º ahead or 4º
after, and were otherwise free, and had some dignity there: because he will
be the significator of the king. If indeed he were impeded, he will not be
the significator of the king.
If however he did not have dignity there, and were on the cusp, or by 2º
ahead or 3º after, or were the Lord of the domicile in which the Part of the
Kingdom
[84]
 were to fall, and were free and safe from the aforesaid
impediments, he will be the significator of the king.
Which if again this were not so, Abū Ma’shar said that if the Midheaven
were the domicile of the Sun, and the Sun on its cusp, not removed or
cadent, he himself will be the significator of the king; and likewise if he
41

=== Page 42 ===
were in the Ascendant received by Mars, and Leo in the Midheaven
(because then the Ascendant will be Scorpio). And he said if the
Midheaven were Aries, and the Sun on its cusp according to what I said,
and Mars were cadent from him, [the Sun] will be the significator of the
king. And if he were to aspect Mars, [Mars] will be a participator in the
signification.
And [Abū Ma’shar] said if Mars were in his own place, strong, and his
condition were good, and the Sun were joined to him, Mars will be the
significator of the king; and more worthy than that if he were in Capricorn
and the Sun were joined to him from out of the Midheaven. And he said
that if his placement were to happen in the Midheaven,
[85]
 or in an angle
from the Ascendant, and the Sun were to project his rays to him, he will be
more worthy in signification. And likewise if the Sun were in the angle of
the Midheaven, or in other places aspecting the Midheaven (by aspects of
friendship, understand), and he were the Lord of the Midheaven, [the Sun]
will be more worthy in signification.
When the Lord of the Year is made the significator of the king
Which if you did not find it just as I have told you, see if the 10
th
were
[86]
 the domicile or exaltation
of the Lord of the Year, and he were to
aspect it from any aspect except from the opposition: the Lord of the Year
or significator of the common people will be the significator of the king.
Which again if it were not so, look to see if the Lord of the Year is
joined with the Lord of the 10
th
 house, or with the Lord of its exaltation,
from such a place that the Lord of the 10
th
 receives him–wherefore he
commits his disposition to him, and the Lord of the Year will be made the
significator of the king. Even if the Lord of the 10
th
 house were in the
domicile or in the exaltation of the Lord of the Year, and the Lord of the
10
th
 house were received by him, he commits his disposition to the Lord of
the Year; for the Lord of the Year will not become the significator of the
king unless the Lord of the 10
th
 were to commit his own disposition to him.
Which again if it were not so, see if the Sun were the Lord of the Year,
and whether he has some dignity in the 10
th
, or if the Lord of the 10
th
 were
under the rays of the Sun (whether he had escaped from
combustion or not,
provided that he is not appearing from under the rays):
[87]
 the Sun will be
the significator of the king, and especially in the region in which this is.
And Abū Ma’shar said
[88]
 if the Sun were to commit disposition to the
Lord of the Ascendant, and he had some testimony in the Midheaven, the
Lord of the Ascendant will be the significator of the king.
42

=== Page 43 ===
And he said that if the Midheaven were one of the domiciles of Saturn,
or the sign of his exaltation, and he were on its cusp, free from
combustion, Saturn will be the significator of the king.
And he said if the Sun had no testimony in the Midheaven, look at the
Lord of the Midheaven and the Lord of its exaltation, to see which of them
were stronger, and with more testimony, and of better condition, and
collected and received more lights from the planets, and were of a better
placement from the Midheaven:
[89]
 because he will be the significator of
the king.
And if the Lord of the Midheaven, and the Lord of its exaltation, and the
Sun, were cadent from aspects [to the 10
th
],
[90]
 and were of bad condition,
nor did you find one of the aforesaid [situations], see if one of the planets
aspects one of the aforesaid significators not aspecting the 10
th
, and [if] he
himself aspects the 10
th
, so that he lifts up
[91]
 the light of one to another:
because this will strengthen him regarding the disposition of the king, and
will make him whose light were so carried to the 10
th
, the significator of
the king of that revolution.
[92]
If however you found none of these, then revert to the Lord of the Year,
and to the Lord of the 10
th
, and to the Sun: and the one of them you find
stronger, or less weak, or better disposed, or less bad, or in a better place
from the 10
th
, or one less bad, make this the significator of the king.
And Abū Ma’shar said if the Sun were the Lord of the Ascendant, the
Midheaven will be Taurus. And if Venus were under his rays, the Sun will
be the significator of the king, because the Lord of the Midheaven is under
the rays. If however Venus had gone out from under the rays in her own
light,
[93]
 she will be more dignified in signification, for she will be in the
Ascendant or in the domicile from which she aspects the 10
th
; and better
than that is if she were in her own domicile or exaltation. And he said if
Venus were at the end of an angle, and were to push her own strength
[94]
to the Sun (which could not take place unless she were joined to him
corporally), then if Venus were the Lady of the Midheaven, she has
already pushed her strength to the Sun, and the Sun will be the significator
of the king. And he said the angles of the planets are the aggregate of their
equation, truth, or certainty; and this is taken by the diameters

of their
short circles.
[95]
Chapter 3: When the Lord of the Ascendant is the Lord of the Year,
whence is known the condition of the king, and of his allies, and the
common people, and certain men both religious and secular
43

=== Page 44 ===
However, the significator of the year or revolution having been found,
and the significator of the king, it remains to discover the significator of
the other diverse persons, and even whence the significators of the king are
aspected–which you could know, as Abū Ma’shar says,
[96]
 from Saturn,
and from the Sun, and from the 10
th
, and from [the king’s] significator.
Whence if you were to see these four well disposed, announce the good
condition of the king, wholly and everywhere. If however you were to find
them impeded, announce wholly the contrary. Which if you were to find
one free and another impeded, judge according to what you saw regarding
the impediment or liberation. But what is signified by Saturn is greater
than any one of the them, both for good and for evil, except for the
significator of the king; and the things signified by the Sun are below the
things signified by Saturn, and the things signified by the Lord of the 10
th
are below the things signified by of the Sun in this case.
[97]
How it is looked at for the soldiers of the king
And he said that you ought to look to the soldiers of the king from the
11
th
 and its Lord: whence if you were see the 11
th
 fit, and its Lord well
disposed, and Mars [well disposed], announce even the condition of the
king’s soldiers to be good. If however you were to see it unfit, and its Lord
impeded, and Mars likewise [impeded], announce the contrary of what I
said. If however [either] the Lord of the 11
th
 or Mars were impeded, and
the other one were free, announce their condition to be middling.
How it is looked at for wealthy and great men who are below the king
However, you would take the condition of wealthy and great men who
are below the king from Jupiter, and make him a participator with the Lord
in whose domicile he was: which if you were to find him strong, and well
disposed, announce their condition to be good. If however you were to find
him badly disposed, announce the contrary.
How it is looked at for bishops and other secular clerics
Indeed you would look for bishops and other secular clerics (and the
Pope and cardinals, and even for legal officials
[98]
 and canonists, and
counselors) from Jupiter and the Lord of his domicile, and from the ninth
and its Lord: which if you were to find them free and well disposed,
44

=== Page 45 ===
announce their good condition. If however you were to find one strong and
another weak, you will announce a middling result according to the
weakness or according to the strength which you found.
How it is looked at for soldiers of the king and his allies, and bearers of
arms
For soldiers and allies of the king, and bearers of arms (for the sake of
making money from the war),
[99]
 you will take
[100]
 [it] from Mars;
which if you were to find him well disposed, announce their good
condition. If however you were to find him badly disposed, announce the
contrary.
How it is looked at for the religious who live under a Rule
[101]
Indeed, for the regular religious serving God, and who have been placed
for this purpose that they may serve God (nor should you trust every caped
religious person, but those who have dedicated themselves to their God,
among which [you should] count monks, and especially those wearing
black vestments); and for old men and the decrepit, and low-class people
doing heavy works,
[102]
 like ditchdiggers, and the like, you will look
from Saturn: which if you were to find him free, namely made fortunate
and strong, announce the good condition of the aforesaid; if however you
were to find him to the contrary, announce the contrary.
How it is looked at for women
However you will take the condition of women from Venus and her
place: which if you were to find her well disposed, announce the good
condition of women, and especially young women; if however you were to
find her poorly disposed, announce the contrary.
How it is looked at for merchants and tradesmen
[103]
Indeed the condition of merchants and tradesmen, and painters, and
scribes, and judges, and the wise, and instructors, and especially those
educated in the
quadrivium
, and boys, and adolescents and the like, you
will take from Mercury: which if you were to find him free and well
disposed, announce their good condition; if however you were to find him
impeded, judge the contrary. However the condition of merchants varies
45

=== Page 46 ===
from the condition of the others, wherefore it is looked for [merchants]
from
the Lord of the Year, and from the Ascendant and its Lord, and from
the Moon, and from Jupiter just like Mercury; but Mercury and Jupiter
prevail over the others in the signification of merchants.
How it is looked at for low-class and common people
You will look for the low-class and commoners, and sailors on smaller
ships, from the Moon; which if you were to find her free and well
disposed, announce their condition to be good. If however she were
impeded, announce the contrary.
And in all the aforesaid matters, make the Lord of the Year a
participator, and the Lord of the domicile in which you were to find the
significator whose signification you seek. And mingle them together, and
see how they fare, and how they are conjoined. For if they were all free,
namely fortunate and strong (that is, the planet naturally signifying the
matter and the planet in whose domicile it was, and the Lord of the Year),
judge everywhere good concerning the signification which you seek. If
however all were sound and one impeded, judge more good than evil. If
indeed two were impeded, and one sound, judge more evil than good. And
according to their liberation or their impediment, more or less, and
according to the Ascendant which there was then–according to that you
will judge the increase or decrease of the good or evil. For if
[104]
 the
Ascendant or the 10
th
 were one of the domiciles of a planet naturally
signifying the signification sought, like if something signified by Saturn
were sought and the Ascendant or 10
th
 is Capricorn or Aquarius; and if
something signified by Jupiter were sought, and the Ascendant or the 10
th
is Sagittarius or Pisces. And if something signified by Mercury were
sought, and the Ascendant or the 10
th
 is Gemini or Virgo.
However for Venus and the Moon it is otherwise: for if something
signified by Venus were sought, neither the Ascendant nor the 10
th
 is
considered, but the 7
th
 and the 4
th
. For if Taurus or Libra were the 7
th
 or 4
th
, it
will harm or profit like the Ascendant or the 10
th
 harms or profits for
Saturn and Jupiter and Mercury. And if the 7
th
 or 4
th
 were Cancer, on
account of the femininity of [the houses] and [the planets’] places.
[105]
Indeed for Mars the Ascendant and the 10
th
 are considered on account of
their masculinity; the 7
th
 and the 4
th
, on account of their nocturnality.
[106]
Chapter 4: What the Lord of the Year or Revolution would signify in
46

=== Page 47 ===
the places in which it fell at the hour of the revolution
And when you have discovered the Lord of the Year or Revolution and
the significator of the king, and of [those] others whose significators are
considered in revolutions, in this chapter we must consider those things
which seem to be able to take place in the revolution.
[107]
 But first
concerning the general accidents of the year, apart from the situation of
things born of the earth,
[108]
 and the like, about which will be spoken of
elsewhere in its own place and time.
Therefore, see in what place the Lord of the Year or Revolution were to
fall in the hour at which the year is revolved, in the figure which you are
erecting. Because if it were to fall in the Ascendant or in a place of
friendship to the Ascendant, it signifies good, and joy, and tranquility for
persons of that clime,
[109]
 and of that region
[110]
 according to the nature
of the house in which it were to fall, as is said elsewhere. If indeed it were
to fall into a place of enmity to the Ascendant, it will signify impediment,
anger and contrariety, and all the more strongly so if the Lord of the Year
were the Lord of the Ascendant. For if it were to fall in the 6
th
 (which is
one of the houses inimical to the Ascendant), infirmities will happen to
men of that region in their bodies, and harm in small animals which are not
ridden; and the more strongly so if the house were a sign signifying such a
subject.
[111]
 If however it were to fall in the 7
th
, contrarieties and
whisperings and wars will happen to them. If indeed it were to fall in the
12
th
, enmity and treachery will happen to them. And all of these will
happen according to the nature and substance of the sign in which the
significator is. And this does not only have a role for the [domicile] Lord
of the Ascendant, but it also has a role for the Lord of the exaltation, and
of the bound, and the triplicity, and all the other significators of the
revolution. But the things signified by the other [rulers of the sign] are
below what is signified by the [domicile] Lord of the Ascendant, according
to the being [or condition] of each of them, whether the things they signify
are good or evil.
And their significations will be more strongly evil if it happened that the
Lord of the Year or the Revolution were retrograde, even though this
happens most rarely: however, the disposition of the planets could be so
bad that of necessity the Lord of the Year would have to be retrograde, and
then it would need the support of another planet who would lift him up and
render his light to the Ascendant, or be rendered from planet to planet until
it then were found by the planet who would render its light to the
Ascendant
[112]
 (or to the 10
th
, if it were the significator of the king).
[113]
47

=== Page 48 ===
Chapter 5: On the knowledge of the accidents which are going to come
in the year, and in which parts they ought to happen
And even though it can be most difficult to see in what directions, and
in which regions, and in which climes, the accidents which are going to
happen in the revolution (or the year which you revolve) ought to take
place, still, to me it seems fitting to know, and not to omit, what can be
known of it. And I will tell you certain things through which you could
know something, by God’s will. For I could not tell you everything fully
on account of the great confusion of cities and regions which there are
given to understand.
[114]
 For since the coming of the Lord there are
18,345 ancient cities or villas and castles, and other identical city
habitations in the climes, without [those] having been newly put together,
just as I have found stated by certain ancient sages.
Of which Messala the Indian
[115]
 said that there are twelve exceeding
the others in magnitude, of which in the first clime there are two deputed
to Saturn. In the second are two deputed to Jupiter. In the third are two
deputed to Mars. In the fourth are two deputed to the Sun. In the fifth is
one deputed to Venus. In the sixth are two deputed to Mercury. In the
seventh is one deputed to the Moon.
Whence, if you wished to know the accidents which are going to come
in the region in which you are, from the revolution or year which you are
revolving, you will note the Ascendant according to the ascensions of the
city or the region in which you are, and see up to how much to the west:
because the thing signified will be extended only that much, provided the
Ascendant does not yield to alteration (indeed that it passes away by
crossing 5º) by giving 53
miliaria
 to each degree (and a certain
[measurement] approximating a
miliarium
 by which the ancient sages
measured, which is 4,000 cubits, according to equal cubits).
[116]
 And
what is signified will be extended only how much as there is of the nature
of the Ascendant. Like if the Ascendant were the fifth degree of some sign,
what is signified by that Ascendant will last toward the east up until five
degrees after those five which had already gone across the line [of the
Ascendant]; and toward the west up to three degrees from those five which
are already beyond the line of the Ascendant. And thus what is signified
will be extended from the place in which you are, toward the east by 265
miliaria
 and toward the west by 159
miliaria
; and thus there are 424
miliaria
 in all. And what is signified will be extended that far, even if
48

=== Page 49 ===
perhaps sometimes this is discerned in terms of more or less [i.e.,
approximately], in proportion as the planets aspect a place or Part, or the
planet signifying the matter.
You, however, from your own industry, consider this, and according to
longitude and according to latitude. Because it could sometimes be that
what is signified would be extended 90º in front and 90º in back; and by
that much to the right, and that much to the left. However, you must work
it out lest the region be so disposed that this impedes the going out
into
[117]
 of some direction, either by good or evil. Because if the
particular site of the region were good, it will increase the good and
decrease the evil, just like mountains, valleys, lakes, swamps, and similar
places altering a region. You will observe this same thing in all climes,
lands and regions, according to their Ascendants and according to their
divisions, and according to their horizons.
Chapter 6: How the earth is divided into two primary divisions
For the earth is divided into two primary divisions, of which one is from
the eastern quarter and from the southern quarter,
[118]
 because their heat
in which they agree, unites them, and makes one, resemble the nature of
the other. The second is from the western quarter and from the northern
quarter,
[119]
 because their coldness in which they agree, unites them and
makes one resemble the nature of the other.
Chapter 7: How it is divided according to three other following
divisions
Moreover, the earth is subdivided into three other following divisions,
namely into the superior, the middle, and the inferior. And these three
divisions are fitted to the three superior planets, namely Saturn and Jupiter
and Mars; and therefore for them it is stronger than for others. Because
from them descend greater significations than from others. For even
though the others participate with them, still the virtue of [the superiors] is
much greater and stronger than the virtue of the inferiors.
[120]
For the first division, namely the superior one, which is northern, which
is the seventh clime, and whatever is inhabited from the earth outside the
climes determined by the ancients, toward the arctic pole, is attributed to
Saturn, whose participant is the Moon; which is clear through these things:
49

=== Page 50 ===
because on account of the slowness of Saturn, and his darkness, and the
thickness of those parts of the air, the smokiness of the land of those
earthly and thick regions,
[121]
 the mass of those inhabiting those regions
are of little knowledge, and little intellect, and are forgetful but
nevertheless lustful; nor does piety reign in them. But nevertheless if at
some time it came upon one of them to adhere to the sciences, often he
would exceed others, just like our most reverend predecessor Abū Ma’shar
Tricas, who, even though he studied in Athens, was still a Latin, just as he
himself confessed in the Treatise
Agiget
.
[122]
 And even certain others,
even though they are rarely found, like Michael Scot in my own time; and
a certain other younger man, namely Albert the Teuton of the Order of
Preachers.
[123]
That the Moon would participate with Saturn is clear on account of their
obstacles and stealth which happens to them on account of the obstacle of
the Moon and her instability and sudden change and alteration; and
because of their saffron and white and often red colors,
[124]
 and on
account of the opposition of [Saturn’s and the Moon’s] domiciles.
The second division, namely the middle part, which is the sixth, fifth,
and fourth clime, is attributed to Jupiter, whose participant is Mercury–the
domiciles of whom are opposed. And even the Sun participates with him
in the fifth and in the fourth clime, and in the southern part of the sixth,
and this appears through these [facts]: because those living in these regions
are more often wiser and more compliant than the others, and especially
those living in Italy (if they are not very intent on earning money). For the
citizens of those climes are good, and of a more certain intellect and a
deeper and sharper form of thinking; and piety thrives in them, and truth in
certain ones of them, and religion more so than in some others, and a
prophetical manner. And this happens more in the northern part of the
fourth clime, and in all of the fifth, and in the southern part of the sixth–
but in Italy more so than in the other regions, even though ibn Sina
[125]
seems to want to say something else. For he put the greater temperature
under the circle of equality [rather] than elsewhere.
[126]
 However, he did
not speak as an astrologer, but as a doctor: and therefore he was deceived
in his opinion.
[127]
That Mercury is a participant with [Jupiter] is clear on account of the
sharpness of their way of thinking, which is fit to learn and work with
every mystery, and to learn and comprehend every [form of] wisdom, and
knowledge, both mathematical and natural, and theological; and even for
learning all mechanical arts, even though certain ones of those living in the
seventh clime are fit for certain mechanical masteries. And it is even clear
50

=== Page 51 ===
on account of the diversity of commixtures of [the inhabitants’] colors, of
white, red, black, and the like; and because their domiciles are
commingled and composed; and on account of the temperate heat and
appropriate thinness of the air of their climes, and the moderate smokiness
of the land.
And that the Sun would participate with him in the aforesaid climes, is
clear through this: because they know above all others how to rule by
means of guidance; they even knew rhetoric and ethics and politics above
other men. And this is the division excelling over all other divisions, and it
is better and more dignified than the rest.
Indeed the third division, namely the inferior one, which is south from
the others, which is the third, and the second, and the first clime, is
attributed to Mars, whose participant is Venus, the domiciles of whom are
opposed. And these appear through these [facts]: because those living in
these climes are predators and cutters of roads, and thieves. For they
employ a filthy, venereal form of worship; they [sexually] abuse men and
brute animals; they are drinkers and gamblers, following an unfit way of
drinking and gambling, and often are bestial in all of their actions, immoral
men, of a shameful life, and in all of their actions they are foul and
tasteless, and impudent men, and have an irregular and reprehensible way
of life.
[128]
That Venus participates with him, is clear on account of their lust, the
worship of Venus and of drinking and games; but Mars reduces all these to
shamelessness and ineptitude. Also, their colors are often burnt and
horrible, and often are black and swarthy on account of the deep heat and
dryness in their skin, even though this happens more in one region than in
another; which happens on account of the excessive heat of the Sun’s rays,
heating and destroying the disposition of their places, and on account of
the intense heat of the air, and its excessively destructive thinness–even
though al-Farghānī seems to want to say that winter there is of an even
complexion. However, this is true with respect to our winter and our
summer; for the Sun is exactly as far from the equator when it is in Cancer,
as when it is in Capricorn.
Chapter 8: How the earth is divided into seven other divisions
Again, these two and three divisions are subdivided into another seven
divisions according to the number of the seven planets–which are called
climes, which are fitted to the seven planets.
51

=== Page 52 ===
For the first clime is fitted to Saturn, who is higher and superior and
slower than the rest of the planets.
Indeed the second clime is fitted to Jupiter, who immediately follows
after Saturn in slowness, and succeeds [him] in the order of circles.
The third is fitted to Mars, who immediately follows after Jupiter and
succeeds [him] both in slowness and in the order of circles.
The fourth is fitted to the Sun, who follows after Mars in the order of
circles.
The fifth is fitted to Venus, who follows after the Sun in the order of
circles.
The sixth is fitted to Mercury, who follows after Venus in the order of
circles.
Indeed the seventh and last one is fitted to the Moon, who follows
after Mercury in the order of circles, because she is inferior to the rest
of the planets and faster than the rest.
Whence every planet disposes more over the clime deputed to it than the
others, even though each of them has something to do over every clime–
sometimes according to more, sometimes according to less. Likewise the
signs rule over regions, and imprint in them whatever is according to their
nature. Wherefore the fiery ones imprint more over hot regions, the earthy
ones over dry ones, airy ones over moist ones, watery ones over cold ones.
[129]
 Because the signs do not signify over the parts of the world by
places or through their position, but through their [elemental] nature.
Whence, if there were a hot region over which a fiery sign rules, what is
signified [by the sign] will happen more strongly than [it would] in a cold
[region]. For it tempers the coldness in the cold one; and because [a wet
sign] moistens in a wet [region], it tempers the dryness in a dry region, and
vice versa
.
Just as Aries, Leo and Sagittarius (which are the first triplicity), heat
in the eastern parts, in the northern parts they temper the coldness,
because they are fiery, and are eastern signs. Whence if the
52

=== Page 53 ===
Ascendant were one of those signs, it will strengthen what is
signified, and increase it; and the eastern wind is hot and dry.
And just as Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn (which are the second
triplicity) dry out in the parts of the south, in the parts of the west they
temper moisture because they are earthy, and are southern signs.
Whence if the angle of the 10
th
 were of those signs, it will strengthen
what is signified, and will increase it; and the southern wind is hot
and moist.
And just as Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius (which are the third
triplicity) moisten in the parts of the west, they temper dryness in the
parts of the south because they are airy, and are western signs.
Whence if the angle of the 7
th
 house were of those signs, it will
strengthen what is signified, and will increase it; and the western
wind is cold and moist.
And just as Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces (which are the fourth
triplicity) make cold in the northern parts, in the eastern ones they
temper heat, because they are watery, and are northern signs. Whence
if the angle of the 4
th
 house were of those signs, it will strengthen what
is signified, and will increase it; and the northern wind is cold and
dry.
And even the planets help this: for if what is signified were in the north,
and Saturn ruled over what is signified, he will help it, and will make it
appear to a greater degree; and more strongly so if Mercury were to help
him, and what was signified were of coldness. And if it were in the west,
and Jupiter were to rule over it, what is signified will be increased, and
more strongly so if the Moon were to help him, and what is signified were
of moisture, and [Jupiter] will make it appear to a greater degree. And if it
were in the southern parts, and Mars were to rule over it, it will be
increased if it were something signified of dryness, and he will make it
appear to a greater degree. And if it were in the eastern parts, and the Sun
were to rule over it, and it were something signified of heat, the Sun will
help it, and will make it appear to a greater degree. If however Venus were
a participant, she will temper some of the heat.
[130]
Another division of the earth
53

=== Page 54 ===
And after these two, and these three, and these seven divisions, again
the earth is divided into another twelve divisions following the number of
the twelve signs, and following the degrees transited from the east to the
west.
[131]
For Aries is adapted to the first clime; whence Mars, who is the
Lord
[132]
 of Aries, rules over the things signified by that clime from the
east to the west; but the
Lords of the bounds participate with him, and the
virtue of the Lord of the bound prevails over the virtue of the Lord of the
domicile in the particular significations of revolutions. For Jupiter, who
has the first bound of Aries, disposes over the significations of the
revolution of the first clime, from the beginning of the inhabitable earth
from the direction of the east toward the west
for 318
miliaria
.
[133]
 And
after him, Venus for 424
miliaria
. And after him, Mercury for 371
miliaria
. And after him, Mars for 265
miliaria
. And his signification is
stronger then because he has the virtue of the bound and the virtue of the
domicile [Aries]; and so it goes with the others. And after him, Saturn for
212
miliaria
. Then the disposition reverts to Jupiter and to the rest of the
others until it reaches to the end of the inhabitable region toward the west.
[134]
Taurus is adapted to the southern half of the second clime, and Venus
(who is the Lady of Taurus) rules over its signification from the east to the
west. And Venus, who has the first bound of Taurus, rules its
significations and disposes over them from the beginning of the
inhabitable earth from the east toward the west for 424
miliaria
. And its
significations will then be without the participation of anyone, because she
is the Lady of the domicile and the Lady of the bound, and therefore they
appear to a greater degree. And after her, Mercury for 371
miliaria
. After
him, Jupiter for 371
miliaria
. And after him, Saturn for 106
miliaria
. And
after him, Mars for 318
miliaria
. After him, the disposition reverts to
Venus, and she rules the significations for 424
miliaria
, and so on for the
rest of the Lords of the bounds.
Indeed Gemini is adapted to the northern half of the second clime. And
Mercury, who is its Lord, rules over the significations of its half from the
east to the west, but [the Lords of the bounds] participate with him in the
bounds.
[135]
 For Mercury himself rules the first bound, and his
signification will appear strong then (because he is the Lord of the
domicile and the Lord of the bound) for 371
miliaria
. And after him,
Jupiter for 318
miliaria
. And after him, Venus for 371
miliaria
. And after
her, Mars for 318
miliaria
. After him, Saturn for 212
miliaria
. Then the
disposition reverts to Mercury and so one for the rest, up until the end of
54

=== Page 55 ===
the inhabitable earth to the west.
Cancer is adapted to the southern half of the third clime, from the east to
the west. And its Lady the Moon rules the significations of the clime from
the east to the west, and the Lords of the bounds participate with her. For
Mars, who has the first bound of Cancer, rules the significations of the
revolution which ought to be from the beginning of the inhabitable earth
from the direction of the east to the west for 318
miliaria
. And after him,
Jupiter for 371
miliaria
. And after him, Mercury for 371
miliaria
. [And
after him, Venus for 371
miliaria
.]
[136]
 And after her, Saturn for 159
miliaria
. Then the disposition reverts to Mars, and to the rest of the other
planets, until it reaches the end of the inhabitable earth toward the west.
Leo is adapted to the northern half of the third clime from the east to the
west. And the Sun, who is its Lord, rules over the significations of that half
generally, but the Lord of the bounds [do so] with him particularly.
[137]
For Saturn, who is the Lord of the first bound of Leo, rules the
significations of the revolution from the beginning of the inhabitable earth
from the direction of the east toward the west, for 318
miliaria
. And after
him, Mercury for 372
 miliaria
. After him, Mars for 265
miliaria
. After
him, Venus for 318
miliaria
. After her, Jupiter for 318
 miliaria
. Then the
disposition reverts to Saturn and to the rest of the planets in succession,
until the end of the inhabitable [earth] is reached.
Virgo is adapted to the southern half of the fourth clime, from the east to
the west. And Mercury, who is the Lord [of Virgo], rules the significations
of that half from the east to the west generally, but the Lord of the bounds
participate with him; and he himself, who is the Lord of the first bound of
Virgo, rules over the significations of the revolution which ought to be
from the beginning of the inhabitable earth toward the west, for 371
miliaria
. And after him, Venus for 318
 miliaria
. And after her, Jupiter for
265
 miliaria
. After him, Saturn for 318
 miliaria
. After him, Mars for 318
miliaria
. Then the disposition reverts to Mercury,
etc.
, as was said for the
others.
Libra is adapted to the northern half of the fourth clime from the east to
the west. And Venus, who is its Lady, rules over the significations of that
half generally from the east to the west, but the Lords of the bounds
participate with her. For Saturn, who is the Lord of the first bound of
Libra, rules the significations of the revolution which ought to be from the
beginning of the inhabitable earth, from the direction of the east toward the
west, for 318
 miliaria
. And after him, Venus for 265
miliaria
. And after
her, Mercury for 265
miliaria
. After him, Jupiter for 424
miliaria
. And
after him, Mars for 318
 miliaria
. Then the disposition reverts to Saturn,
55

=== Page 56 ===
etc.,
 as was said for the others.
Scorpio is adapted to the southern half of the fifth clime. And Mars,
who is its Lord, rules over the significations of that half generally, from
the east to the west, but the Lords of the bounds participate with him. For
Mars himself, who is the Lord of the first bound of Scorpio, rules over the
significations of the revolution which ought to be from the beginning of
the inhabitable earth from the direction of the east toward the west, for 318
miliaria
. And after him, Venus for 371
 miliaria
. After her, Jupiter for 424
miliaria
. And after him, Mercury for 318
miliaria
. After him, Saturn for
159
miliaria
. Then the disposition reverts to Mars,
etc.
, as was said of the
others.
Sagittarius is adapted to the northern half of the fifth clime, from the
east to the west. And Jupiter, who is its Lord, rules over the significations
generally from the east to the west, but the Lords of the bounds participate
with him. For Jupiter,
[138]
 who is the Lord of the first bound of
Sagittarius, rules over the significations of the revolution which ought to
be from the beginning of the inhabitable earth, from the beginning of the
east toward the west, for 424
miliaria
. And after him, Venus for 318
miliaria
. After her, Mercury for 165
miliaria
. After him, Saturn for 318
miliaria
. After him, Mars for 265
miliaria
. Then the disposition reverts to
Jupiter,
etc.
, as was said for the others.
Capricorn is adapted to the southern half of the sixth clime, from the
east to the west. And Saturn, who is its Lord, rules over the significations
of that half generally, from the east to the west, but the Lords of the
bounds participate with him. For Venus, who is the Lady of the first bound
of Capricorn, rules the significations of the revolution which ought to be
from the beginning of the inhabitable earth, from the direction of the east
towards the west, for 318
miliaria
. And after her, Mercury for 318
miliaria
. After him, Jupiter for 371
miliaria
. After him, Saturn for 318
miliaria
. After him, Mars for 265
miliaria
. Then the disposition reverts to
Venus, as was said for the others.
Aquarius is adapted to the northern half of the sixth clime, from the east
to the west. And Saturn, who is its Lord, rules over the significations of
that half universally, from the east to the west, but the Lords of the bounds
participate with him. For this same Saturn, who is the Lord of the first
bound of Aquarius, rules over the significations of the revolution which
ought to be from the beginning of the inhabitable earth, from the direction
of the east towards the west, for 318
 miliaria
. And after him, Mercury for
318
 miliaria
. And after him, Venus for 424
miliaria
. And after her, Jupiter
for 265
miliaria
. After him, Mars for 265
miliaria
. Then the disposition
56

=== Page 57 ===
reverts to Saturn, as was said for the others.
Pisces is adapted to the seventh clime, from the east to the west. And
Jupiter, who is the Lord, rules the significations of that clime universally,
from the east to the west, but the Lords of the bounds participate with him.
For Venus, who is the Lady of the first bound of Pisces, rules over the
significations of the revolution which ought to be from the beginning of
the inhabitable earth, from the east toward the west, for 424
miliaria
. And
after her, Jupiter for 318
miliaria
. After him, Mercury for 318
miliaria
.
After him, Mars for 265
miliaria
. After him, Saturn for 265
miliaria
. Then
the disposition reverts to Venus, as was said for the others.
If however the clime were not of such a length [or longitude] that the
things signified by the planets could be extended so much that the number
of the
miliaria
 could be completed, as was said, it does not refer [to
anything]. For with land missing, the signification of the bound of the
planet expires.
Whence, you ought to look back at the disposition, and at the condition
of the planets in the revolutions of the years, both in nativities and
questions, and of the world, and see if the condition of the Lord of the sign
were good, because it signifies the good condition of the clime generally,
according to the part which it rules. And likewise look at the condition of
the planets ruling over the bounds. For if they were to agree in one being
[or nature or condition], it will signify that what is signified by the
revolution will appear to a greater degree, both for good and for evil. Like
if the condition of the Lord of the sign and the condition of the Lord of the
bound were good, it signifies complete good in the region over which the
Lord of the bound rules. If however the condition of each were bad, it
signifies that complete evil will appear in the region over which the Lord
of the bound rules. If however they were to disagree, what is signified by
them will appear less, but what is signified by the Lord of the sign will
appear less than what is signified by the Lord of the bound, both for good
and for evil.
Chapter 9: How the condition of the Sun is to be viewed in a
revolution of the year, if it were diurnal
Also, look at the condition of the Sun and his disposition in a revolution
of the year of the world (if the revolution were diurnal), and see whether
he is going to be eclipsed in that year or not.
Likewise, look at the aspects of the planets to him, namely [those of] the
57

=== Page 58 ===
benefics and the malefics: because the benefics signify good, the malefics
on the contrary signify evil. For if the Sun were made fortunate and strong,
it signifies the exaltation and eventuating of a great thing, in a diurnal
revolution.
Look even at the condition of the Lord of the Ascendant, and see
whether it is free from the impediments already stated, or not. Because if
he were free, it signifies goodness and the tranquility of the land over
which the sign that is then ascending, rules; and of the citizens of that
region, and of the people
[139]
 who are signified by that planet. If however
he were impeded, it signifies impediment and detriment and evil which
will come to the inhabitants of that region, and [the people] who are
signified by the planet who is the Lord of the Ascendant of the revolution;
and their condition will be disposed according to the substance of the sign
ruling over that region that is signified by that sign. Like if Libra were
ascending, and Venus (its Lady) were cadent from the Ascendant, or from
the angles, impeded (either retrograde or combust or besieged by the two
malefics), or made unfortunate in another way, it signifies that destruction
and infirmities and sorrows will happen in Arabia, and to the inhabitants of
it, and to all who are signified by Libra or by Venus. And if Leo were
ascending, and the Sun were impeded, it signifies that the aforesaid
impediments will happen to those of Babylonia, and to all who are
signified by Leo and the Sun. If however Cancer were ascending, and the
Moon were impeded by the aforesaid impediments, it signifies that the
aforesaid impediments will happen to the Romans, and to all who are
signified by Cancer and the Moon. And may you understand this with
every sign, and with every planet, according to the things signified by
each.
[140]
Chapter 10: How one must look at the condition of the Moon if the
revolution were nocturnal
If however the revolution were nocturnal, then look at the Moon, just as
you are looking at the Sun in a diurnal revolution. Which if she were the
Lady of the Revolution or disposition, and were in Cancer, you will look
only at her. If indeed she were outside Cancer, then look on to the Lord of
the domicile in which she is: which if you were to find him strong and
made fortunate by [being in] some strong place, or by aspect of the
benefics to him, it signifies good for the citizens of that region. If however
you were to find him weak, made unfortunate from the aforesaid causes, it
58

=== Page 59 ===
signifies the bad condition and bad disposition of the citizens or the
inhabitants of that region, and their detriment.
[Further general delineation of the revolution]
[141]
You may say likewise concerning the Lord of the Ascendant of the
revolution;
[142]
 wherefore if it were of good condition, it signifies the
good of the aforesaid citizens. If however it were of a bad condition, it
signifies their detriment.
And know that the Moon in a revolution of the night, if she were made
fortunate and strong, increased in light and number, signifies the exaltation
and influence
[143]
 of a great matter and for the good.
Likewise look to see if the luminary whose authority it was (and
especially the nocturnal [luminary]), is joined to Saturn by body, or by
aspect. Because if [the luminary] were joined to him by body, or from
some aspect, without perfect reception, the malice will be increased for it;
and all the more strongly if the Moon were joined to him in the going
down [or waning] of her own light. If indeed she were being separated
from him then, and especially in the increase of her own light, the malice
will be decreased, and it will not bring in so much detriment.
You will even see where the impeding malefic is, and of which house it
is the Lord; because harm will come out from the matter which is signified
by that house. Like if it were in the 2
nd
, it will occur because of substance,
or because of something of those things which are signified by the 2
nd
house. If indeed it were in the 3
rd
, it will occur because of brothers, or
because of short journeys, or because of those things which are signified
by the 3
rd
 house. If however it were in the 4
th
, it will occur because of
parents, or inheritances, or because of those things which are signified by
the 4
th
 house. If indeed it were in the 5
th
, it will occur because of children,
or women (who are not wives or girlfriends),
[144]
 or because of those
things which are signified by the 5
th
 house. And if it were in the 6
th
, it will
happen because of infirmities, or male or female slaves, or because of
those things which are signified by the 6
th
 house. If however it were in the
7
th
, it will occur because of wives, or partners, or enemies, or one of those
reasons which are signified by the 7
th
 house. If it were in the 8
th
, it will
occur because of death, or because of those things which are inherited
from the dead, or because of those things which are signified by the 8
th
house. And if it were in the 9
th
, it will occur because of religion, or
religious men, or a long journey, or because of the search for those things
which pertain to the future eternal life, or one of those things which are
59

=== Page 60 ===
signified by the 9
th
 house. If however it were in the 10
th
, it will occur
because of a king or a kingdom, or a magistrate, or one of those things
which are signified by the 10
th
 house. If indeed it were in the 11
th
, it will
occur because of hope, or friends, or because of those things which are
signified by the 11
th
 house. But if it were in the 12
th
, it will occur because of
hidden enemies, or large animals, or one of those things which are
signified by the 12
th
 house.
After you have looked at the Lord of the Ascendant, and you have
judged concerning his condition, then look at the Lord of the second, and
judge concerning him as you have you have judged concerning the Lord of
the Ascendant. Like if he were free from impediments, and were made
fortunate and strong, judge the goodness and increase of substance, and
likewise the profit of the citizens and inhabitants (of the region that is
signified by the Ascendant and its Lord), and of those [things] which are
signified by the 2
nd
 house, in that region. If however you were to find him
impeded, [judge] to the contrary.
Then look at the Lord of the third, which if you were to find him free
and made fortunate, and strong, say their short journeys [will be] fortunate,
and useful, and lucrative; and that brothers of that region will behave well
toward each other; and the rest of the things which are signified by the 3
rd
house will be well disposed. If however you were to find him impeded, say
the contrary.
Then look at the Lord of the fourth, which if you were to find him made
fortunate and strong, it signifies that the fathers of that region will behave
well toward their children, and that their fields will bring forth the produce
well, and the rest of the things which are signified by the 4
th
 house will be
well disposed. If however you were to find him impeded, say the contrary.
Then look at the Lord of the fifth, which if you were to find him made
fortunate and strong, it signifies that the children of that region will behave
themselves well toward their parents, and that there will be games and
joyful things in that region, and that all the things which are signified by
the 5
th
 house will be well disposed. If however you were to find him
impeded, say the contrary.
Then look at the Lord of the sixth, which if you were to find him made
fortunate and strong, it signifies the health of the bodies of the citizens of
that region, and that their male and female slaves, and male and female
servants, will behave well toward them; and likewise that their smaller
animals, and the things signified by the 6
th
 house, will be well disposed. If
however he were badly disposed, say the contrary.
Then look at the Lord of the seventh, which if you were to find him
60

=== Page 61 ===
strong, it signifies that their wives will more often behave well toward
their husbands, and that partners will cooperate well with partners, and
there will be few enmities (unless perhaps the Lord of the seventh and the
Lord of the Ascendant aspect each other at the same time, from enmity),
and all the things which are signified by the 7
th
 house will be well disposed.
If however it were badly disposed, say the contrary.
Then look at the Lord of the eighth,
[145]
 which if you were to find him
made fortunate and strong, it signifies that there will be little mortality in
that region, and that, except for a few, they will not die a bad death. But
they will depart [this world] from in their own beds (unless perhaps the
malefics impede the Lord of the Ascendant or the Moon with a great
impediment), and that the rest of the things which are signified by the 8
th
house will be well disposed. If however you were to find him impeded, say
the contrary.
Then you would look at the Lord of the ninth, which if you were to find
him made fortunate and strong, it signifies their long journeys will be
useful and praiseworthy, and that their religious men will be increased, and
the rest of the things which are signified by the 9
th
 house will be well
disposed in that region. If however you were to find the contrary, you will
judge the contrary.
Then you would look at the Lord of the tenth, which if you were to find
him made fortunate and strong, it signifies that the king or the
defender
[146]
 of that region will be well disposed, and that they will
behave themselves well toward their subjects, and that the rest of the
things which are signified by the 10
th
 house will be well disposed. If
however you were to find him impeded, say the contrary.
Then you would look at the Lord of the eleventh, which if you were to
find him made fortunate and strong, it signifies that the hopes of the
citizens of that region, and their trust, will come to a good end; and that
their fortune will be increased in the good, and there will not be enmities
between them (except for a few), and all the things which are signified by
the 11
th
 house will be well disposed. If however you were to find him
impeded, say the contrary.
Then you would look at the Lord of the twelfth, which if you were to
find him made fortunate and strong, it signifies that the greater animals of
the citizens of that region will be well disposed and will be increased in the
good; and there will be few reproaches [or blasphemies] and few slanders
between them, and that the rest of the things which are signified by the 12
th
house will be well disposed. If however you were to find him impeded, say
the contrary.
61

=== Page 62 ===
Whence if you were to look well at all of the significators of all twelve
houses, you could see how the accidents of that region will be disposed in
the revolution. For according to how you were to find the Lords of the
houses disposed, the accidents of the significators of each house will occur
according to that–namely, according to the strength or weakness of each of
them, and according to the place of the Lord of the sign from that sign
itself. And the adaptation of the Lord of each house will be according to
the aspect of one to another, and according to how the malefics aspect the
planetary Lord (namely of that house).
Even look at the angles and their Lords more diligently and minutely
than the others: because their virtue exceeds the virtues of the others.
Chapter 11: What every one of the seven planets would signify in the
Ascendant, in a revolution of the year
On Saturn in the Ascendant at the hour of the revolution
You will even look at the Ascendant of the hour of the revolution, to see
which of the planets is in it. Because if Saturn were there, nor were he the
Lord of the Ascendant, it signifies the detriment of that region which falls
under that revolution, in accordance with what is said elsewhere; and
pestilences, like infirmities, death, famine, many harmful winds (if he were
direct, and especially in airy signs). If indeed he were retrograde, it speaks
against winds, nor will he permit them to grow strong; however the ones
which there are, will be harmful. If however he were the Lord of the
Ascendant, it will mitigate the aforesaid things, nor will they be so
harmful.
On Jupiter in the Ascendant at the hour of the revolution: what he would
signify
If however Jupiter were in the Ascendant at the hour of the revolution, it
signifies the general goodness of the disposition of the year or revolution,
and there will be peace and security, and good will between men of that
region, more so than usual; and it will be good for its wealthy and great
men; and goods will be increased and bring profit, and their business
matters will be improved. And if the Lord of the Ascendant ([or]
[147]
 the
Lord of its exaltation) were joined to him, or he to it (from whatever
aspect, and especially from the trine or sextile, or by corporal conjunction),
62

=== Page 63 ===
and it were of good condition, there will be love between the king of that
region and his subjects; and the rustics will encounter good from him, and
that he will please them.
On Mars in the Ascendant: what he would signify
If indeed Mars were in the Ascendant at the hour of the revolution, free
(namely made fortunate and strong), it signifies there is going to be an
earthquake in that region. And if he were in an eastern sign, it signifies it is
going to be in the first quarter of the revolution. If indeed he were in a
southern sign, it signifies it is going to be in the second quarter of the
revolution. If by chance he were in a western sign, it signifies it is going to
be in the third quarter of the revolution. And if he were in a northern sign,
it signifies it is going to be in the last quarter of the revolution. It even
signifies a scarcity of rains, and a scarcity of battles. If indeed he were
impeded and of bad condition, say the contrary, namely instead of good
say bad, and instead of bad say worse, except for rains (because he does
not extinguish their powers so much in it).
If however he were on the line of the 10
th
 house, or beyond it by 15’ or
less, or after it by 1° or less, it signifies that the king or the chief of that
region will capture or imprison more of his subjects. And if he were
beyond it by 15’ up to 30’, or after from 1° up to 3°, he will capture a
lesser quantity of them. And if it were beyond it from 30’ up to the end of
1°, or after from 3° up to 5°, he will capture fewer. And if he were
[148]
beyond it from 1° up to the end of 2°, or after it from 5° up to the end of
10°, he will capture far fewer again. If however he were beyond it from 2°
up to 5°, or after it from 10° up to the end of 25°, and the house was not
removed, he will imprison practically none (even if some). And even
though he will have imprisoned [some], still he will not kill them, nor will
he mutilate them (except for few), although he will torture them.
[149]
If however Mars at the revolution were on the line of the 4
th
 house, or in
the other degrees or places opposite the aforesaid, he will kill (of those
whom he will capture) according to the quantity and proportion and mean
by which he will capture them if Mars were in the 10
th
, and according to
the places and degrees opposite them.
[150]
Indeed if he were in the first or the 7
th
, in similar places and degrees, he
will mutilate some of them, according to the aforementioned quantity and
proportion.
On the Sun in the Ascendant: what he would signify
63

=== Page 64 ===
If however the Sun were in the Ascendant at the hour of the revolution,
free from the malefics and the other impediments, and the Lord of the Year
or Revolution were with
[151]
 him, it signifies the good condition of the
wealthy and great or noble men, and their joy, and the increase of the
good, and the progress [or success] of things. And if he were received, it
signifies the taking away of evil. If however he were not in the Ascendant
at the hour of the revolution, but were outside it
[152]
 in a good place from
it, free from impediments, it signifies the same, but less so. If indeed he
were impeded, it signifies their detriment, and the contrary of the things
which I told you.
On Venus in the Ascendant: what she would signify
Indeed if Venus were in the Ascendant at the hour of the revolution,
namely free and made fortunate and strong, it signifies joy and gladness,
and dancing, and the breaking up of battles, and especially of young
women and men employing venereal practices; and the good disposition of
the Arabs and their goods; and all the more so if she were with the Lord of
the domicile or exaltation of the sign in which she is. And if she were
impeded, it signifies the contrary of the aforesaid.
On Mercury in the Ascendant: what he would signify
If for example Mercury were in the Ascendant at the hour of the
revolution, in the aspect of the benefics, and he were free from
impediments (namely made fortunate and strong), and he himself were the
Lord of the Year, it signifies the good condition and good disposition and
the usefulness of the wise (namely of judges and medical doctors), and
merchants, also writers and boys; and all the more so if he were joined
with the Lord of the domicile or exaltation of the sign in which he himself
is. If however he were impeded, it signifies the contrary of those things
which I have told you.
On the Moon in the Ascendant: what she would signify
Which if the Moon were in the Ascendant at the hour of the revolution,
or she were in the house [domicile?] of the Lord of the Year or Revolution,
joined to him by body or by aspect (except for the opposition), and were
otherwise free from impediments, it signifies an abundance of waters or
64

=== Page 65 ===
rains, and the increase of rivers and streams, and their flooding; the
increase of cold; and the goodness of the disposition of men, and that they
will rejoice in the good. If however she were impeded, the aforesaid will
be decreased, or perhaps annihilated.
Chapter 12: On Saturn and Mars, if they were impeded in a
revolution when they are above the earth
Likewise you will look in the hour of the revolution to see if Mars and
Saturn are above the earth [and] impeded, because this signifies the
severity of the year or revolution. And more strongly so, if Mars were to
receive Saturn, and committed disposition to him, because it will signify
severe and lasting accidents, and that the significations or detriments will
appear and manifest: for they will signify the detriment and weakness of
the king or the chief, and of the wealthy and nobles or great men (namely,
those who are fit for a kingdom), and that faith and religion will be
decreased (or rather it will be annihilated), and their religious men will
suffer detriment; and there will be many robbers and cutters of roads, or
pillagers; and battles and contentions will be multiplied; and there will be
more quarrels between men than usual; and even between the religious
men themselves; and they will envy each other, and especially those to
whom pride and vainglory is fitting; and more seriously so if Saturn were
in the 10
th
.
And by how much more the malefics were elevated above the earth, by
that much more will the accidents be more serious. And it will be thus far
worse
[153]
 if the Moon were below the earth, and she were to commit her
own disposition to Saturn while he is located above the earth, or [if] she
were joined to him by the opposition or square aspect: because then it
signifies severe detriments, and great tribulations, and horrible and fearful
things, like the death of the king and great men and the wealthy, or nobles,
or a regime change
[154]
 for the worse; and the more strongly so if the
malefics were retrograde, or occidental, or otherwise impeded. If however
they were direct, or oriental, nor impeded, the significations will be more
remitted [or abated].
And if Mars did not commit his own disposition to Saturn, the
significations of Saturn will not be so intense,
[155]
 and the significations
of Mars will be stronger, and especially in contentions and battles. And if
Saturn were to commit his own disposition to Mars, the significations of
Mars will be more intense, and the significations of Saturn will be
65

=== Page 66 ===
decreased.
And if the benefics were above the earth, namely direct, made fortunate
and strong, they signify the taking away of evil, and the increase of the
good; and the more strongly so, if Jupiter were so disposed in one of his
own dignities, and were oriental. And Venus is stronger when she is
occidental, so long as she is otherwise made fortunate. Whence if a planet
goes out from under the rays of the Sun, it is like a man who has grown ill
and is freed, and begins to resume his own powers, and is increased little
by little until he is returned to his own original strength, provided that the
malefics do not aspect [that planet]–because then it is like a sick man over
whom a crisis has come and he seems to have escaped; afterwards he
would relapse. And when it enters under the rays, it is like a man who had
been healthy and begins to grow ill; or who was a young man, and begins
to grow old, until his natural heat is gone.
Chapter 13: On the planets when they enter into the degrees of their
exaltation
Again, look to see if Saturn is entering into Libra, or is in it, and
especially in its twenty-first degree. Because his virtue will be increased
that much, and his significations will be made greater; and more strongly
so if he were to receive the disposition of other planets, and especially of
the malefics. For then it will signify changes, and great and wondrous and
stupendous things, which was touched on [in Treatise 4] in the recounting
of the conjunction that Mars and Saturn make in the beginning of Cancer.
You will even look to see whether Jupiter is entering into Cancer, or is
in it, especially in its fifteenth degree: because then his virtue will be
increased, and his significations made greater; and more strongly so if he
were to receive the disposition of one of the benefics: for it will signify
great things, and wondrous and famous and durable changes, however to
the good.
Likewise you will look to see if Mars is entering into Capricorn, or is in
it, and especially in its twenty-eighth degree: because then his
significations will be increased and made greater; and more strongly so if
he were to receive the disposition of the other planets, and particularly of
some malefic. For it will signify great and terrible things of those things
which seem to pertain to Mars.
And thus all the other planets: if they were found to be entering into
their exaltations at the hour of the revolution, they will increase their
66

=== Page 67 ===
significations and make [them] greater (namely the benefics for the good,
indeed the malefics for the contrary of the good). But the significations of
the superiors are considered more, because they are more powerful, and
stronger, and higher, and more notable.
And Māshā’allāh said,
[156]
 when the year is revolved, look at the
benefics and malefics to see if they were to aspect from a fixed sign: what
they signified will be prolonged, for good or evil. And if they were to
aspect from a movable sign, this will be middling. If indeed they were to
aspect from a common sign, it will be half this.
[Eclipses]
[157]
After this, if you knew an eclipse was going to come in that same year,
or in that same revolution, look at the Lord of the sign in which you saw it
was going to be: what his condition [or nature] is, and how he behaves
with the Lord of the ascending sign of the eclipse to come,
[158]
 and
whether they aspect each other or not. Likewise, how he
[159]
 behaves
with the Lord of the Year or Revolution, if they were to aspect each other
or not, and whether the benefics or malefics aspect him or not. Because if
the benefics and the Lord of the Ascendant of the eclipse (or the Lord of
the Revolution, or other benefic planets) were to aspect him, it signifies
good. If however the malefics were to aspect him–unless perhaps they
receive him by a trine or sextile aspect (because reception takes away from
their malice, even if it does not abolish it completely)–and the aforesaid
planets (or one of them) do not aspect him from a praiseworthy aspect, it
signifies evil. If indeed they were to aspect him together with the malefics,
nor were they impeded, they signify neither this nor that. If however they
were impeded, they signify evil, slightly remitted. If indeed they were to
aspect without the benefics, or the benefics without them, it signifies good,
slightly remitted.
Likewise, look at the significator of the king to see whether the
aforesaid planets (namely the Lord of the sign in which the eclipse ought
to be, and the Lord of the Ascendant of the eclipse) aspect him or not; and
whether the benefics or malefics aspect him. Because the benefics signify
the good condition of the king; indeed the malefics, to the contrary, signify
his bad condition. And the significations which the aforesaid planets
signified, will be greatly burdened if they were impeded by the aspects of
the malefics. And the condition of the king will be more strongly burdened
if his significator were the Lord of the sign in which the eclipse is going to
come. Because if it were, it signifies his ruin–and this will be when the
67

=== Page 68 ===
Sun reaches the degree which is the 10
th
 house at the hour of the eclipse.
And if the Lord of the sign in which the eclipse is going to be, were the
same as the Lord of the Year ([i.e.,] of the common people), it signifies
detriment is going to come over them. And the time of this effect will be
when the Sun reaches the degree which is the Ascendant at the hour of the
eclipse to come. And these will either be in the persons or the affairs of the
king and the populace.
For if the Ascendant of the eclipse were Gemini, or Virgo, or Libra,
or the first half of Sagittarius, or Aquarius, the detriments will happen
in their persons. But in Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius, they will
likewise happen in birds. And these will happen more strongly if
Saturn were in one of these signs, whether he were direct or
retrograde (but if he were retrograde it will be worse).
If however the Ascendant were Aries or Capricorn, it will happen in
sheep or goats, or other small animals, according to the substance of
the sign.
If indeed the Ascendant were Taurus, or the last half of Sagittarius,
they will happen in cows and other greater animals according to the
substance of the sign; but in cows [it will be] more serious than in the
others.
If however the Ascendant were Cancer or Pisces, they will happen in
fish and other animals of the kinds [that are] in waters, which are
useful to men. Indeed if it were Scorpio, they will happen in
poisonous animals, and those striking with their tails or rear; and
more strongly to those living in waters.
And always understand the increase of detriment when Saturn is in the
sign deputed over the matter.
In order to know the time of the lastingness of the detriments from the
hour of the eclipse, you will consider how many hours and how many
minutes of the hour the eclipse lasted. Because if it were a solar [eclipse],
it will last one year for each hour, and one month for every five minutes.
And if it were a lunar [month], it will last one month for every hour, and
one day for every two minutes.
And look to see where the impeding malefics are: because if they were
in the tenth or eleventh, or ninth, the significations will happen in the
68

=== Page 69 ===
seventh clime, and in that [area] of the earth which is inhabited outside the
clime toward the arctic circle. And if they were in the first or the second or
twelfth, they will happen in the sixth and fifth and fourth climes. If
however [they were] in the seventh or eighth or sixth, they will happen in
the third and second and first climes. But if they were in the fourth or fifth
or third, they will happen in the northern parts of the region in which they
happen. Nevertheless if the impeding malefics were received, they will
impede somewhat less.
[Further rules]
[160]
And he whom God willed to be a Master
[161]
 said if the Sun were the
Lord of the Ascendant in the revolution, and Venus were under the rays,
[then] because she is the Lady of the Midheaven,
[162]
 the Sun will be the
significator of the king. Then you will look to see how the king’s condition
is going to be in that year or revolution–which you could know by the
place of [the king’s] significator [i.e., the Sun] in the figure of the
revolution. Therefore see where he is, and how he is aspected by the
planets, namely whether benefics or malefics are aspecting; and whether
he is in an angle, or in a succeedent, or in a cadent (even though this rarely
happens); and whether the Lord of the domicile or exaltation of the sign in
which he is, aspects him or not. Because the benefics signify good, the
malefics on the contrary signify evil, just as was said to you elsewhere.
You will even look at the significators of all the houses, and the one of
them you find fortunate and strong, judge the goodness of the signification
of that house whose Lord he is; and the one of them you find unfortunate
and weak (namely retrograde or combust, or cadent from the angles or
from the Ascendant or from his own domicile), judge the badness of that
house whose Lord he is. And if you were to look at all houses, see in
which of them the benefics are found, because they increase the
significations of those houses according to how they were made fortunate
and strong, because they will increase more strongly. If however they were
weak, they will increase what they increased, more weakly.
You will even look at the Part of Fortune, which if you were to find it
alone in whatever house it was, it will signify the greater fortune of its
signification. If however some good planet were to aspect it, it will signify
greater fortune. And if [the good planet] were to receive it, it will signify
greater fortune again. If however the malefics were to aspect it from a trine
or sextile aspect with reception, it will be as if it were not aspected by
anyone; if indeed without reception, they will subtract one-fourth of the
69

=== Page 70 ===
goodness from it. Indeed if one of the malefics were joined to it from a
square aspect or opposition, or corporally, they will take all the goodness
from it, and it will profit nothing.
You will even look at the house in which the Head of the Dragon is,
because it signifies the increase of the significations of the house in which
it is, both for good and evil. For in the 6
th
, it signifies the increase of
infirmities, and of the other significations of that house; in the 8
th
, it
signifies the increase of its mortality and of the other significations. And
understand [this] in the rest of the houses, according to the significations
of each of them.
Likewise you will look at the Tail. Because it signifies the decrease of
the significations of the house in which it is, both for good and evil. For in
the 6
th
 it signifies the decrease of infirmities, and in the 8
th
 the decrease of
mortality, and of the other significations which are signified by those
houses. And understand [this] for the rest of the houses.
And if the Lord
[163]
 of a sign in which there were a benefic promising
good, were free and namely made fortunate and strong, the good will be
multiplied. And if it were impeded, [the good] will be decreased according
to the quantity of the impediment. And if the Lord of the domicile
[164]
 in
which there was a malefic (by which evil threatens),
[165]
 were impeded,
the evil will be increased according to the quantity of the impediment; and
more strongly so, if [the malefic] were northern or committed its own
disposition to another malefic who is northern. And if [the Lord] were free,
the evil will be decreased according to the quantity of [the Lord’s] own
strength.
And if the malefic who is in the domicile of the impeded planet, were to
commit his own disposition to some malefic located in the sixth, it
signifies a multitude of infirmities; and more strongly so, if the
commission [of disposition] were from the opposition or the square aspect.
If however it were from the trine or sextile aspect, it will be somewhat less
than this. If indeed it were to commit it to a benefic, it will decrease what
is signified somewhat less again. And if it were to commit it to a malefic
located in the eighth, it signifies mortality; and if it were to commit [it]
from the opposition or square aspect, it will be more serious. If however
from the trine or sextile, it will be somewhat less than this. If indeed it
were to commit it to a benefic, it will be decreased in it more again. And if
it were to commit it to a planet in the ninth, long journeys of the citizens of
that region will be impeded. And if it were to commit it to a planet in the
tenth, it signifies the impediment of the officials and the governors of that
region. If however it were to commit it to a planet in the eleventh, it
70

=== Page 71 ===
signifies the impediment of men’s trust and of their hope. If indeed it were
to commit it to a planet in the twelfth, it signifies the impediment and
difficulties of greater animals, and enmities, and contentions, and battles
and captures. And understand thusly for the rest of the houses, for each
one according to their significations, just as I have touched on for you
elsewhere.
Which
[166]
 if Venus were not under the rays of the Sun, nor otherwise
impeded by a strong impediment, she cannot avoid being the significatrix
of the king, and especially if she were in Taurus (or Libra).
[167]
Chapter 14: How the condition of the king and the nobles and the
populace should be considered–of what sort their condition is going to
be
After you have understood the condition of the aforesaid persons
(namely [that] of the king and the nobles, and great men, and the common
people or the rustics), you will consider what will be concerning their
condition in the revolution, and concerning their accidents, and what will
be between them, namely how the king may be treated by his subjects, and
will follow [for] them from him, and how the citizens of that region will
follow and obey their authorities and administrators or those set over them.
And you will look at the condition of each of the aforesaid following the
condition of the king, which you could look at in this way. For indeed you
will see in which house his significator is, because his accidents will take
their root or power from the house [domicile?] in which he is, according to
its fortune or misfortune, and you will see his impediments, or his escape,
or his liberation from them, according to this. And if you were to see that
contrarieties are supposed to happen to him, like battles and legal
controversies the like, you could see what ought to happen to him from
thence, which you could know through his significator and the strength or
weakness of his enemies. Likewise, you will see whether journeys (long or
short) ought to happen for him in the revolution, which you could know
through the Lord of the ninth and through the Lord of the third. For
through the Lord of the ninth you will perceive pilgrimages or long
journeys; through the Lord of the third, short or nearby journeys. Whence
you will see the Lord of the house of the journey at the hour of the
revolution, and his place: which if he were well disposed, and in a
fortunate and strong place, and were received from the house in which he
is, it signifies that [the king] will journey or go on a pilgrimage of his own
71

=== Page 72 ===
devices, for the purpose of finding tranquility or wandering or getting
some space. And if [the significator] were in its first station, or near it by
5° or less, it signifies slowness and laziness in his pilgrimage or in
journeying. And if it were retrograde or stationary in its own first station,
and it were received, it signifies that he will journey, but will return
shortly. If however it were like this without reception, it signifies that he
will not complete his journey, but rather will suffer detriment in it, and
anger or distress.
Then look at the Lord of the house [domicile?] of the journey, and see if
the Lord of the domicile in which he was, is retrograde, and were to aspect
its own domicile by a trine or sextile aspect: because this will signify that
[the king] is going to go in order to organize and dispose his business
concerns, and for the sake of his subjects. If however [the Lord of the Lord
of the ninth] were to aspect [its own domicile] from a square aspect, or
from the opposition, it signifies that he is going to go out in order to do
battle with his rebels and enemies.
Then look at the significator of the king, to see if it were free from
impediments, and even if one of the planets which is naturally inimical to
it were free,
[168]
 and that the Lord of the journey or the pilgrimage is not
in the house of infirmity [the 6
th
] or in the house of death [the 8
th
]. Because
this signifies the guarding and deliverance of his person in the pilgrimage
or journey, in accordance as his significator were sound and free from
impediments. And even if the significator of the king is found free of those
things which were said, if the Lord of the house of the journey or
pilgrimage were impeded, it signifies impediment and sorrow according to
what is signified by the house in which it is, both of the house of infirmity
and the house of death, and all the others. And if the Lord of the house of
the journey or pilgrimage were free from impediments, and the significator
of the king were impeded, impediments which will be suspected, and
which he feared, will happen to [the king] according to the significations
of the house in which [the significator] was impeded, unless perhaps
Jupiter were to aspect and receive him, and he himself were sound and
free–because then all the malice of whatever one there was, or whatever
kind, is then broken.
Chapter 15: Why the king will go on a pilgrimage, if he were going to
go on a pilgrimage
However, in order to know the reasons why he will go on a pilgrimage
72

=== Page 73 ===
(if he were supposed to go on a pilgrimage), you will look at the Lord of
the house of the pilgrimage or journey, and you will see in which house it
itself was. Because one of the things signified by that house will be the
reason for the journey or pilgrimage.
For if it or the significator of the king were in the first, or were joined to
the Lord of the first, his departure will be because of the salvation
[169]
 of
his own person; and it will seem more likely that he will not be on a
pilgrimage, but will be in peace and quiet. But if there were another planet
between him and the degree of the Ascendant, whether lighter or heavier
than he, see of what nature it is: because if it were of those inimical to the
significator to the king, someone will come upon him who seeks to deprive
him of his kingdom or his dignity, and who will contend with him in order
to take his kingdom or dignity away from him. If indeed [this] were of the
things happening to him, the one who comes will be such a person that the
king or commander will hand the kingdom or dignity over to him
voluntarily, and will prefer him to himself. And see of which house he is
the Lord: because from him will be known who it will be who is going to
come to do this. Like if it were the Lord of the second, he will be of those
who are signified by the 2
nd
 house. If indeed it were the Lord of the third,
he will be of those who are signified by the 3
rd
 house. And understand
thusly concerning the rest of the houses’ significations; and perhaps that he
will build in the land to which he goes.
If indeed the Lord of the ninth were in the second, or joined to its Lord,
it signifies that his journey is because of a quest, namely to acquire money.
If however it were in the third–since it will be in the house of his own
enemies (namely of the ninth)–it signifies that his departure will be
because of making war or engaging in battles. And he will desire to
journey and ride; and he will multiply the journeys–even if he does not
desire with a great desire–if it were a pilgrimage.
[170]
And if it were in the fourth, or joined to its Lord, it signifies that his
journey will be horrible and fearful, if it were a pilgrimage. And because it
will be in the eighth from its own house (namely from the 9
th
), it is feared
concerning his death. And if one of the malefics were to aspect him then
from the square aspect or from the opposition, or were joined to him
corporally, or were to commit its disposition to him, he will hardly or
never evade the dangers. However, he will not desire much to ride or
journey, but rather he will desire to be in quiet and tranquility.
And if it were in the fifth or joined to the Lord of the fifth, it signifies
his condition to be praiseworthy; and he will be in joy and dancing and
delight; and he will desire to have a child, and will have one according to
73

=== Page 74 ===
the sex of the sign in which Mars is, [and] the [majority] portion of the
significators (which are Lord of the first and the Lord of the fifth, and the
Moon, and the Lord of the domicile in which she is, and Jupiter). And it
even signifies that he will build in the land to which he is going to set out,
and he will think to spend time there, but he will hardly or never spend
time there.
And if it were in the sixth or joined to its Lord (namely so that it
commits its own disposition to it), it signifies he is going to become ill in
that revolution.
And if it were in the seventh or joined to its
[171]
 Lord, it signifies some
strength of his enemies who are inimical to him, not because of the
kingdom or a dignity, but for some other reason; [and] he will be intent on
venereal activity more so than he ought to be.
And if it were in the eighth or joined to its Lord, from any aspect
without reception, death will be feared for him in that revolution. And if
the Lord of the eighth were to receive him ([and] not he the Lord of the
eighth), it will be feared more so again. And if he were to receive the Lord
of the eighth, nor were the Lord of the eighth to receive him, it will be
feared more so again, so that it will hardly or never happen but that he will
die. If however each were to receive the other, only God could make it so
that he might not die; because otherwise he would not be able to escape
death.
And if it were in the ninth, or were joined to the Lord of the ninth, or to
some planet in it, he will be on journeys and pilgrimages both long and
short. But if the Lord of the ninth were then cadent or combust, death or
the greatest discomfort will be feared for him on his pilgrimage or journey.
If however it were not so impeded, it signifies the journey will be good
and prosperous, and that he will apply himself in affairs pertaining to
religion and pity, provided that one of the malefics does not aspect him by
an aspect of enmity (because that would signify that grief and sorrow will
come upon him from the direction of his own household members). And if
it were the first square aspect,
[172]
 it will happen from the direction of his
enemies. If however it were the second square aspect, it will happen from
the direction of slaves or an opportunity [or pretext] of theirs, or that of
low-class persons. And it is necessary for you to look at the sign in which
the second aspect of the Lord of the house of pilgrimages is,
[173]
 [to see]
if one of the malefics were there; and to see of what substance that sign is;
because if it were in the image of men, the misfortune of beasts will be
feared concerning him. If however it were in the image of other animals, a
blow or a bite or a poisonous puncturing will be feared, according to the
74

=== Page 75 ===
substance of that sign.
And if it were in the tenth or joined to the Lord of the tenth, it signifies
goodness and his strengthening in his kingdom, and that his journey will
be prolonged, and that he will want to make the matters of the kingdom fit.
And if it were in the eleventh or joined to the Lord of the eleventh, it
signifies the fitness of his own person, and of those following him,
whether of the soldiers or of those of his own household [or of his
intimates], just like a king or chief. And it even signifies the goodness of
his mind; and that he will eagerly wound his subjects badly, or rather he
will put down some unpunished people;
[174]
 and that he will pay out
substance in the affairs of the kingdom, and even for other reasons, in a
good way, and sometimes it will disperse.
And if it were in the twelfth or joined to its Lord, he will apply himself
to inquiring and investigating enemies, both his own and of the kingdom,
and concerning which you [will] fear his enemies were not believed, and
he will be occupied with this. And if it were to aspect the Lord of the
twelfth without reception, he will get them and wound them. If indeed it
were to aspect from a trine or sextile aspect without reception, he will
wound them less; if indeed with reception, he will wound them little or not
at all.
And he whom God willed to be a Master
[175]
 said that whenever you
were to find the significator of the king joined to the Lord of some house,
it signifies that same thing
[the significator of the king] would have
signified if he were found in the house, provided that he commits
disposition to the Lord of that house.
And Abū Ma’shar said that you ought to look in marriage celebrations
just as you have looked for a journey. Because perhaps there will be a
marriage on account of seeking substance. And he said, look then at the
Lord of the eighth, and the Lord of the second, to see if the Lord of the
eighth were to commit disposition to the Lord of the second: he will find
substance from it. If however the Lord of the second were to commit
disposition to the Lord of the eighth, he will [not?]
[176]
 find substance
from it. And he said, [if] the Lord of the house of marriage were in the
eleventh, he will marry her on account of love and delight; and more
strongly so if the significator of the king and the Lord of the seventh
were
[177]
 aspecting each other. And if it were in the tenth, his kingdom
will be increased from this. And if it were in the fifth, he will seek a son
from it.
And Ptolemy said,
[178]
 look at the significator of the king and the Lord
of the seventh, and judge according to what I told you in the chapter on
75

=== Page 76 ===
journeys. And look at the aspect of the benefics and the malefics in their
own places. And he said, also look in addition in the nativities of children,
and [see] how their condition toward each other will be.
Chapter 16: Why it will be feared for the person of the king, if his
significator were under the rays
And
[179]
 if the significator of the king were under the rays of the Sun,
death will be feared for him in that revolution; and if it were not under the
rays, but were near them by 12° in front of them (if it were of the
superiors) or after
[180]
 (if it were of the inferiors), it will be feared for him
when it begins to enter the rays, according to the conjunction of the one of
[these] two to which he will be joined: namely the Lord of the house of
infirmity, and the Lord of the house of death. Which if it were not either of
them then, death will be feared for him in the hour in which he is joined
with the Sun by body (or degree by degree). Also you will look to see, if
the 10
th
 house were Leo, whether Mars aspects the Sun then, or they were
joined corporally, because the killing of the king will be feared in that
revolution.
However, in order that you might see whence it will come to him, look
to see in whose house Mars were then: because from what is signified by
that house, the reason of this wicked deed will be born. And if Saturn were
to aspect him, it will happen to the king through a similar signification of
difficulty; and it will be feared that the king will be poisoned in that
revolution or year.
And he whom God willed to be a Master
[181]
 said that if the Lord of
the Year were combust in the Midheaven, it will be feared for the king in
the same ways: and these will happen to him in the region in which it then
was. And if the combustion were in the angle of the earth [the 4
th
] or [in]
the seventh [angle], they will happen to him from someone who will come
[from] outside the land. And he said that the opposition of the malefics,
and their square aspect, is more serious in this case than the corporal
conjunction. And he said, if the Sun were the significator of the king and
he were to aspect Jupiter from the opposition, the king will be inimical to
the members of his household, and will be suspicious of them, and will be
oppressed by them. And likewise, if he were opposite the Lord of the
Ascendant, he will be inimical to the rustics, and will be suspicious of
them and will impede them.
76

=== Page 77 ===
On the mutual reception of the planets
After this you will know which of the planets receive each other, and to
what place
[182]
 of the figure they are projecting their own rays.
Wherefore in the [earthly] regions subject to the signs to which the rays
are projected, the significations of those planets will have greater efficacy,
and imprint more in them than in other places.
[183]
Which planets are friends of the Lord of the Ascendant in the revolution
You will even know which planets are friends of the Lord of the
Ascendant of the revolution, or which are enemies, and which of them
aspect more, or to whom he commits disposition; and which aspect the
Ascendant with a praiseworthy aspect or one of enmity. Wherefore,
according to how the benefics or malefics were to aspect him or the
Ascendant, you will judge concerning the significations of theirs that are
going to come in that revolution.
He whom God willed to be a Master, said,
[184]
 know that both malefics
(namely Saturn and Mars), if one of them were in an angle in the
revolution of the year, and were in earthy signs, direct, it signifies the
destruction of trees, and the death of animals. And if Mars were to aspect
the significator of the king, and he (namely Mars) were commingled with
the light of Saturn, it signifies contention and the shedding of blood. And
Māshā’allāh said
[185]
 if [Mars] were in an airy
[186]
 sign, it signifies
injustices and enmities. If indeed [Mars] were [not]
[187]
 in an angle and
were to aspect the Ascendant, it signifies infirmities and blood, and more
severely in every land in whose sign his light was
[188]
 (or the opposition
or square aspect). And he said that if [Mars] were retrograde, it signifies
pestilence. And if [Mars] were in a sign which does not
[189]
 aspect the
Ascendant, and he were direct, it signifies infirmity and the detriment of
seeds. If indeed [Mars] were retrograde, it will signify death and infirmity
and blood.
Chapter 17: On those things which ought to come to the king in a
revolution of the year
After
[190]
 you were to see that the king is going to go on a pilgrimage
in that year, see how the condition of the Lord of the house of the
pilgrimage is, namely whether it is direct or free or impeded; and whether
77

=== Page 78 ===
it is in its own domicile or a stranger’s; and is going from the sign in which
it is to another one of its domiciles, and is joined to the Lord of the
domicile or exaltation in which it is. And see in what hour it is going to
enter into its own domicile, or in which [hour] it is going to come to the
place in which the Lord of the domicile or exaltation (in which it was
when it was joined to him) was.
[191]
 And see if the Lord of the ninth is
retrograde: because if it were so and it were received, it signifies that he
will have much space
[192]
 in his journey or his pilgrimage, and that he
will return quickly [compared to] his usual regard to a journey.
[193]
 If
however it were retrograde, nor were it received, it signifies that his
journey will be difficult and irksome; and that impediments will happen to
him because of his journey or pilgrimage. If however it were slower in
course than in its own first slowness,
[194]
 it signifies a long delay on his
journey or pilgrimage; and that for various reasons he will be detained in it
in the regions to which he goes or had gone on pilgrimage; and it will be
feared for him on the pilgrimage.
And Abū Ma’shar said if it were in its own second slowness
[195]
 he
will return when the planet is direct, and his pilgrimage will not be
perfected. If however it were retrograde, and the Lord of its own house
were to aspect it from a square aspect, or from the opposition, it signifies
that his departure will be to war, clearly with enemies turning against him,
and it seems that he ought to be outside his own region. If however [the
Lord of its own house] were to aspect it from a trine or sextile aspect, it
seems that he is going to go against some of his own subjects who are
becoming (or have been made) rebels against him. If however they were
joined corporally, it seems that he will arrive at the place of the contention.
And when you had investigated this, look at the significator of the king:
which if you were to find him free from the impediments of the malefics,
nor were he joined to one of the planets who is naturally inimical to him,
and the Lord of the pilgrimage [the 9
th
] were free, in an optimal place from
the Ascendant, nor were it in a place of enmity to the Ascendant, nor were
it found in the 6
th
 or the 8
th
, it signifies the safety and deliverance of his
body. If however his significator were free from the aforesaid
impediments, or it were the Lord of the sign in which the Lord of the
house (in which the Lord of the pilgrimage were) were found,
[196]
 and the
Lord of the pilgrimage were impeded, it signifies that impediment will
happen to him, and his own destruction in the pilgrimage, and perhaps that
some illness will happen to him which will not be of his usual types of
illnesses, according to the sign in which the Lord of the house of
pilgrimage is. If indeed his significator were impeded, and the Lord of the
78

=== Page 79 ===
house of pilgrimage were free, what he feared in terms of an illness which
he is used to having,
[197]
 will happen to him on the pilgrimage.
You will even see whether the significator of the king is aspected by one
of the planets, and whether the one that were to aspect him is a benefic or a
malefic. For if it were a malefic, it signifies enmity which will happen to
the king in that year or revolution. Then you will see whether the malefic
has any dignity in the sign in which
[198]
 he aspected the significator of
the king. Because if he had some dignity there, the enemy will be from the
land of the king according to the person which is signified by that dignity.
Wherefore if it were the domicile, he will be of the greater inhabitants of
his own land, and of his own household members. If however it were the
exaltation, he will be of the more noble people in his kingdom, or of those
who came from somewhere else and were in charge over some dignities in
that kingdom, or perhaps they acquired a fortune there (signified by the
aspect),
[199]
 and great riches, and they are not of the powerful people
(namely those who are fit for a kingdom and royal dignities); and they will
be of more noble birth if the aspect were the second square.
[200]
 Indeed
the corporal conjunction signifies a marriage alliance on the part of
women. If indeed it did not have a dignity there, he will be from the king’s
own particular blood-relatives. And if it were the triplicity or bound, he
will be of the great citizens who are subject to the king. If the aspect were
the first square,
[201]
 it signifies the enemy
[202]
 to be a son born not from
legitimate intercourse. But if the aspect were from the opposition, the
enemy will be openly adversarial to the king. If by chance the aspect were
a sextile or a trine, it signifies that he will be one close to or from those
close to, the king.
Chapter 18: On the conjunction of the two malefics (namely of Saturn
and Mars) with a planet in the degree of its own exaltation: what
would be signified from that
[203]
Abū Ma’shar said, look in a revolution of the year [for] a conjunction of
the malefics (namely of Saturn and Mars), to see whether they are joined
with some planet which is in the degree of its own exaltation, by aspect
(and it is worse if by the square or by opposition).
[204]
 For if it were
Saturn, it signifies evil and destruction in the region deputed to that planet.
And if the aspect of Saturn were from a fixed sign, what is signified will
be prolonged according to the quantity of degrees which there were
between their bodies–for years, or months, or weeks or days. For if what
79

=== Page 80 ===
was signified is supposed to be perfected within the year which you are
revolving, it will signify months according to the number of degrees. If
however it were going past the year or revolution, it will be prolonged for
years. If however it were from a movable sign, it will signify days
according to the number of degrees. And if it were not perfected in so
many days, it will signify weeks. And if it were from a common sign, they
will be weeks. And if it were not completed in so many weeks, it signifies
months. If however Saturn did not aspect him, but some planet were to
transfer their light between them, it signifies the coming of things liable to
be scattered over the men of the region of that planet, or destruction and
detriment will come over them in peoples who will not be from that
region.
[205]
 If however some planet did not transfer the light between
them, and the rays of Saturn were to touch the rays of the planet located in
its own exaltation (or [those] of a planet which was fit to transfer their
light between them), sadness and grief will enter upon the men of that
region, which they need not fear; for the fear will be dissolved and will not
reach actuality, by the will of God.
On the aspect of Mars to a planet in its own exaltation
If however it were from the aspect of Mars, just as I said concerning the
aspect of Saturn (and worse is if it were the square or opposition), the
aforesaid will happen just as I said concerning Saturn, in a like way and
for like reasons. And more so because Mars will perfect accidents which
would be signified by iron and fire and the shedding of blood.
You will even look at the Lord of the ninth: if you were to find [it] in
the third, it signifies the king is going to go on a pilgrimage for religious
reasons, and because of the pilgrimage of eternal life, and the future age
from the Creator, because this place
[206]
 in this [matter] signifies the
same that the 9
th
 does, even though it is its nadir.
And Abū Ma’shar said if you were to see [him] in one of the houses (of
the twelve houses), you should not dismiss his aspect from the places. And
stronger will be the significators of the opposites: as is his signification
and the signification of the sign that is the nadir of one planet; or [if] it
were his domicile or exaltation, because then it signifies what I said.
[207]
Chapter 19: When the Sun and Moon are joined to one of the planets
or are being separated from them: what they would signify
80

=== Page 81 ===
You will consider the Sun and the Moon, and you will see how they are
disposed, namely whether they are joined to one of the planets, or are
being separated from one of them: because what is signified will be
according to how you were to see them conjoined with the planets, or
separated from them, both by body and by aspect. And Abū Ma’shar said,
because the square aspect is strong, and the sextile weak, the conjunction
harsh.
Again on the accidents of the king
Again, you would look–so that you might know the accidents of the
king–at what kinds of things are going to come in the revolution which
you are seeking, to see whether the Moon is found in the 7
th
 house or not:
because if she were in it, and were in increased light, and fast in course,
and joined to the Lord of the 7
th
, or to the Lord of the exaltation of that
domicile, or to one having two other dignities in it, or to a benefic planet, it
signifies that the rustics will adore their king and obey him, and they will
willingly listen to him and revere him, and none of them will be contrary
to him, nor will there arise an army from someone over him, nor against
him, nor will something contrary to him be pondered, but rather he will see
things which please them, and which he loves and about which he rejoices.
But if the Moon were then impeded, and were in little light and course, nor
received, it signifies the contrary of that which I have told you. Because
battles and contentions and wars will happen to him, nor will his own
subjects comply with him, nor simply will they happen to him only when
she is impeded in the seventh; but yet it will even be feared that they will
happen to him if she were impeded in other places by terrible
impediments, or were she cadent.
Again on the good or bad condition of the king
You would even look, in a revolution of the year, by means of the
condition of the Lord of the Midheaven, concerning the condition of the
king (to see how it is going to come to him in that revolution), which you
could weigh carefully through the condition of Saturn, and that of
the Lord
of the Year; even through certain others of the planets just as I will
expound to you. If the Lord of the 10
th
 house were
the significator of the
king in the revolution of the year, and Saturn were combust (and more
strongly so if he were in front of
[208]
 the Sun) or were the significator of
the king, joined to the Lord of the Year, and were to commit disposition to
81

=== Page 82 ===
him; and the Lord of the Year were joined to a planet appearing in the 8
th
from the Ascendant of the revolution (which is the house signifying death
generally) or to a planet located in the 5
th
 from the Ascendant of the
revolution,
[209]
 from the opposition or a square aspect, it signifies the
death of the king in that year or revolution. Or [if] the significator of the
king were joined to this same Lord of the Year, and the Lord of the Year
were joined corporally to the Lord of the 5
th
 or 8
th
 in one of the other houses
(or from the opposition or a square aspect), it signifies his death. And more
certainly so if the Lord of the domicile in which the conjunction is, were a
malefic. Likewise if the significator of the king were entering combustion,
it signifies the death of the king; and he would hardly or never be able to
avoid this. If however Saturn were oriental, going out from under the rays
of the Sun, he will not impede the king, but his condition will be
improved.
If indeed this conjunction were with a planet in the 3
rd
 or 6
th
 or elsewhere
with the Lord of the third or sixth,
[210]
 it signifies an infirmity is going to
come to him in that revolution. And according to the significations, and
through the significations of the house in which the conjunction is, and on
their occasion, the contrary things which are going to come to him, will
happen to him.
If however the significator of the king did not commit disposition to the
Lord of the Year or Revolution, not so much danger hangs over him: for
that much fear hangs over him. And this is to be understood concerning
any king or one similar to a king, according to his clime and according to
his region. But if he were already crossing over combustion, by as many
degrees as there are degrees of his orb, up until he touches the tenth minute
of the last degree of his combustion, it signifies that anger and sorrow and
contention, and likewise fear, will come to the king in that revolution; and
more strongly so if a malefic were to aspect him. Because if it were to
aspect him, it will introduce fear over the king, and it will be feared
concerning him and about him, according to the substance and
signification of the house and sign in which the malefic is. Like if it were
in the second, it will be because of substance. And if it were in the third, it
will be because of brothers or journeys. And if it were in the fourth, it will
be because of parents or inheritances. And if it were in the fifth, it will be
because of children. And if it were in the sixth, it will be because of
infirmity. And if it were in the seventh,
[211]
 it will be because of his wife.
And if it were in the eighth, it will be because of death. And if it were in
the ninth, it will be because of long journeys. And if it were in the tenth, it
will be because of the kingdom. And if it were in the eleventh, it will be
82

=== Page 83 ===
because of allies. And if it were in the twelfth, it will be because of hidden
enemies. If however a benefic were to aspect him, all of this will turn
about, and turn away from him.
And in order that you might know when these things ought to happen,
see when the significator of the king will be joined with that malefic.
Because then will be the time of the arrival of those signified things
(whether the malefic who impeded him were joined to him by body, or by
opposition, or by a square aspect). You will judge according to the one of
them who first arrives, or when the impeding malefic comes to the 10
th
 of
the Ascendant of the revolution, or at least to its Ascendant, unless a
benefic then aspects the significator of the king or the malefic itself, so that
it breaks his malice. If however this conjunction were in an angle, the time
of the accidents will be when the significator is combust, or when the
malefic reaches the place in which the significator of the king then is.
[212]
Chapter 20: On the condition of the king with those placed under him
Indeed you could know the condition of the king with his subjects, and
the condition of his subjects with him, by the conjoining of their
significators to each other, or by their aspect with reception. Because he
(of the significators) who receives the other, commits his own disposition
to him. Whence if the significator of the king were to commit his own
disposition to the significator of his subjects, the king will be of good will
and peaceful to his rustics, more so than they to him. If the significator of
the common people were to commit its own disposition to the significator
of the king, they will be obedient, and more of good will to the king than
he to them. If indeed each of the significators were to receive the other, the
king will commit his own disposition to his subjects, and they to him. And
one of them will want what the other wants, and each will be peaceful to
the other.
Chapter 21: On the peculiar and particular condition of the king
However, you could know the peculiar and particular condition of the
king, according to the daily accidents which are supposed to happen to him
in the revolution, through his significator–namely [according to] how you
were to see him daily disposed to the good or to its contrary. Because
according to what happens to him from day to day, up to the end of the
83

=== Page 84 ===
revolution, just as he is joined to the benefics or malefics, or as he arrives
at places in which the malefics were at the hour of the revolution, or to
other places which were then impeded–for according to that, good things
and bad things (or his liberation from them) will happen to him.
Chapter 22: What the significator of the king would signify in the
angle of a house
Abū Ma’shar said when the significator of the king is in the angle of the
Midheaven, it signifies the battle of the king; indeed when he is in the
Ascendant, the condition of men will be diminished. If indeed he were in
the western one, or in the angle of the earth, his rustics will be destroyed.
And he said if the Lord of the Year or the significator of the king were
going away toward a malefic planet, or to the light of a slow and malefic
planet in an angle, destruction or death will be feared concerning him
whose significator it was.
Chapter 23: If the significator of the king, or any other planet, were to
have escaped from impediment, and were to go to its own exaltation

If the significator of the king were to stand impeded before his own
exaltation, and had already escaped from that impediment, and were then
joined to some benefic (and better than that, if the benefic were to receive
him), and when he were separated from it, before he arrives at the degree
in which he is exalted, if he were to go to it immediately, nor were he then
impeded by one of the malefics, there will then be a greater strength and a
stronger testimony than there ever could be.
See where the Part of the Kingdom
[213]
 were to fall then: because if it
were to fall into a place in which it is
[214]
 impeded, it signifies
contrarieties and impediments are going to come to the king in his own
kingdom in that revolution. If however it were to fall into the place of [the
significator’s] own exaltation (toward which he is then going), it signifies
the increase and goodness of his kingdom, without the contrary, and
without any impediment. Indeed for those wishing to resist [the king], look
from the opposite places (nor however should you include among them the
natural enemies of the king). Because if [the places] were impeded, [the
enemies] will be impeded, and it will go badly for them. If indeed they
were [not] impeded,
[215]
 still they will not at all be weakened in these
84

=== Page 85 ===
things which they want against the king.
And if the significator of the king were the significator of one of the
things signified
[216]
 and were
al-mubtazz
 over it,
[217]
 or the Part of the
Kingdom were to fall on him, and the Sun were to commit his own
disposition to the significator of the king, the king will rule in that
revolution over all those things which are signified by Saturn, Jupiter, and
the Sun, and Mercury (if he were masculine). And indeed if the Moon
were to commit her disposition to him, the king will rule over all those
things which are signified by Mars, Venus, the Moon and Mercury (if he
were feminine).
[218]
 It will add to his subjects in his kingdom, according
to how you were to see the Lord of the domicile in which its significator
was, and
the Lord of the Year, and the Lord of the domicile in which the
Lord of the Year is.
Chapter 24: To know when the revolution lasts through the whole
year, and when through half the year, and when through a quarter of
the year
It was spoken above of the revolution of years, and of the Lord of the
Year. And often I have named the Lord of the Revolution to you when I
made mention of the Lord of the Year, and not in vain. Because every
Lord of the Year is called the Lord of the Revolution, but it does not work
the other way around.
[219]
 For the Lord of the Year is when, in the year
which you are revolving, it is not sought except in one revolution. And this
is when a fixed sign is ascending at the entrance of the Sun into Aries: for
that revolution contains in itself all quarters of that year. And so the one
that is then the Lord of the Year, will be the Lord of the whole year, and of
the whole revolution. But if a common sign were ascending, the revolution
will not last but through one half of the year, namely up until the entrance
of the Sun into Libra: then it will be necessary for you to repeat the
revolution, and the one that rules then will be the Lord of the Revolution
up until the end of the second half of the year. Indeed if a movable sign
were ascending, that revolution will not last but up until the entrance of the
Sun into Cancer, and then it will be necessary for you to do the same for
the other quarters of the year. And the Lord of the first quarter will be he
whose rulership it was in the entrance of the Sun into Aries. And he who is
in charge of the rulership in his entrance into Cancer, will be the Lord of
the Revolution of the second quarter. And he who is in charge in the
entrance of the Sun into Libra, will be the Lord of the [Revolution of the]
85

=== Page 86 ===
third quarter. And he who is in charge in his entrance into Capricorn, will
be the Lord of the [Revolution of the] last quarter.
And always, in every one of the aforesaid entrances, you will renew
your judgment, just as you have done in the entrance of the Sun into Aries.
And always make the Lord of the first revolution a participator with the
Lord of the second; and the Lord of the second with the Lord of the third;
and the Lord of the third, with the Lord of the fourth, until you would
finish all of them. Because [such a Lord] will have one-fourth of the
rulership, just as the Philosopher said.
[220]
 And thus he who is the Lord of
the whole year, will be the Lord of a Revolution; he who is the Lord of
one-half will be the Lord of a Revolution; he who is the Lord of a quarter
will be the Lord of a Revolution. However, with the Lord of the Year it is
not so, even though he is familiarly called the Lord of the Year.
[221]
What the Lord of the hour and the Part of Fortune would signify in a
revolution
After you have carried out all of the aforesaid in the order by which it
was described, and you have looked at all the things which were to have
been looked at, as I have told you, you will then consider the Lord of the
hour and the Part of Fortune, and the Lord of the domicile in which [the
Part] were to fall: which if they were well disposed, they will aid the Lord
of the Year and the significator of the king; which if you were to find them
well disposed, they will increase their good. If however you were to find
them impeded, they will decrease their impediment. If however they were
impeded, and you were to find them impeded, they will increase their
good. If however you were to find them well disposed, you will take away
from their goodness.
[222]
And Abū Ma’shar said, know the conjunction of the planets with the
Lord of the Year, and with the significator of the king, and their
conjunction with the planets, and their separation and arrival [application]
with respect to one another, in the houses [domiciles?] and the aspects, and
attach the broader, lesser things of their essences
[223]
 (understand [by
this] their works through the situations
[224]
 of others), and commingle the
essences
[225]
 of the signs with these, and [know] that it may conquer over
reception by nature; and learn the condition of the significators, and know
their situation to one another, by difference [diversity] and binding,
[226]
and with reception and rendering [or returning].
[227]
86

=== Page 87 ===
Chapter 25: On the knowledge of the accidents which are going to
come in the climes, at the hour of the revolution
The climes are divided by the planets, just as was said elsewhere.
Whence it is necessary for you to consider, in the revolution of the year,
which clime each planet rules, and to know its nature [or condition], if you
want to know the accidents which are going to come in the clime which
the planet rules. Because the general accidents of the clime will be
according to what the condition was of the planet which rules it; and the
Lord of the Year (and the Lord of the Ascendant of the revolution, and the
Lord of its hour) will participate. Whence, each of them will be at hand to
do help or harm to the Lord of the clime, according to what its condition
was, both in good and in evil. But in your memory let there always be
those things which I have told you above in a chapter: what the Lord of the
Year would signify in the places in which it falls, [and] how far the
signification of every significator will be extended.
And you will consider the Ascendant of the revolution according to the
diversity of the ascensions of any region. And if it sometimes were to
happen that one planet has a signification over two climes, or rules one and
participates in another, always put its signification over every region
which it rules; and thus you could know the accidents which are going to
come in those regions, both the general and the particular ones, both for
the king and the common people. Because if the significator of the king
and of the region whose year you are revolving, were stronger in the 10
th
house than any of the planets, [and] in its own domicile, and it were
otherwise sound and free, it signifies that the king will rule over all great
men of that region, and will be their master. And if there were no king in
that region, these things will happen to him who is greater in it. And may
you not err in the consideration of the significators of the king, because
you ought to consider it according to the regions and according to the
climes over which their significations are extended.
Chapter 26: What the Lord of the Year and the significator of the
king would signify when they were well disposed in the revolution
In the revolution of the year which you are revolving, look at the Lord
of the Year and the significator of the king to see how they are disposed,
and what kind of condition they have: which if you were to find them well
disposed and of good condition, and free from impediments, and they were
87

=== Page 88 ===
in places of friendship to the Ascendant and the 10
th
, and they were in the
noted aspect of the planets, received by them,
[228]
 and they themselves
were to receive them; and [if] the Sun (if the revolution were in the day) or
the Moon (if the revolution were in the night) or one of the luminaries
were one of the aforesaid significators (namely, that of the king or of the
Year), and the luminaries (or either of them) were to aspect the Ascendant
or its Lord, and the luminary were free and in a good place from the
Ascendant, it signifies that those who will live in that clime or in that
region (just as the signification of the Lord of the Year will be extended),
will be of good condition, and that prosperity and good and
accomplishment and strength will happen to them.
And Abū Ma’shar said: and better than this is if the luminary (whose
authority it was), were to commit disposition to the Lord of the Ascendant:
the nobles or great men and the wealthy, both those who are fit for a
kingdom and others, will be subjected to the king of that same clime or of
that same region, and the citizens or inhabitants of the region will be in
tranquility and quiet, and good will be rendered to them.
And if some of the planets were to commit disposition to the Lord of the
Year from the conjunction or some good aspect, and he were to receive
them, likewise happiness and joy on all sides will happen to them,
according to the natures [or substances] of the signs in which the planets
are, in whose domiciles the luminaries are–especially if they were to
aspect [the luminaries] (or at least one of them) from a strong and good
place. Because then it signifies that in that clime or region there will be
security and rest, and health in all of them, both in their things and in their
persons, and they will turn their wills away from doing evil, and they will
be eager to do well and to observe justice and faith, without detriment or
destruction.
Again on the disposition of the Lord of the Year, according to the place in
which he is, in the revolution of the year

Even look in the revolution at the Lord of the Year and the sign in
which he is: which if he were of good condition, and likewise [if] the sign
in which he is were well disposed, and he were made fortunate in strong in
the bound of a benefic, received by one of the benefics, and he were to
receive one of them, it signifies that the king or lord of that same clime or
region, will be of good condition and of much attainment, more so than the
other kings or great men of that clime or region, and likewise the Lord of
the region deputed to the sign in which the Lord of the Year is, and all
88

=== Page 89 ===
those inhabiting it; and prosperity and good will happen to them.
Again on the same topic
And if you were to find the Lord of some city to be free (namely made
fortunate and strong), and of good condition, received by a benefic, and
you knew to what sign that city or region belongs, announce joy and
happiness for the citizens, and the fitness of their matters and persons.
Therefore may you know what sign and what planet the city or region
belongs to.
[229]
 If however you were to find the contrary, you will judge
the contrary.
What the Lord of the Year and the other planets would signify if they were
impeded in the revolution
Just as you have looked at the Lord of the Year or Revolution, so it is
necessary for you to look at him, and even at others, in the significations
contrary to these. Therefore look in the revolution of the year at the virtue
and power of the Lord of the Year and of the other planets: because the
effecting of their works will be according to the places in which they were
found at the hour of the revolution.
For if the Lord were impeded, and were in the Ascendant, men will be
impeded in their own persons. If however he were
[230]
 elsewhere outside
the Ascendant, he will be impeded according to the substance of the sign
and the house in which he were impeded: like if he were in the 2
nd
,
substance will be impeded, and so with the rest of the houses [domiciles?]
according to [their] natures [or substances], and you will judge according
to what is signified by each of the houses. If however another of the
planets were impeded besides the Lord of the Year, what is signified by
the sign will be impeded, and [likewise] the domicile whose Lord the
impeded planet is, namely following the domicile whose Lord he is after
the Ascendant [in order]: like if the Ascendant were Aries, Taurus would
be impeded before Libra.
[231]
 And if the Ascendant were Taurus, Gemini
will be impeded first before Virgo, and so on with the others. And the
condition of the citizens or inhabitants of the region or clime deputed to
that planet will be weakened; and they will say they are impeded, and will
be openly aware of their impediments, and will say they are being put
down and suppressed and deprived of their standing. And more strongly so
if the Lord of the Year or Revolution were in one of the angles (and
especially in the 4
th
) and Mars or Saturn were to aspect him; and if he were
89

=== Page 90 ===
in the bounds of the malefics (and more severely so if he were at the end of
a sign), unless it were the bound of the malefic who aspects him (because
then it decreases something of the impediment, even if only a middling
amount). And the impediment will be stronger again if he were besieged
by the two malefics, because then the evil and the impediment of their
citizens is doubled; and more strongly so if the besiegement were by
corporal conjunction, because this will take away from them what is
sought, and will bring harm to them. And if it were by opposition, the
detriment will be less by one-fourth. If however it were by a square aspect,
it will be less by one-third.
And Abū Ma’shar said if it were a corporal conjunction and Saturn were
to impede in front and Mars behind (or one or the other malefic, you
understand), [many] of the citizens will be taken captive, but few will be
killed. If however Mars were to impede the significator in front and Saturn
behind, many of the captives will be killed.
[232]
 And if the planetary
significator were combust, it signifies the destruction of the things and
persons of the citizens of that region which it rules, and [it signifies]
exiling
[233]
 from the region on account of the unbearable impediment
which will happen to them.
Again on the same topic
In a revolution of the year, know even what sign and which planet might
rule in the revolution of the year over some city: because if the sign were
badly disposed and the planet impeded, it signifies detriment and evil and
the destruction of the things and persons of the citizens of that city or
region.
And Abū Ma’shar said, for every clime, establish a planet from which
the
signification of the condition of the king might be taken, so that you
might know what might come to kings, by the will of God.
Chapter 27: On the knowledge of the planetary significators in the
revolution of the year, both of the significator of the king and certain
others
If the Sun were in the 10
th
 in a revolution of the year, not removed from
the cusp of the 10
th
 house by more than 4º ahead or more than 10º after,
[234]
 and the Lord of the bound of the degree of the 10
th
 house were in that
bound,
[235]
 or were to aspect its own bound from a good place from the
90

=== Page 91 ===
Ascendant, and from an aspect of friendship, these two, so disposed,
signify kings and their affairs. For if the Sun were then free from the
impediments of the malefics (and likewise the Lord of the bound of the 10
th
house), and in a good place from the Ascendant (and better than this if [the
Lord of the bound] were in the angle, except, however for the 4
th
 house),
kings and great men fit for a kingdom, and their affairs, will be saved. If
however the Sun and the Lord of the bound of the 10
th
 house, and the
places in which they were, were impeded by the presence of the malefics
or their aspects–and more strongly so if the impediment were from the
angle, both of the figure of the revolution and of the significators
[236]
–
kings and the aforesaid great men, and their affairs, will be impeded and
their condition will be made worse.
If however the 11
th
 and its Lord were sound and free from the
impediments of the malefics, the soldiers and allies of kings will be saved.
But if they were impeded, [the soldiers and allies] will be impeded and
suffer detriment.
And Abū Ma’shar said Mercury signifies scribes and business dealers,
and astronomers, and learned men, and the wise. And he said this: [that] if
[Mercury] and his place were fit and lasting, [the aforesaid people] will be
fit. And Jupiter signifies providers and leaders; if he were fit and sound
they will be made sound. And likewise Venus signifies women.
Chapter 28: On the condition of the king and on the condition of his
substance, and on the condition of his own soldiers or allies
You will even look, in a revolution of the year, to see whether the
significator of the king aspects the Part of Fortune. Because if he were to
aspect it from an aspect of friendship, or were joined corporally to it, it
signifies [the king’s] good and fortunate condition (and better than this if
his significator were the Lord of the 10
th
 house). You will then look for his
substance and his soldiers and allies from the 11
th
 house and its Lord:
which if you were to find them well disposed, of good condition, say the
condition of the soldiers and their substance will be good and fortunate.
If the Lord of the Year were the significator of the king
If however the Lord of the Year were the significator of the king, then
look for his substance from the 2
nd
 and its Lord, just as you have looked for
the substance of the common people.
91

=== Page 92 ===
Indeed for his soldiers and allies, Abū Ma’shar said you will look from
the Lords of the triplicity of the sign in which the significator of the king
is, and judge concerning them in the revolution according to how you were
to find them disposed. For if all were well disposed, judge their good
condition through the whole year or revolution. If however you were to
find them poorly disposed, judge the contrary. If however you were to find
one well disposed, and the other poorly, judge according to that. For if the
first were well disposed, judge good in the first one-third of the revolution.
If the second, in the second. If the third, in the third. And if you were to
find the contrary, you will judge the contrary. And always make the Lord
of the bound in which the significator of the king is, a participator.
On the common people and their substance
You will judge likewise concerning the condition of the common people
through the Lord of the Year, and concerning their substance through the
2
nd
 and its Lord; and concerning the condition of each through the Part of
Fortune: which if it were well disposed, it signifies good. If however it
were poorly disposed, it signifies the contrary.
Again concerning the significator of the king, if his significator were Mars
or Saturn
If Mars or Saturn were the significator of the king, nor were [either one]
the Lord of the Ascendant, nor of the 10
th
, nor of any exaltation, and one of
them will impede by its presence or opposition or square aspect, it
introduces destruction which will come to men from the direction of their
own king; and its impediment will be stronger if it were in an angle. And if
it were in the Ascendant, or in the eastern part, it will come from the
direction of the east, and its arrival will hasten. If indeed it were in the 7
th
or in the western part, it will come from the direction of the west, and it
will slow down somewhat. If however it were in the 4
th
 or in the northern
part, it will come from the direction of the north, and will slow down
more. Indeed if it were in the 10
th
, it will come from everywhere, and will
happen generally to all men; but it will come more strongly in the northern
and southern parts than in the east or west; and the harshness over them
will slow down, and especially in Germany and parts adjacent to them.
When a benefic is in charge
92

=== Page 93 ===
And if the significator of the king were a benefic, and were so placed
just as I have told you concerning a malefic, it signifies goodness and joy,
and the gladness of the citizens or inhabitants of the aforesaid areas,
according to [where] it is in any of them, unless it is impeded by
retrogradation or fall or descension (because if it were so, it will signify
nothing good).
And Abū Ma’shar said that if there were a bad aspect to the Lord of the
Ascendant or to the significator of substance, there will be oppression in
the body; and [if it were] from the second, in substance; and from the third,
in brothers; and from the fourth, from the direction of parents and older
kin; and from the fifth, from journeys and from those things which were
from his own hand; and from the sixth, from infirmity; from the seventh,
from women and war; from the eighth, from the remains
[237]
 of the dead,
and contention. And if the sign (namely the eighth one) were a movable or
common one, death will be feared concerning the king, if it were the
significator of the king whom the malefic Lords aspect.
[238]
 And if this
aspect were from the eighth to the significator of the rustics, it will be
feared concerning the rustics. And if the significator were one (namely of
[both] the king and the rustics), it will be feared concerning everyone, for
death will invade them. And if it were from the ninth, from the direction of
pilgrimages and religious men who seek justice. And if it were from the
tenth, from the direction of the king and his domination. And if it were
from the eleventh, from the direction of friends. And from the twelfth,
from the direction of enemies. And he said, speak likewise for the good if
the aspect were from a strong benefic, and the malefic were to [be cadent].
[239]
 And he said, say likewise in the revolution of the years of nativities.
Chapter 29: On the impediments of the malefics and on their aspects,
what they would signify, and how the impediments and the impeding
ones might be known
In a revolution, look at the significators (namely of the king and the
common people or the rustics), and see whether they are aspected by
malefics or not. Indeed if the malefics were to aspect them from the
opposition, and the malefics themselves were impeded, it signifies (on
account of the enmity of the aspect) that impediment will come to the king
and the rustics from the direction of enemies.
And Abū Ma’shar said if the aspect were a square, the impediment will
be from men who are not known to be enemies. And he said [it is] because
93

=== Page 94 ===
this aspect is in the middle, and does not publicize enmity. And if they
were to aspect them from a sextile aspect, the impediment will come from
the direction of certain people who are thought to be friends, nor however
it is really certain whether they are friends or not. If however they were to
aspect them from a trine aspect, the impediment will be from the direction
of friends.
And Abū Ma’shar said that if the [malefics’] aspect were such a figure
from their own places,
[240]
 this is just as was said toward the significator
of the rustics. And if it were toward the significator of the king, it will
enter in concerning the king. And he said it is necessary that it be seen
whether the rustics would help the king, or the king would help the rustics.
And this is known by the complexion which there is between each of the
significators and the impeding or aspecting malefics; and this according to
the kind of aspect (namely whether it were a trine, or sextile, or a square,
or opposition); and from out of what places or houses or dignities. Which
if the malefic impeding the significator of the king or that of the common
people or rustics were in its own domicile, he from whom the impediment
will come will be from that clime or kingdom or region (namely of those
things which are signified by those testimonies). Like if he were in
domicile, he will be famous in the region, and will be of the household
members of the king. And if it were in exaltation, he will be noble and
powerful, namely from among those who are fit for a kingdom. And if it
were in triplicity, they will be from among those who are not fit for a
kingdom, but are near them. And if it were in bound, he will be from
among those below the aforesaid, who are fit to be military companions,
[241]
 or marquesses, and the like. And if it were in the face, it will be of
the more noble people. And if he were of the nobles who are below
marquesses, still they are of great soul [or magnanimous]. If however it
were not in one of the aforesaid dignities, he will not be well-born nor
known in the region; and men will say that they do not know where he is
from, and perhaps that they will say he is born from an unknown father, or
from fornication, or that a commoner is a father to him.
And Abū Ma’shar said if the significator of the king
[242]
 were in
charge,
[243]
 he will be an enemy from the same clime, and the king will
be weak in prohibiting and repelling him. And he said if the significator of
the rustics were in charge, he will not be an enemy from the clime, nor
from its own rulership. And he said the significator is the Lord of the Year,
and the significator of the rustics; and he said, and the Moon is the
significatrix of the rustics, and of all the common people, and is not in
charge; for every one that is in charge, is a significator, but not the reverse;
94

=== Page 95 ===
because not each significator is in charge.
[244]
Chapter 30: What the retrogradation of the significator of the king
and of the Lord of the Year or the significator of the rustics, signifies
If it were to happen at some time that the significator of the common
people were retrograde in the revolution of the year, though it happens
most rarely (still it could occur), as was said elsewhere, it would threaten a
very horrible evil. For the retrogradation of the significator of the king
signifies his weakness and his depression; and it will be a great thing if he
were to avoid being deposed from rule, and if his kingdom were to escape
destruction in that year. Likewise the retrogradation of the Lord of the
Year will signify destruction and the bad condition of the populace and the
citizens of that region.
You will look to see in whose bound each of them were. For if it were
retrograde in the bound of some malefic (and more strongly so if the
bound were in the domicile of some malefic), this danger will be longer
and greater than if it had been in the domicile or bound of a benefic; and
likewise if the Lord of the bound were impeded, because it will increase
the malice again, and multiply it. If however it were free, it subtracts
something from the malice, even if not much.
If however it were retrograde in the bound of a benefic, the impediment
will be decreased; and all the more so if in addition again it were the
domicile of a benefic; and again something more if the benefic were well
disposed.
Chapter 31: What Mars and Saturn would signify if they were badly
disposed in the revolution of the year
When you revolve the year, look to see if Mars were stationary in his
first station, wanting to go retrograde and be joined with Saturn–or if
Saturn is so disposed that he goes towards Mars while [Mars] is standing
[still], or Mars goes towards him while [Saturn] is retrograding: it signifies
the austerity and hatefulness of men, so that there will not be any who
wishes to obey his betters if he could avoid it, and piety will be cut off; nor
will there by any who feels pity for another with zeal, but evildoers will
abound, and cutters of roads, and pillagers; nor will a slave fear his master,
nor a religious man one ruling him; and it will be worse if Saturn were in
95

=== Page 96 ===
Libra, and worse again if he were retrograde, and worse than this if the
Sun were to aspect him by his opposition, and Mars were to aspect the
Sun, and [the Sun] him. And it will be worse again if Mars were peregrine,
joining himself to Saturn; and it will be the ultimate evil above all others if
the revolution were in the setting
[245]
 of the Sun, or near it, namely a little
bit before or after.
And Abū Ma’shar said quarrels and war will fall between the citizens of
the east and west, and there will be battles in diverse places. Therefore
strive to understand all of these with a very detailed investigation.
Chapter 32: If the Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon and the other
significators were impeded: what would follow from that
The Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon signify the matters of the
common people in the revolution of the year; which if they were impeded,
and were found in a place of enmity from the Ascendant, they signify
impediment that is going to come over men in their persons and their
things, according to the quantity of the enmity, and according to the place
of enmity into which they fell.
For if they were to fall in the 6
th
, they signify infirmities [and] pains are
going to come to men in the revolution. If however they were to fall in the
8
th
, they signify death, and more severely so if the 8
th
 were a human sign.
And if they were to fall in the 12
th
, they signify enmities and betrayals
according to the substance of the sign in which they were: like if they were
in Gemini, it will be because of young men and adolescents. If they were
in Virgo, it will be because of young women. If they were in Libra, it will
be because of men of mature age. If they were in the first half of
Sagittarius or in Aquarius, it will be because of the general mass of men. If
they were in Aries or Capricorn, it will be because of smaller animals. If
they were in Taurus or in the last half of Sagittarius, it will be because of
larger animals and those which are ridden. And if they were in Leo, it will
be because of forest animals, and those rough and wild. And if they were
in Cancer or Scorpio or Pisces, it will be because of animals spending time
in waters.
And if the Lord of the exaltation (if the ascending sign were the
exaltation of some planet) and the Moon were not impeded in the aforesaid
places,
[246]
 it signifies the same as the Lord of the Ascendant does; but it
will be [below]
[247]
 the signification of the Lord of the Ascendant. And
the signification or impediment of the Lord of the bound will be less than
96

=== Page 97 ===
the signification of the Lord of the exaltation. And the signification of the
Lord of the triplicity will be below the signification of the Lord of the
bound, if one of them were impeded. And the impediment of the Lord of
the face will be below the impediment of the Lord of the triplicity.
Look, however, to see how the aforesaid planets are aspected by the
benefics or by the malefics: because I say the benefics decrease
[impediment] unless they are impeded by combustion or retrogradation;
indeed the malefics increase [impediment] unless they are direct and well
disposed and receive impeded planets [that are] inimical to the Ascendant.
And Abū Ma’shar said that if the impediment were from Mars, there
will be a choleric fever, and sudden death. And if the impediment were
from Saturn, there will be fever from black cholera, and death.
The chapters on battles are not put here, but they are found in the book on
elections.
[248]
Chapter 33: When war is signified in the revolution of the year: from
whom it comes or will be incited

If you were to look up to see whether there were going to be battles and
dissensions
[249]
 in the year which you are revolving, and whence they
would be incited and by whom, look for this matter according to the
method which the ancients have handed down to us, and particular our
most reverend predecessor Abū Ma’shar, who was proficient, and very
astute and bold, in the science of the revolutions of years, [and] even in all
other areas of astronomy. For you will then erect the figure for the
revolution of the year, and establish the Ascendant and the other houses,
and all the planets in the domiciles in which they were; and look at Mars,
and see from whom he himself is being separated, or from whom he is
then [already] separated.
For Abū Ma’shar said, because [the one from whom Mars is separating]
is the one who sent him, and who incited the war (even if it were a benefic
from whom Mars were separated, even if it were Jupiter); however the
inciter of the war will be from among the persons who are signified by
Jupiter [if it were Jupiter], and of the more powerful ones; and it will be
possible that he is of the class of bishops and the like. And if he were
separated from Saturn (since Saturn in such a case signifies kings), it
seems that the king is the one who has incited the war, or it will be due to
97

=== Page 98 ===
the advice of old and ignoble men.
[250]
And Abū Ma’shar said there will be a war if Mars were to commit his
own disposition to Saturn, and Saturn were joined with him, and were to
receive him. And he said if Mars were separated from Jupiter and joined to
Saturn without reception, know that he will be its provocator, and will
provoke for justice, because he is of the household members of the king. If
however [Mars] were not separated from Jupiter, and were joined to
Saturn, the one who incited the war will be of ignoble people who are not
fit for a kingdom, nor of great dignity. And if you were to see Mars
separated from Saturn and joined to Jupiter, there will not be a war; and if
there were, it will not be between honest men, nor Catholic nor
distinguished men nor bishops or the like.
Therefore, after you were to see him from whom Mars is being
separated, and from whom it seems the war ought to be incited, and him to
whom [Mars] is joined, nor were you to see reception, and their
conjunction were in one latitude (and if it were a conjunction of Mars and
Saturn), see which of them is stronger in its own place. And the one of
them who towers [over the other] is the stronger, that is, the one who goes
over the other. The one who goes over the other is he who is northern of
the other [in latitude], as was said above. And if Saturn were above the
other, it signifies the weakness of the war. If however Mars were to go
above Saturn, it signifies its strength. You may say the same if one of them
were to receive the other.
And Abū Ma’shar said that, however, the first thing it is necessary for
you to know in this chapter is of what kind the kingdom’s strength is, and
how much it is–then you might know the time of the duration of the
kingdom. And if you were to know what it will be for the kingdom, and
you were to see the time of its duration, look at the hour of the destruction
of the one rising up from the impediment of Saturn and Jupiter and Mars,
or of him from whom Mars is being separated.
And Abū Ma’shar said, know its destruction from the destruction of
these three planets, because it is they who incite war. And if Mars were
retrograde and the others were direct, war will appear, but its appearance
will not be come to an end until Mars goes direct–for then its appearance
will come to an end. And he said, if indeed the war were incited, and Mars
were cadent from the Ascendant of the year, or peregrine, it will be weak.
And Abū Ma’shar said
[251]
 if you were to see the first side received by
his enemies,
[252]
 and it were opposite the first side, or in its square aspect,
this will be the “strength of the sword.” If however the first side were to
receive the second side, there will not be a war. If indeed [the second side]
98

=== Page 99 ===
were not received, and you were to see war, and the first side were
received, there will be no strength to the insurgents; and there will be a
stability of men with the first king, and their inclination toward him. And
he said, and likewise look for the second side, because reception is an ally
and appeasement, and the strength of the received. Therefore if it did not
receive, it will be peregrine, and there will be no trust in it [him?] nor will
there be strength. And he said the first side in the condition of kings, and
their secrets, and intentions, is the degree of Saturn. The second side is the
degree of Jupiter. And he said I have already made this clear to you in the
book of conjunctions.
[253]
Chapter 34: Which of the planets would signify wars in the revolution
of the year, and which of them is the dispositor
Abū Ma’shar said Mars disposes wars, and signifies the masters of
armies and the captains of soldiers; which if he were strong in an angle, it
signifies war; and if he were to be cadent, he does not signify it. And he
said, indeed the Moon is the key to these: which if she were fit [or
adapted], they will be achieved [or undertaken]; and if she were impeded,
they will be impeded.
Again on the same topic, according to Abū Ma’shar
Abū Ma’shar said if Mars in the revolution of the year were in one of
the angles of the Ascendant, whichever one it was, he will incite war
according to the quantity of his own strength, and therefore
[254]
 he incites
war if he were in the square aspect of Saturn and Jupiter. And if you were
to see that Mars was going to incite a war, look to see in what place from
the Ascendant he were to fall, and you will see where the Part of War
[255]
were to fall, and over which of the houses the Part will rule, and you will
see if one of the malefics (namely one or more) were to aspect the
domicile of Mars or the Part of War from the opposition or square aspect,
or they were in them, or they were to aspect the sign which ruled over that
city or region for which you are revolving the year; or [if] the ones that
rule that clime or city or region were to aspect the significator of the king
or of another great man from the opposition or square aspect, or they were
joined to him corporally. It signifies that if the king or a noble man were to
have war with someone or some people in that revolution, that his enemies
will achieve victory over him; or at least grief and sorrow will enter over
99

=== Page 100 ===
him, and tribulation and distress. And if the planet which was his
significator were combust, it will signify the same, and it will be feared
concerning him. And if it were retrograde, the figure signifies his flight,
and the strength of his enemies, and his fall and dejection; likewise if it
were first in a good place from the Ascendant, and then goes down to a
weak place.
[256]
Again on the same topic, if one of the malefics were to rule: what would
follow from thence
Abū Ma’shar said if Mars were to rule the signification of the year, and
were strong, there will be war with skills and worries, and with plundering
and powerful killing. And if Saturn were to rule the year or the quarter,
there will be war by seductions and cleverness, and through discipline [or
knowledge] and skills. And he said if one of the malefics were to rule the
year, and the other malefic were the Lord of the Quarter, there will be no
doubt of having wars in that quarter. And likewise if a malefic were to
aspect the Lord of the Year or Quarter from the opposition or by a square
aspect; or the Lord of the Quarter were in the 7
th
 or retrograde. And he said
if [a malefic] were inimical to the Lord of the Quarter, it will be in the
same quarter; and likewise if it were inimical to the Lord of the Lord of the
Month,
[257]
 in the same month.
Chapter 35: When war is signified in the revolution of the year; and if
it were, when victory is signified; and when flight or defeat; and when
peace (or the extinction of the war)
After you were to see, in the revolution, that a future war is signified,
look at the planet who signifies it: because if it were direct and of good
condition, it does not permit the war to be ended. And it will endure, and
be annulled from, the side of the king or chief of the region in which you
are, or for which you revolved the year which you are seeking; and it will
signify peace and the extinguishing of the war. Even see how the
significator is aspected by the planets, and by how many of them: because
a multitude of planets aspecting him (and more strongly so, if they were to
have dignity in the place in which he is), will signify his strength and
victory, and that he will be aided more so than his adversary, both by his
own and by other people. And if it were stationary in its second station, it
signifies him to be strong and powerful in war, and likewise those
100

=== Page 101 ===
following him. If however it were stationary in its first station, it signifies
his strength in the beginning of the war, but ultimately he will not perfect
[it] well, nor will he persevere. If however it were retrograde, it signifies
his flight and the rupture [of his army].
And if it were the significator of the enemy or the one wishing to war
with him, just as I have told you about the significator of your kingdom, by
the aforesaid conditions, you will judge the contrary of what you have
judged. If however the significator were direct, as I said, nor impeded, it
signifies either peace, or, if there were a fight or war, it signifies victory.
And if you wanted to know from the side of whose people or whose allies
his victory will be, and [what] the reason for the subduing of his enemies
is, look to see which of the planets better aspects him, and from a greater
dignity,
[258]
 because that one will be the significator of those who are the
cause of his victory. Like if it were the Sun or Saturn, it will be the king or
another more noble person (but the Sun signifies more junior people than
Saturn). If however it were Mars, they will be bellicose soldiers. And if it
were Jupiter, they will be great men, nobles, and wise. And if it were
Mercury, they will be literate men, both noble and common. And if it were
the Moon, they will be men who act by means of merchant activities,
navigation and the like.
And Abū Ma’shar said if it were Venus, they will
be Arabs.
Chapter 36: How it should be elected for one wanting to go to war
[259]
If however someone wished to go to war, after which you were to see it
was going to happen in the revolution, and you wished to elect for him the
hour for doing this, look at the three superior planets to see whether they
are retrograde or direct. If however they were retrograde, Abū Ma’shar
said let the beginning of your hour for going to war be that of their going
direct. And if they were direct, when they undertake to go retrograde, and
likewise when they begin to be combust. And if they were combust, when
they begin to emerge; and if they were occidental, when they become
oriental; and if they were oriental, when they become occidental; or when
they are changed from the signs in which they are (namely at the hour in
which the planets signify war), because then the planet is said to change
figure;
[260]
 and likewise when its substance or signification is changed.
[261]
If however Mars were received at the hour of the revolution (and even
better if he were received by one of the benefics by domicile or exaltation),
101

=== Page 102 ===
he extinguishes war in that year or revolution. And if the reception were
from the 10
th
, it signifies not only the extinction of war; but it even
signifies peace in that year.
Chapter 37: Through what men or peoples the fight or war will come
to be
If you were to look at the erected figure of the revolution of the year,
and you were to find a future battle or war, look to see which side Mars
seems to be allied to; for he will be allied to that side with whose
significator he bears himself more amicably, and which he aspects more;
and from which side of the east or west he is;
[262]
 and from which side is
the planet from which he is being separated (because that is on the side of
the Ascendant, and he to whom he is joined is on the opposite side). For
from whatever side Mars is, if he were direct, the war will come to be from
that side, through bellicose and honest
[263]
 men, who confidently show
their faces to their enemies, nor do they show their backs to them. Indeed
if he were retrograde, [the war will arise] through changeable men who
want to be praised for things they are not doing, and sometimes attribute to
themselves what others are doing, and speak more than they act, and
threaten more than they strike, and who clamor for war with great
vehemence, but do not remain firm in war, but abandon it over the
shoulders of others,
[264]
 and they exhibit themselves as having done great
things, and they are predators like thieves and the cutters of roads. And if
Mars were stationary, the war will be stronger just as I told you above in
the other chapter when I spoke of the station of the significator.
Likewise, look at Saturn, who, even though he leads men gravely to
war, still he brings strong and terrible things more so than anything else,
and more pestilences; wherefore he must be looked at in this matter,
because he signifies this from the side on which he is.
And Abū Ma’shar said, for Saturn signifies a harsh condition for the
citizens of the same side in which he is, according to the quantity of the
substance of the sign in which he is, and the bounds of his own place, after
you were to follow him by succession: the Ascendant, and the house of
substance, and of brothers, and the rest, up to the end of the twelve signs.
[265]
 And he said if Saturn were retrograde, it will be how I told you with
Mars, but it will be more severe. And by means of these same chapters,
someone can act in questions of wars, and in the departure of hours
[266]
 to
wars, and in the taking out of
carroccio
s
[267]
 and military banners. Nor
102

=== Page 103 ===
should you believe that this chapter (nor even any) contradicts the others;
but distinguish the times, and harmonize the writings.
And Abū Ma’shar said a retrograde planet signifies a commingling of
things, and reversal and diversity, also war and victory by the Lord of the
same clime that belongs to that planet. And a stationary planet signifies the
desire for evil and the repetition of what had already ceased, and killing.
And [its] aspect signifies evil, and a quarrel, and seduction, and cleverness.
Chapter 38: Whether the captain of the adversary is young or old
If however you wished to know the age of the captain or leader of the
other side, look at the impeding malefic; which if it did not impede, look at
his place. And look at the place of the significator of the enemy. If
they
[268]
 were both oriental from the Sun, the captain or leader will be a
young man, and younger than that if the Moon were oriental with them; if
indeed they were occidental, they will be old men. If however one were
oriental, the other occidental, he will be of mature age, not very young nor
very old; but a malefic signifies one younger than the Lord of the seventh,
if it were oriental; and an older man if it were occidental.
Chapter 39: If the significator of the war were pacified with the Lord
of the Year: what will follow from thence
Abū Ma’shar said if the significator of the war were pacified with
the
Lord of the Year, it will be good in that year. And if it were pacified with
the Lord of the semester, or with the Lord of the quarter, it will be good in
that semester or in that quarter. And if it were pacified with the Lord of the
month, it will be good in that same month. And if with the Lord of the day,
in that same day.
I say “pacified,” that is, “joined to him by body or by aspect with
reception.” And he said if it were pacified with the Lord of the profection,
[269]
 it will be good in the last half of the month. You may understand the
same concerning the [Lord of the] day and hour.
And
[270]
 if the pacification were from the beginning of the sign up to
its seventh degree and-a-half, it will be good in the first six months. And if
it were from the seventh degree and-a-half, up to the end of the fifteenth
degree, it will be good from three months up to the end of the half-year.
And if it were from the fifteenth degree up to its twenty-second and-a-half
103

=== Page 104 ===
degree, it will be in the last six months of the year. And if it were from the
twenty-second and-a-half degree up to its end, it will be from the ninth
month up to the end of the year.
You may understand the same concerning the month, day, and hour; and
in those times there will be security and peace, and men will not take
offence, but they will be confident, nor will it be necessary for them to
fear.
Chapter 40: What the malefic planets would signify if they were in
human signs in the revolution
Look in the revolution, when you revolve a year, and see if one of the
malefic planets were in the human signs (namely in Gemini, or in Virgo or
in Libra, or in the first half of Sagittarius, or in Aquarius), and see whether
it is slow in course. Likewise, see if the other malefic is joined to him by
body, or by an opposite or square aspect (whether he who is joined to him
is retrograde or direct): because it signifies detriment that is going to come
to men. If it were retrograde, this will happen more quickly, and with
greater wounding. And if the conjunction were from the angles, it will be
harsher and more crafty.
Which if the malefic who aspected the other (and the other [is] namely
the retrograde one who is joined to him) were in the 10
th
, there will be
impediment, whether harshness or evil, which is then signified for all men
generally, and in every region, unless the planet who is the Lord of the
sign that rules some region, works to the contrary; and more severely and
strongly, if the malefic who impeded were in the Midheaven, and the Lord
of the Ascendant were the Lord of the Year–because then an obstacle will
be discovered for him, and the detriment will begin from the eastern
direction, and will extend up to the western one.
If however the malefic who aspects the other were in the 10
th
, and the
retrograde one who is joined to him were in the 4
th
, the impediment will
begin from the western direction, and be extended up to the uttermost ends
of the south of Ethiopia, and those regions will be oppressed for that
reason.
If however the aspecting malefic were in the 7
th
, and the retrograde one
who is joined to him were in the 4
th
, the beginning of the impediment will
be everywhere, and will be extended up to the west from the north. And if
the two malefics were being joined, the impediment will be more severe,
and appear more quickly; and there will be severe mortality in men–and
104

=== Page 105 ===
more strongly so if Saturn were he who impedes, because he naturally
impedes the signification of the sign in which he is.
Therefore you should see in what place the malefic were to fall from the
place of the other malefic (namely the slow one), because if they were
joined in a common sign (or he who is joined to the other is joined to him
from a common sign), the evil will be determined by death. If however it
were in a fixed or movable sign, the end of the signification will be
according to the nature of that one of the two malefics who is then stronger
by the place in which it were found. For if Mars were stronger, it will be
determined by killing, or by hot, pestilential infirmities, according to how
he was more prepared to be joined with the Lord of the 8
th
 or with the Lord
of the 6
th
 or with a planet who transfers the light between him and one of
them. If however Saturn were stronger, it will be determined
[271]
 either
through melancholic or pestilential illnesses, in accordance as he is joined
(or ready to be joined) with one of them, just as I said concerning Mars.
And Abū Ma’shar said you will commingle the strength of the death
with him. And these things will happen more strongly if their conjunction
were from the angles. If however it were outside the angles, their
significations will be reduced, nor will they impeded so much, and they
will be improved.
And Abū Ma’shar said the greater destruction will be in the side in
which the impeding malefic were.
[272]
 And he said, know therefore what
there is by the sign in which the two malefics are, in terms of cities and
provinces; because the aforesaid evil things will happen in them.
Chapter 41: On the matter which introduces fear in the revolution of
the year, and what the malefics would signify in the angles
Sometimes some horrible things tend to appear in the revolution of the
year, which introduce fear. Whence, if you were to see one of them when
you revolve the year, see whether he who introduces the fear is joined to or
aspects himself with Saturn or Jupiter, because they are heavier than the
rest. Wherefore the fear will oppress, and one will have to fear concerning
it, and more strongly so if the aforesaid planets were impeded (and
especially Saturn, because he will signify that there are long-lasting pains
that are going to be prolonged from that fear and death).
If however he did not aspect [Saturn or Jupiter], nor were he joined to
one of them, it will harm little. If however the significator of the evil were
in an angle, it will signify a multitude of evil, and its durability.
105

=== Page 106 ===
And Abū Ma’shar said if it were ahead of the angle,
[273]
 it will be
middling and brief. And he said it would help by dignity in this time, and it
will help concerning good and evil.
Chapter 42: If the Lord of the sign in which the Lord of the Year is,
were to aspect him, or if he did not aspect him: what it would signify
Look to see, in a revolution, in whose domicile the Lord of the Year is;
and see whether it aspects him from a trine or sextile aspect, nor is it
impeded: because if it were so, men will be in a good status (namely in
quiet and security and peace, and joy, and tranquility and happiness). If
indeed it were not impeded, nor aspected, or aspected and were impeded,
judge between each.
[274]
 If however it did not aspect him, and it were
impeded, it signifies sorrow, and worry, and fear, litigation or contentions,
and the complete contrary of that which it signified for the good.
And Abū Ma’shar said that this is according to the quantity of the
complexion of the substance of the sign in which the significator is:
because if it were in the 1
st
, it will be in their persons; if it were in the 2
nd
, it
will be in substance, and understand the same concerning the rest of the
houses.
[275]
Chapter 43: On the revolution of the year, if it were in the setting of
the Sun
You will consider the revolution of the year, whether it is toward the
setting of the Sun.
[276]
 For Abū Ma’shar said if it were so, the Sun will
commit his own disposition to the Moon, who is the luminary of the night.
Therefore, look at her, and see where her place is from the Ascendant:
which if she were fit to take up the disposition of the revolution, look at
the Lord of the sign in which she then is; and you should see how he is
aspected by the planets, and judge according to how you see it; which if
benefics aspect him, they signify good; indeed the malefics signify evil.
Even look to see how she is placed with Saturn, that is, in what kind of
aspect, namely a trine or a sextile; and whether Saturn receives her by
domicile, or by exaltation, or by two other dignities: because then Saturn
will commit his own disposition to her. For if Saturn were to commit his
own disposition to her, she will be made stronger, and will dispose the
affairs of the revolution better. Indeed if she were to commit her
106

=== Page 107 ===
disposition to him, she will not dispose afterwards concerning the
revolution, and if she were to dispose, her disposition will be bad.
[277]
And Abū Ma’shar said, look at the increase of her light, and its
diminution, and whether an eclipse is going to come to her in that year.
And he said, it is necessary that, in an eclipse, its place be seen, and the
degrees of its fulfillment;
[278]
 and in an eclipse of the Sun, its degrees and
the place of the conjunction; and the
al-mubtazz
 over these places, and
how the planets aspecting her are aspected. The
al-mubtazz
[279]
 is the
planet who is in charge of the degree of the conjunction or prevention by
the multitude of [its] dignities or strengths.
[280]
Chapter 44: If the Lord of the Ascendant were impeded in a
revolution of the year: what would follow from that
Look at the Lord of the Ascendant in a revolution of the year. Which if
you were to find him impeded, announce the impediment is going to be
over men in that year, according to the substance of the ascending sign:
like if the ascending sign were formed in the image of a human, it will
happen to them in their persons. If however the ascending sign were
formed in the image of another animal, it will happen to animals formed in
that image. And this will happen more severely in the land which the sign
rules, and which the planet rules.
And Abū Ma’shar said that it will be more from the direction of the east,
and in the areas deputed to the planet which is the Lord of the ascending
sign, than in the others: like if the Ascendant were Libra, and Venus were
impeded, the land of Libra will suffer impediment from winds, and
infirmities and headaches, and the like.
And if the Ascendant were Taurus, the land of Taurus will suffer
impediment, and detriment from cold, and snow, and dryness, the
destruction of the fruits of trees, and the impediments of cows, and
crooked [or winding] things,
[281]
 and the like, according to the
nature and disposition of each region, unless Mars worked to the
contrary.
And if the Ascendant were Gemini, and Mercury were impeded, the
land of Gemini will suffer from the blowing of winds, and from the
corruption of the air, and from pains in the head and the intestines, the
tongue and lungs, and in the places of the breathing-holes of the body.
107

=== Page 108 ===
And if the Ascendant were Virgo, the land of Virgo will suffer from
cold and dryness, and moderate sterility, and from pains in the chest
and in the area of the heart, unless Jupiter works to the contrary.
And if the Ascendant were Cancer, the Moon were impeded, the land
of Cancer will suffer from rains, and from pains in the eyes and the
whole head, unless Saturn works to the contrary.
And if the Ascendant were Leo, and the Sun were impeded, the land
of Leo will suffer from the dryness of the air, and from the flowing
down of rheum, and from illnesses of the head, and the like, unless
Saturn works to the contrary in coldness and constriction.
And if the Ascendant were Scorpio, and Mars were impeded, the land
of Scorpio will be impeded by waters and poisonous reptiles, and
from pains in the head and the arms and the private parts, and the like.
And if the Ascendant were Aries, the land of Aries will suffer from
the dryness of the air, and from the flowing down of rheum, and from
pains in the head, and the like, unless Venus works to the contrary.
And if the Ascendant were Sagittarius, and Jupiter were impeded, the
land of Sagittarius will be impeded by persons in the first part of the
year, and in the last [part] by animals which are ridden, with illnesses
of the head and the legs and the like.
If however the Ascendant were Pisces, the land of Pisces will suffer
from the flooding of waters, and from illnesses of the feet, like gout,
and the like, unless Mercury works to the contrary.
And if the Ascendant were Capricorn, and Saturn were impeded, then
the land of Capricorn will suffer from cold, and dryness, and sterility,
and from pains in the knees and the joints, and the head, and the feet
and the like, unless the Moon operates to the contrary.
And if the Ascendant were Aquarius, and Saturn were impeded, the
land of Aquarius will be impeded by moist winds, and from illnesses
of the legs, and the neck, and the head, unless the Sun works to the
contrary.
108

=== Page 109 ===
And if the Lord of the Ascendant of the revolution were in charge over
other lands than [those] the [rising] sign is in charge over, they will
participate with the lands of the impeding ascending sign, even if they are
not impeded as much as those that are deputed to the sign. And if the
ascending signs
[282]
 were sound, and the planets free, the lands subject to
them will be saved, according to the nature
[283]
 of each.
And Abū Ma’shar said, after you have looked at the Ascendant, look at
the second and third, and fourth, and fifth, and the rest of the houses, and
their Lords, just as you have looked at the first, up to the end of the signs.
And he said, make the angles more dignified, and their Lords, because
their job and strength is to be over the rest of the signs which signify the
matters of kings.
[284]
Chapter 45: What will follow from the conjunction of the two malefics
with the Lord of the Year, or with the significator of the king
In the revolution of the year, look at the conjunction of
the Lord of the
Year, and the significator of the king, with the malefics. For if the two
malefics were joined with the Lord of the Year, whether they are joined to
him
[285]
 or he to them, this signifies severity which will come over the
rustics or common people; and this will happen in the land or region
belonging to the sign in which the malefics are. If however they were in
different signs, it will happen in different regions, according to how they
are deputed to the signs. If however the conjunction were with the
significator of the king, it signifies that severity will come over the king
from the aforesaid regions.
And Abū Ma’shar said, the lifting up of the strength of the malefics is
looked for in his journey. And he said, the testimony of Saturn and Jupiter
is sought in this, according to how it is revealed in the chapter on
conjunctions.
[286]
Again on the same topic
Abū Ma’shar said if one of the two malefics were joined to the other,
and they were in human signs (whether by body, or by opposition, or by
square aspect), [so long as] they were joined together.
[287]
 If however one
of the malefics were Saturn, and he were stronger than Mars, it will signify
many and serious infirmities, and they will die more from them. If
109

=== Page 110 ===
however it were Mars, and he were stronger than Saturn, it will signify
killings instead of the infirmities of Saturn. If however one were in a
human sign, and the other in another [type of sign], each will introduce an
impediment concerning the significations of the sign in which it is;
however, this will be less, nor does it matter whether one or two are
diurnal or nocturnal, or masculine or feminine. If however they were
received, their impediment will be reduced according to the reception.
And Abū Ma’shar said those who are infirm in that same year, health
and safety would be hoped for them apart from the moderate amount who
will die
.
 If however the malefics were received, there will be less death
and less killing. And Abū Ma’shar said they will be commingled with each
other.
Chapter 46: How the bodies of the king and the common people must
be looked at in the revolution of the year
After you have looked to see what would follow from the conjunction of
the malefics with the Lord of the Year and with the significator of the
king. Now it remains to say in this chapter, how the condition of the
common people or the rustics, and the king, must be looked at in their
persons. Indeed you will look at the condition of the common people or the
rustics and the king in their persons, from the Lord of the Year, and from
the Lord of the Ascendant; and see what there is in the Ascendant of the
revolution in terms of aspects: whether the benefics or the malefics aspect
it. Because if the benefics were to aspect the Ascendant and the Lord of
the Year, they signify the good condition of their bodies in the revolution;
and even better if in addition they were to aspect the Lord of the
Ascendant; and better again if in addition they were to aspect the Moon;
and more perfectly yet if the Part of Fortune were there, aspected by the
benefics.
If however the malefics were to aspect the Ascendant, nor were the
other significators sound, nor well located,
nor the Part of Fortune, judge
the contrary of that which I told you, namely instead of good, announce
bad. Like if the malefics were to impede the Lord of the Year, you will
judge impediment according to the substance of the impeding malefic. For
Saturn signifies impediment from prolonged pains and death. Indeed, Mars
signifies impediment through iron and fire, and killing, both in fleeing and
otherwise.
However, you will look for the condition of the king from the Sun and
110

=== Page 111 ===
from the tenth, and its Lord, not to mention from the Part of Fortune and
its Lord: which if you were to find them well disposed in the trine or
sextile aspect of the benefics, or in a square with reception, or in their
corporal conjunction, and the benefics were to aspect the tenth, judge the
soundness of the king’s body, everywhere and wholly. If however you
were to find the contrary, you will judge the contrary. And if you were to
find the condition to be less good than I have told you, you will judge less
good. And if you wanted to make Saturn a participant in the aforesaid, you
will not err.
Chapter 47: Which planets would signify kings and kingdoms, and on
the impediments of the four angles
Abū Ma’shar said the Sun and Saturn signify kings and kingdoms. And
he said whatever kind of planet you were to find impeded out of the four
angles, say evil from its substance. Whence, you must see where the Sun
and Moon fall in the figure of the revolution. For if they were to fall in
good places from the 10
th
, and stronger ones, or in the tenth itself, they
signify the good condition of the king generally, and the good disposition
of kingdoms.
Likewise the angles must be looked at, and their Lords. For if you were
to find the angles and their Lords made fortunate (and make the Moon a
participant, and the Part of Fortune)–which if you were to find them well
disposed (namely made fortunate and strong), announce good generally. If
however you were to find them badly disposed, announce the contrary. If
however you were to find some of them well disposed, indeed others
badly, announce according to what you find. For, announce good
according to the significations of those well disposed, indeed announce
evil according to the significations of those poorly disposed.

Again on the same topic, according to Abū Ma’shar
Abū Ma’shar said the king whose clime and citizens belong to the Lord
of the Year will be the stronger among kings. After this, what follows by
means of the succession of the strengths of the signs,
[288]
 and every
nativity which is under that sign, or under the sign of the Lord of the Year,
will be more trustworthy for the good, and of a better rank and dignity
among men, unless his nativity is impeded in its root. Whence you ought
to look in the hour of the revolution to see if the Lord of the Year were the
111

=== Page 112 ===
significator of the nativity or the region, or the clime over which the king
rules, because that king whose kingdom is under the rulership of the Lord
of the Year will be stronger than the other kings, and his kingdom will be
better and longer lasting, and in a better condition than the other kingdoms.
And they who are born in the cities or regions or that kingdom in the
revolution (and let the Moon be made fortunate and strong), will be more
fortunate and famous; and they will be reputed better than the others who
are born in other regions, provided that the planet which is the significator
of some one of them is not impeded in the root of his nativity. Even if the
Part of Fortune is impeded, it will complete [or furnish] what I told you
concerning the Part of Fortune. If however the significator of the nativity
of one of them were impeded, the native will not be so fortunate (however
he will be less unfortunate than the other unfortunate people of the other
regions).
Chapter 48: If the Moon or Mercury were the Lord of the Year or the
significator of the king, and is aspected by the malefics: what would
follow from that; and on the Part of Fortune and its Lord

If at some time it were to happen that the Moon or Mercury is the Lord
of the Year or
the significator of the king, and one of the malefics were
joined with it, and were to impede it by aspect or conjunction, the
condition of the year and of the vulgar or common people will be
weakened and made harsh, if it were the Lord of the Year. Indeed if it
[289]
were the significator of the king, [the king’s] condition will be weakened
and made harsh, nor could this be avoided or prevented–and this, on
account of the weakness of the one who is the significator, since it will not
have so much virtue that it could expel the impediment introduced to it by
the malefic with whom it is joined–unless the Part of Fortune (and its
Lord) works to the contrary, by doing good on account of its disposition.
Indeed if they
[290]
 were impeded, they will not signify good but its
contrary, according to the substance of the sign in which they are: because
impediment will fall according to what is signified by that sign, and over
the things signified by it; and then it will be said to be inimical to the
significator.
Then look at see whether the significator of the king commits its own
disposition or strength to the significator of the common people: because
the disposition of the year or of the king will be worse if the significator
will be impeded by a malefic, and is joined to a planet which is inimical to
112

=== Page 113 ===
the Ascendant; and
vice versa
.
Chapter 49: On the committing of the disposition of the Lord of the
Year to the significator of the king: what would follow from thence
Abū Ma’shar said if the Lord of the Year were to commit its own
disposition to the significator of the king from a square aspect, the king
will bear down upon the rustics in search of substance; and for this reason
distress will enter upon them. And if it were from the trine or sextile
aspect, they will turn over the
census

without his entering into the district
upon the rustics. And he said, because if he were to commit the disposition
without an aspect, this will be without the act of the king, and the king will
think that he will not see it.
[291]
 And he said that if the significator of the
king were to commit disposition to the Lord of the Year, the king will
withdraw substance in that same year. And he said, if however the Lord of
the 11
th
 were to aspect the significator of the king, this will be with his
good intentions.
[292]
Chapter 50: On the conjunction of the Head of the Dragon with
Saturn, and on the conjunction of the Tail with Mars, and what would
follow from thence
Abū Ma’shar said the conjunction of the Head of the Dragon with
Saturn signifies the impediment of the substance of the sign in which they
are joined, just like an eclipse of the Sun and Moon signifies, unless its
malice is broken by an aspect of the benefics. Whence if Saturn were
conjoined with the Head of the Dragon in Aries, it signifies impediment is
going to come in that revolution, in sheep and the like, unless Mars were to
aspect them by a trine or sextile aspect, and he himself were made
fortunate; there will even be harm in the matters of kings, unless the
significator of the king or the Lord of the 10
th
 house were to work to the
contrary.
If indeed their conjunction were in Leo, the impediment will be in forest
animals living by catching [other animals], and it will harm kings
somewhat, even if not much. And if their conjunction were in the first half
of Sagittarius, the impediment will be in humans. If however it were in its
last half, the impediment will be in large animals, but more strongly so in
those which are ridden.
113

=== Page 114 ===
And if their conjunction were in Taurus, the impediment will be in cows
and the like, and trees and herbs; and it will even wound sheep and boys
somewhat, and the rain will be middling, and the
annona
 will be reduced,
unless Venus and the Moon were to work to the contrary. And if it were in
Virgo, the impediment will be in women (and especially in young
women), and it will touch young men somewhat; and seeds will be
reduced, and things born from the earth which are turned into seed. And if
it were in Capricorn, the impediment will be in goats and the like, and will
wound things born from the earth somewhat (even if not as much as in
Virgo); and cold will be increased, unless Mars were to work to the
contrary.
If however it were in Gemini, the impediment will be in humans, and
more so in young men and adolescents, less in those who are of mature
age, and less again in old men. And it will be likewise in birds. And
harmful winds will blow. And if it were in Libra, the impediment is in
humans, and more in those who are of mature or complete age, and
middle-aged; less in old men and adolescents, and those who are 45 years
or less; and more winds will blow. And if it were in Aquarius, the
impediment will be in humans, and more in old men and low-class people,
however less in those who are of mature age, and less again in young men
[and] adolescents.
If indeed their
[293]
 conjunction were with Mars in the aforesaid signs,
the impediment which Mars would signify will be much less than the
impediment of Saturn, but it will be through heat and dryness, unless
Jupiter or Saturn were to work to the contrary.
[294]
If however their conjunction were in Cancer, the impediment will be
from impeding and devastating locusts in the areas in which they are, and
especially in the eastern and hot regions; and there will be rains in the
regions fit for it, more so than usual. And Abū Ma’shar said things born
from the earth will be increased, and those creeping upon the ground, both
the wounding [kind] and the non-wounding [kind]. And if it were in
Scorpio, the impediment will be in poisonous animals, both terrestrial and
aquatic, and especially in scorpions. And if it were in Pisces, in animals
spending time in water and especially in those which are of use to humans.
Chapter 51: On the conjunction of Mars and Saturn with the Tail
Indeed if Mars were joined with the Tail, it signifies destructions and
killings, and famine, and a multitude of evil. If however the Tail were
114

=== Page 115 ===
joined with Saturn, it signifies famine and a scarcity of good in whatever
sign it is, and harsh destructions, and cold and the greatest fears, and the
destruction of the harvests, and an overflowing of evil, and this will be in
the direction [or area] in which they are.
Chapter 52: On the conjunction of the two malefics (namely Saturn
and Mars) with some planet in the degree of its own exaltation: what
would follow from thence
[295]
Abū Ma’shar said, look at the conjunction of the malefics (namely of
Saturn and Mars) in the revolution of the year, to see whether they are
joined by aspect with some other planet who is in the degree of its own
exaltation (and worse than that is if by square or opposition). For if [the
aspecting malefic] were Saturn, it signifies evil and destruction in the
region deputed to that planet.
And if the aspect of Saturn were from a fixed sign, the signification will
be prolonged according to the quantity of degrees which there are between
their bodies: up to years, or months, or weeks, or days. For if it were a
signification that ought to be perfected within the year which you are
revolving, it will signify months according to the number of degrees. If
however it were a signification crossing past the year or revolution, it will
be prolonged for years.
If however it were from a movable sign, it will signify days according to
the number of degrees. And if it were not perfected in so many days, it will
signify weeks.
And if it were from a common sign, they will be weeks. And if it were
not completed in so many weeks, it will signify months.
If however Saturn did not aspect it, but some planet transferred their
light between them, it will signify the coming of displeasing matters over
men of the region of that planet; or destruction and detriment will come
over them from peoples who will not be from that region. If however some
planet did not transfer the light between them, and the rays of Saturn were
to touch the rays of the planet located in its own exaltation, or of the planet
which was fit to be able to transfer the light between them, sorrow and
grief will enter over the men of that region, which they ought not to fear:
for the fear will be dissolved, and will not reach actuality, by the will of
God.
If however it were from an aspect of Mars, just as I said about the aspect
of Saturn (and worse than that if it were a square or opposition), the
115

=== Page 116 ===
aforesaid will happen just as I said for Saturn, in a similar way and for
similar reasons and more, because Mars perfects the accidents he signifies
by iron and fire, and the shedding of blood.
Chapter 53: On the Lord of the fourth, if it were in the house of
pilgrimage at the hour of the revolution: what it would signify
If at the hour of the revolution there were incarcerated people in the city
or region in which you are, just as sometimes is wont to happen, and you
wished to know what is going to happen [to them] from that in the
revolution, look at the Lord of the fourth from the Ascendant, and see
whether it is in the ninth: because if it were in it, it signifies the pilgrimage
of those who were in prisons in the city or region in which you are
revolving, and the departure from their prisons in the revolution. And this
will happen to them without the permission and will of the king or civil
authority, or others who are in charge of that region. I say this [will be so]
unless
the significator of the king aspects the Lord of the 4
th
 from a trine or
sextile aspect (because then it will be from his will). If however it were
from a square aspect or the opposition, then they will depart not only
without his permission but even contrary to his will and orders. And if the
significator of the king or the chief were in the ninth, and the Lord of the
fourth were to commit its own disposition to him, it signifies that the same
king or chief himself will lead the conquered people from the prisons by
his own will. And if the Lord of the ninth did not receive the disposition
from the Lord of the fourth in the ninth, it signifies that an enemy of the
king or chief will lead the incarcerated people from the prisons.
And Abū Ma’shar said, commingle the conjunction of the planets with
each other, and judge according to their commixture.
Chapter 54: What it would signify if one of the planets commits its
own disposition to another in the revolution
You will even see whether one of the planets commits its own
disposition to another in the revolution.
[296]
 For if the significator of the
king were to commit his own disposition to Saturn, the religious, those
serving their religion, and old and decrepit men, and those doing heavy
works will find good from the king; and the king will spend money on the
buildings of the religious, even in their own properties.
[297]
 And if Saturn
116

=== Page 117 ===
were then above the earth, he will build a royal building. And if he were
below the earth, he will build canals and ditches, and aqueducts, and will
clear lands, and more so if he were in the Ascendant somewhere near
[around] its end, more strongly or in the third or the ninth, and he will be
occupied in heavy works.
And if he were to commit it to Jupiter, noble citizens and great men,
and skilled men, famous, and bishops and the like, will achieve good
from the king.
And if he were to commit it to Mars, bellicose soldiers, and the
bearers of arms, and leaders of armies, and those engaging in wars,
will achieve good from the king; and they will be honored by him,
and he will hear them and bring them closer to himself.
And if he were to commit it to the Sun, those near [or relatives of] the
king will find good from him, and especially those who are fit for a
kingdom.
And if he were to commit it to Venus, women and all those of whom
Venus is the significatrix, will find good from the king, and he will
bring them into his household.
[298]
And if he were to commit it to Mercury, then it signifies that the wise,
or advisors of royal matters, scribes, sculptors, [and] painters will find
useful good and favor from the king in that same year or revolution;
and he will listen to them, and will bring them into his household.
If however he were to commit it to the Moon, it signifies that those
who are signified by that planet to which she is joined, and to which
she herself sends disposition, will find good from the king, and
likewise sailors.
You may say the same about the Lord of the ninth: which if he were to
commit his own disposition to the aforesaid planets in the revolution, the
aforesaid people will find [good] from the Pope or from other bishops and
the like, according to what was said about the significator of the king and
the king.
117

=== Page 118 ===
Chapter 55: If some planet were the Lord of the Year: what it would
signify in every sign, and in every triplicity, and first concerning
Saturn
[299]
Even though Saturn is naturally a malefic, still he can sometimes signify
good and fortune accidentally, and so with every malefic. And even a
benefic, even though it naturally signifies good, still it can sometimes
signify evil accidentally. Therefore a malefic signifies evil and impediment
through its own nature; and if it is joined with another malefic, or were to
aspect him from any aspect, and he himself were impeded, he impedes [the
other]. If however he were free from impediments and well disposed, and
were joined with him from a trine or sextile aspect, he will not impede [the
other], but will signify an adaptation to the good.
Likewise if a benefic were impeded and weak, its signification will be
weakened. Whence if some impeded malefic were to aspect him, or
another [planet] who was of bad condition, he will take up his malice, and
will signify evil, and impediment, and the impediment will be according to
the nature of the malefic impeding the benefic.
Therefore, after you have discovered the Lord of the Year, and the
significator of the common people or the rustics, and it were in Aries or
Leo or Sagittarius, it signifies the appearance of things at which men will
have wonder in the cities and regions or lands over which the sign rules,
and especially in the eastern parts; and this will be more concerning the
wealthy and great men and powerful people exceeding the common
magnates and nobles; and they will come to be through shrewd and
ingenious men, and those hiding their own matters, and the like, and
saying nothing about them.
[300]
 And signs and wondrous portents will be
shown, and this under the form of beautiful appearances and imitations.
[301]
 You will then see whether he who rules the revolution is a benefic or
a malefic.
If indeed it were a malefic, and it were Saturn, and he were free from
impediments (namely made fortunate and strong), he signifies the good
condition and good disposition of his own significations. If however he
were impeded and of bad condition in the hour of the revolution, he
signifies impediment and the bad disposition of all of his significations,
and those which are in his division, the which significations are the
wealthy, old things, the religious, religious men living under a Rule, Jews,
farmers, old men, and decrepit men, and the like. Discord will arise
between men, and they will even abound in lying, and they will condemn
each other.
118

=== Page 119 ===
And if Saturn were of a good condition, and well disposed in the place
in which he then is, he will signify patience and subtlety, and the inquiry
into all matters, both noble and common, in that year. And he signifies that
the rustics will obey their masters or kings, and will be humble to them;
and the empire or kingdom will be raised up, or the rulership of the region
in which you are revolving the year. And its fame and name will be
increased.
And if Saturn were of a bad condition, and evil or impediment were
threatened in the revolution, and Jupiter were to aspect him by a trine or
sextile aspect, and [Jupiter] were free, namely made fortunate and strong,
he breaks the malice of Saturn, and abolishes it; nor does he determine it to
harm or impede.
If however the Sun were to aspect [Saturn] from a trine or sextile aspect,
nor were [the Sun] cadent from the Ascendant or from an angle (except for
the 10
th
), nor were he otherwise made unfortunate, he will break one-third
of Saturn’s malice.
If however another benefic were to aspect [Saturn], and it were made
fortunate and strong by the said aspects, or Jupiter [were to aspect] from a
square aspect, it will break and abolish half of Saturn’s malice. However,
from the other aspects the benefic decreases Saturn’s malice according to
what its nature [or condition] is. If however a benefic (who would abolish
or decrease Saturn’s malice) did not aspect, it signifies the death of the
wealthy and of great men, and their envy toward one another, and
accusations, and their neglectfulness, and the hatred of the common people
(and those subject to them) against them. It even signifies death because of
waters, and impediment and fear, and death in the land or region which is
signified by the sign in which he then is.
But if [Saturn] were oriental, in his own light, direct, fast in course, or in
one of his own dignities, or in the dignity of some planet who is friendly to
him (like Jupiter and both luminaries), and he is joined to [that planet] and
receives him, and were in a good place from the Ascendant, and in his own
haym
, he signifies that men in that year or revolution will apply
themselves to the disposition or heavy and laborious works, like the works
of waters, the planting of trees, the collecting together and raising up of
groves, and the clearing of land, and their care, the building of cities and
castles and houses or palaces, and such like.
Chapter 56: On the corporal conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter
119

=== Page 120 ===
Which if Jupiter were joined to him corporally, the works which men do
will be with silence, and they will work by religious means, and with the
appearance of faith, and the observance of the precepts of justice. However
if he were to aspect him by a trine or sextile aspect (and better than that, if
it were with reception), it signifies that supremacy
[302]
 will come over the
kings and great men who are in the regions over which the sign in which
Jupiter then is, is in charge (and matters over which they rejoice).
If however he were to aspect him from the opposition, it signifies that
the contrary of what I told you will happen to it; because it signifies that
contentions of war will come to the kings or the wealthy or great men who
are in the division of the sign in which Saturn is, from the regions which
are in the division of the sign in which Jupiter is
[303]
–from the kings or
great men, or the wealthy of his regions.
And Abū Ma’shar said this will be according to the quantity of degrees
which there are between Saturn and Jupiter, and the place of the
conjunction, up to the hour in which the war and contrariety is. And he
said if the aspect of Jupiter to Saturn were from the square aspect, instead
of wars there will be differences between them in the matters [or things]
which there are in the division of Saturn. And if Saturn were in Taurus, or
Leo, or Sagittarius, or Pisces, or even in Aries, and Jupiter were to aspect
him, it signifies the increase of the goods of the wealthy and great men and
nobles in that year. And if the aspect were a trine or sextile, and he
[Saturn?] were in a good place from the Ascendant, it signifies that good
and joy (and what pleases them) will come to the rustics or common
people from the nobles or great men.
Chapter 57: If Mars were joined to Saturn in the revolution, and he
were of good condition: what it would signify
[304]

And if Saturn were the Lord of the Year or Revolution, and were of
good condition, and likewise Mars, and [Mars] were to aspect him by a
trine or sextile aspect, and each were to receive the other by domicile or by
exaltation or by two other dignities, or both were received by one planet, it
signifies that in that same year the substance of the common people or the
vulgar or rustics will be increased, and their honor and reputation will be
commingled with great men and the wealthy. If however Mars were to
aspect him, or were to be joined to him corporally, and [Mars] were of bad
condition, it signifies the destruction of the standing of the wealthy and
great men in the revolution, who were in the division of Aries or Leo or
120

=== Page 121 ===
Sagittarius (in short, with great delay), and those who are in the division of
the sign in which each of them is. The citizens of those regions will act
badly toward each other, and there will be little piety between them, and
no compassion.
But if their aspect were a trine or sextile, it signifies that donations will
come to the nobles or wealthy or the magnates who are in the division of
Aries, Leo and Sagittarius (and likewise concerning which they rejoice and
are made happy), from the citizens who are in the division of the sign in
which Mars is. Even they and the other inhabitants of the regions will be
of good condition, and pleasing things will come to them from the regions
which are in the division of the sign in which Mars is.
If however it were by the opposition or a square aspect, without
reception, it signifies the contrary of what was said. For instead of
donations and other pleasing things, evils, injuries, quarrels, contentions,
and contrarieties will come between the wealthy or nobles and magnates of
the regions which are in the division of the sign in which Mars is, and the
wealthy and the magnates of the aforesaid regions. For they will rise up in
them because of battles, and they will strive against them to expel them
from their cities and regions, nor will this continue through them; and the
roads between them will be cut off, nor will things be permitted to be
carried from these regions to those; even the whole of the citizenry in the
regions which are in the division of the sign in which Mars is, will strive to
wound and offend the citizens of the other, aforesaid regions.
And if Mars were joined corporally to Saturn, it signifies war, and the
shedding of blood, and a multitude of fevers; it even signifies quartan
fevers, and pestilences in the eastern parts, and it signifies young men, and
a battle and much killing by iron will fall between the wealthy and the
magnates.
And Abū Ma’shar said the
annona
 will be oppressed, and the wine; and
butter
[305]
 will be multiplied. And he said that if Mars were near the
Ascendant of the year, there will be many battles, and there will be pains
of the eyes, and inseparable infirmities;
[306]
 and thunders will be
multiplied, and there will be detriment in the earth of every kind, unless
Jupiter and Venus were to work to the contrary; which if they were to
aspect [Saturn and Mars], they will break their malice; and only Jupiter
can break the malice of each and lead them back to good.
Chapter 58: If the Sun were joined to Saturn in the revolution, and
they were both of good condition
121

=== Page 122 ===
If however Saturn were the Lord of the Year or Revolution, and the Sun
were joined to him, and both were of good condition, it signifies that the
wealthy or great men of that region will be engaged in their own affairs in
the seeking of a realm, and of a high and beautiful mastery of what
pertains to the nobles or the magnates. And this, even in the part turning to
the side of honest and the highest pleasing things.
[307]
 If indeed the aspect
were a trine or sextile, donations will come to those who are in the division
of the sign in which the Sun is.
[308]
And Abū Ma’shar said, good
[309]
 will be taken away from these parts,
and things for sale; and matters will be carried away from those things
which are signified by the Sun; the merriments of men will be increased,
and their dignities. If however the aspect were by the opposition, instead of
donations will come quarrels and war, and contrariety, nor will the things
for sale be carried away from one of the regions to the other; and it will be
the contrary of what was said. And shameful and terrible rumors will come
instead of the earlier happy things. Indeed if the aspect were a square, Abū
Ma’shar said there will not be wars, nor will battles be multiplied, but
there will be quarrels and discords between the wealthy and the magnates.
Chapter 59: If Venus were joined to Saturn in the revolution, and they
were of good condition
And if Saturn were the Lord of the Year or Revolution, and Venus had
joined herself to him, it signifies the seeking of venereal things like games,
delights, singing, rest, the cultivation of venereal things,
[310]
 and similar
things in which men delight; and that the rustics will be commingled with
the wealthy from the beginning of the revolution, but their being together
in one household
[311]
 will not last. If however Venus were to aspect him
from a trine or sextile aspect, donations and sharing of households will
come to the wealthy who are in the division of the sign in which Saturn is,
from the citizens who are in the cities which are in the division of the sign
in which Venus is; and pleasing things will come to them, and what will be
conveyed to them will be of the nature of Venus.
And Abū Ma’shar said, if however she were to aspect him from the
opposition, instead of donations and pleasing things there will be wars and
contrarieties, and the wealthy will proceed to war with the wealthy; and
what was conveyed will be cut off from those cities; and the substance
from those parts will be decreased. And he said the
census
 will be broken,
122

=== Page 123 ===
and evil rumors will come, and the good condition will be turned into evil,
and quarreling and grief, and sorrow. And the root of all of these things
will be from women and because of women, and venereal things; and men
will be more honest than usual–and more so if Saturn were to receive her
and the revolution were at night. If however she were to aspect him from a
square aspect, Abū Ma’shar said that there will not be battles appearing;
but there will be diversity in the matters between the wealthy and the
common people; and there will be dissensions and most ferocious discords
between the citizens of those cities or regions–such that if a father were a
citizen of one of those cities which are in the division of the sign in which
Saturn is, and a son were a citizen of one of the others which are in the
division of the sign in which Venus is, they will not agree in those things
which they ought to do. Likewise they [will] quarrel and contend in their
own business matters, and will talk about their business openly to others
and between themselves.
Chapter 60: On Mercury, if he were joined to Saturn in the
revolution, and they [were] of good condition
If however Saturn were the Lord of the Year or Revolution and Mercury
had joined himself to him, it signifies that there will be men (and
especially wealthy and great men) of a will to acquire pretenses,
[312]
 and
eloquence of speaking and of philosophy and astronomy and medicine and
dialectics. Likewise he who was born under such a figure will apply
himself in this, and it will be made fruitful, and he will succeed in them.
And Abū Ma’shar said the appearance of these things will be in this
time [or season], in the wealthy and the citizens of the regions which are in
his division. And if Mercury were to aspect him from a trine or sextile
aspect, every good thing will come upon the wealthy from them; and
merchandise for sale will be taken away from them;
[313]
 and substance
will be multiplied, and the
census
 from them; and this will be praised in
the cities which are in the division of Saturn and the sign in which he is;
and the merchandise will often be of the aforesaid Mercurial [sort]. And
they will be firm and stable in their counsels. If however he were to aspect
him from the opposition, instead of donations and sharing a household
there will be contrarieties and war; and these wealthy people will proceed
contrary to them, in order to overcome them, and to vanquish and expel
them from their own homes. And whatever good was conveyed from them
to them,
[314]
 will be cut off; and substance will be decreased from the
123

=== Page 124 ===
same parts; and the
census
 will be broken; and evil rumors will be heard,
and the good will be hidden; and evil will appear from those cities, and
more strongly so if Mercury were impeded by the malefics, or had some
commingling with them. If however he were made fortunate by the
benefics, then it will impede less, but it will not abolish the impediment of
the opposition. If indeed the aspect were a square, it will be less than this,
nor will war appear; however there will be differences between these
wealthy or great men, and between the wealthy and the rustics.
And Abū Ma’shar said the cause of this matter will be a Mercurial thing,
just as he expounded this in his greater book,
[315]
 according to how he
himself testified. Understand this, and keep it in your mind.
Chapter 61: On the conjunction of the Moon with Saturn in the
revolution, and [if] they are both of good condition
Indeed if Saturn were the Lord of the Year or Revolution, and the Moon
were joined to him, there will be an appearance of legates, and rumors, and
explorers, and the constituting of the affairs of boasters; and this will be
among the wealthy and magnates, and even in the common people; and
they will wish to be placed on an equal footing with great men in that
revolution.
And if the Moon were then to aspect Saturn from a trine or sextile
aspect, it signifies that donations and things over which they will rejoice,
will come to great or noble men who are in the division of the sign in
which the Moon is; and goods for sale and substances will be conveyed
from those cities, and their
census
 will be multiplied from them.
And Abū Ma’shar said these things will be brought away to the wealthy
who are in the division of the sign in which Saturn is, and they will mostly
be lunar things; and men will profit from planting. And he said if the
aspect of the Moon and Saturn were from the opposition, it will be the
contrary of what was said: for instead of donations and good things, there
will be contrariety and wars; and they (namely the wealthy who are in the
division of the sign in which the Moon is) will enter into their [own] harm
and weakness; and what was brought from those parts to these will be
destroyed; and the
census
 will be broken, and the commercial roads will be
cut; and evil rumors will arise and appear; and good will be destroyed and
turned into evil. And if the aspect of the Moon to Saturn were a square, it
will signify that war will not appear; however there will be contrariety
between wealthy and great men, and the rustics or common people; and
124

=== Page 125 ===
even between neighbors, because of lunar things.
Chapter 62: What Saturn would signify in every sign, and in every
triplicity, and in every house, whether he were the Lord of the Year or
not
If Saturn were the Lord of the Year, and were in Aries or its triplicity, it
signifies the severity of the matters of great and noble men, who are in the
eastern parts; but chiefly in Aries.
[316]
Whence if he were in Aries, he signifies a multitude of winds, and the
death of women of prayer, or of those pertaining to religion, and this in the
areas of Thoracey
[317]
 and Aiaroc;
[318]
 also the scarcity of provisions
and wine and butter, and even of oils and fats. Indeed if he were impeded,
it signifies a multitude of robbers and cutters of roads, and many
tribulations in the revolution. And if he were the sole significator, and
were cadent from the Ascendant, not aspecting it, and he were direct, it
signifies that hindrance and distress will enter over the nobles.
And Abū Ma’shar said if he were retrograde, he will destroy the houses
of substances and their coffers; and more severely so if he were to receive
the disposition of Mars, because then it signifies severe cold and the death
of animals, in addition to what he said about battles and wars. If however
he did not aspect Mars, the cold of winter will be severe, according to the
disposition of the region, and animals will die in it. And he said if he were
not retrograde, it signifies that there will be contention between those
doing business together, and plundering, and evil, and more strongly so if
Mars were to aspect him from an angle. If however he were to aspect him
from a cadent, the impediment will be decreased, or rather will practically
be wholly abolished.
And Māshā’allāh said
[319]
 if [Saturn] were direct in an angle, it
signifies many rains, and the contentions of the wealthy; and more strongly
so, if he were to receive the rulership of Mars and his strength–for it
signifies then that the rustics or common people will contend with the
king. And if he were retrograde the condition of men will be burdened.
And he said if [Saturn] were to receive the disposition of Mars and from
the Moon at the same time, it signifies severe cold and the death of
animals, and wars, and battles.
Pay attention, in the revolutions of the years of the world, to see if
Saturn were in a fixed sign: because then this signifies mortality, and a
scarcity and decrease of things born from the earth. But in Leo [it is]
125

=== Page 126 ===
stronger and more difficult and longer-lasting than in the others. Indeed in
Scorpio [it is] less than in Leo; in Taurus, less than in Scorpio; in
Aquarius, less than in Taurus. And by however much worse he were
disposed, by that much more will his malice be increased; and more
strongly so if Mars were to help him, unless Jupiter (who diminishes
[Saturn’s] malice according to his own disposition) were to work to the
contrary.
If indeed [Saturn’s] latitude were northern, it signifies the corruption of
the air, and its thickness and darkness in the required and usual seasons,
more so than usual. If indeed his latitude were southern, it signifies the
severity of cold and a multitude of ice in its own seasons.
And if he were oriental, he signifies the griefs and sorrows of wealthy or
great men, and their thoughts; and it seems that this will happen to them
because of the cold [or ice]. If however he were occidental, it signifies an
earthquake is going to come in that year; and you will know this by the
quantity of the degrees which there are;
[320]
 and he signifies [this]
especially in the eastern parts; however, it is to be feared everywhere you
revolve the year and were to find it so; but if he were oriental, it will be
less than this; and less again if he were made fortunate and strong. If
however he happened to be retrograde, it will be much worse.
Chapter 63: On Leo
Know that if he were in Leo, and his latitude were northern, it signifies a
multitude of rains, and the corruption of the matters of great men and
common men, and the destruction of the acquisitions of those doing
business together.
And if he were oriental, it signifies infirmities are going to come to the
rustics and low-class persons. If however he were occidental, it signifies
pestilences which will come in the earth, and mortality.
Indeed if he were retrograde, it signifies hardships are going to come
from the accidents which come to men, and that they will be prolonged
and will be lasting. If however he were direct, it signifies their ease.
Chapter 64: On Sagittarius
And if he were in Sagittarius, and his latitude were northern, it signifies
a multitude of strong waters, and the coldness of winter.
[321]
126

=== Page 127 ===
And Abū Ma’shar said if he were oriental, it signifies the nearness of the
wealthy from their regions.
[322]
 And if he were occidental, it signifies
battles between men (namely noble and great ones), and discords will fall
between them.
And if he were retrograde, it signifies severity in the matters and goods
of men, and battles and wars between them. And if he were direct, it
signifies the prosperity of those journeying [or going on pilgrimages] by
earth and by water.
Chapter 65: On Taurus and its triplicity
If however he were in Taurus and its triplicity, it signifies the detriment
of wealthy and great men; and this will be in the southern parts in the
division of the sign in which Saturn is, but chiefly in Taurus.
[323]
Whence if he were in Taurus and were in an angle, direct, it signifies
contentions and wars, likewise [the impediments] of quadrupeds (and
especially bulls and female cattle
[324]
), and especially in the land deputed
to the sign in which he is.
And Abū Ma’shar said if he were in an earthy sign, it signifies the
destruction of those things which are from its seeds, namely a scarcity of
trees, and detriment from vermin who fall in them, and locusts. And he
said there will be tribulations and injury, and tremors, and earthquakes;
and the destructions of cities and villages and houses.
Moreover, if Saturn were in Taurus in the hour of the revolution
(whatever kind of Ascendant it is), or in Leo, or in Scorpio, or in Aquarius,
it signifies battles and famine, or the dearth of things born from the earth.
And if he were impeded, it signifies mortality in addition, and it will be
feared concerning great men in the revolution; and this will be worse and
stronger in Leo than in Taurus; stronger in Taurus than in Scorpio;
stronger in Scorpio than in Aquarius (in which these things will happen
less than in any of the others).
And if Mars
[325]
 were joined to him, and the Moon joins to them, and
especially with Saturn in the [?] latitude,
[326]
 in whatever sign this was, or
from whatever one, or whatever kind of Ascendant it was, it signifies
famine and mortality. Indeed if he [she?] were joined to Mars, it signifies
the detriment of kings and their changes,
[327]
 and battles in the parts of
that sign in which the conjunction is deputed;
[328]
 and many sheddings of
blood, changes, and battles. And if he
[329]
 were retrograde, it signifies in
addition the destruction of the harvests; and it even signifies wars in many
127

=== Page 128 ===
regions or lands and directions (especially those of the east and the south
more so than in the other directions); and more severely so if he were then
in the 10
th
: because then the evil will be more general; and there will be
impediments in boys and youths.
And Abū Ma’shar said if he were removed from the angle in these signs,
and were to aspect the Ascendant, and were direct, there will be what he
said happened in this chapter below. Saturn in the third from it signifies
the death of the king, by the testimony of the matter of years.
[330]
And Māshā’allāh said
[331]
 it will destroy seeds, and the harvests will be
few. If however he did not aspect the Ascendant, the evil will be less. And
if he were retrograde, it signifies the destruction of seeds, and the harvest
will be small; and it will be feared for youths in that year. And if he were
cadent from the Ascendant, not aspecting it, and he were direct, nor did
Mars aspect him nor the Ascendant, it signifies the decreasing of the
aforesaid evils, because then he could not harm much, unless Mars were to
work to the contrary. And if he were retrograde, and Mars were to impede
him, it signifies the destruction of the harvests, and mortality in the lands
which the sign (in which he was then) rules.
Chapter 66: If the Moon suffered eclipse
And if at that time the Moon suffered eclipse,
[332]
 it signifies killing in
the parts of the east, west, and even the south. And it signifies snow and
rains in the lands in which it is used to raining. Indeed in the others, [it
signifies] the alteration of the air. Indeed it signifies an abundance of seeds
or harvests, and of creeping things; and the death of bulls and female
cows; and there will be little wine and butter in direction of the west.
And if [Saturn’s] latitude were northern, it signifies the goodness of the
air, and its beauty and the goodness of its complexion. It will even signify
useful and profitable rains, nor those harming seeds, and the like, but those
helping them. And there will be a middling marketplace value of things
born of the earth, and even [that] of other things, even if not completely
[so]. If however his latitude were southern, it signifies pestilences,
mortalities, and tremors and comminglings with the corruption of the air,
and its worsening, and the scarcity of its goodness.
And if he were oriental, it signifies a multitude of rains, or infirmities
for that reason. But if he were occidental, it signifies the fear of the
wealthy and the magnates, or nobles, because of the rustics or common
people; and the commingling of their matters.
128

=== Page 129 ===
If however he were retrograde, it signifies the death of magnates and
nobles, and a multitude of trembling and distress between men. If indeed
he were direct, it signifies long-lasting infirmities taking place in the upper
parts of men.
Chapter 67: On Virgo
Indeed if Saturn were in Virgo, and his latitude were northern, it
signifies the goodness of the winds, and their sweetness, and their
strengthening in the times of the harvests and sowing. And if his latitude
were southern, it signifies the scarcity of rains, and the wasting of the
waters of fountains [or springs].
If however he were oriental, it signifies that women who are pregnant in
that year will abort because of the winds; and even because of copulation
after becoming pregnant. But if he were occidental, it signifies quick
fevers in that year, and terrible tremblings.
And if he were retrograde, it signifies the fear of the king of that region
from his own enemies, that they will become contrary concerning him.
[333]
 Indeed if he were direct, it signifies gaining by that king over his
enemies, and his strength against them.
Chapter 68: On Capricorn
Indeed if he were in Capricorn and his latitude were northern, it
signifies the good disposition of the air, and the moderation of the rains. If
however his latitude were southern, it signifies the shadowiness of the air
in the winter, and its cloudiness, and cold.
And if he were oriental, it signifies the bad condition of the magnates
and nobles in that revolution, and their terror, and that they will not behave
well with the rustics or common people; and that they will act together
poorly. If indeed he were occidental, it signifies a multitude of locusts in
the usual areas, and great heat, harming and devastating the harvests.
However, if he were retrograde it signifies that the rustics or common
people will be mixed together, and will grow angry with one another. If
however he were direct, it signifies the good disposition of the wealthy and
the magnates or nobles; and that they will behave well toward everyone
and amongst themselves, and that they will love justice and rectitude, and
mildness, and they will practice [mildness].
129

=== Page 130 ===
Chapter 69: On Gemini and its triplicity, if Saturn were in it
If indeed he were in Gemini or its triplicity, it signifies that whatever he
signified (whether the signification were good or bad), will mostly appear
in the western [parts]. But if he were in Gemini and were in an angle,
direct, it signifies the severity of the northern winds, and the coldness of
the winter of that year.
And Abū Ma’shar said there will be detriment and destruction in birds,
and infirmities will happen to men from what is cold and dry, in whatever
commixture of the hot and wet.
[334]
 And there will be lying and
contentious men, and even the shedding of blood is signified from this.
And he said if [Saturn] were in an airy sign, it signifies the severity of the
cold, and a multitude of ice and clouds, and the corruption of the
complexion of the air, and thunders, and flashings and lightning bolts, and
impediment from a multitude of rains (and especially if he were from the
fifth degree of the sign up to in the twenty-sixth); and there will be
impediment from these lightning bolts, and from glowing sparks running
to and fro in the air, below the spear-shafts.
[335]
And if he were retrograde, it signifies the contrarieties of the kings and
the nobles, and magnates or the wealthy; and death will be feared
concerning it in that year or in that revolution, for the reason that it
signifies an earthquake that is going to come in that same year.
And if he were removed from the angle, the winds (both eastern and
western) will be multiplied.
And Abū Ma’shar said it even signifies the severity of the cold; and men
will be in changes [from place to place]. But if in addition he were
retrograde, men will likewise be in motion; and there will be infirmities
from winds, and rains; and dew and hoar-frost. If however he were cadent,
not regarding
[336]
 the Ascendant, and he were direct, these things will
happen in the regions which are in the division of the sign in which Saturn
then is; and the winds will be multiplied from out of the southern division.
If however he were direct, these things will happen by means of fortunes,
without weakness;
[337]
 and infirmities, dissolutions, ruptures, and
plundering will fall among the citizens who are in the division of the
aforesaid sign, and they will happen more and more strongly among the
rustics and common people, and low-class persons.
And Abū Ma’shar said, if however Saturn were in the angle of the earth
[the 4
th
], and he were the Lord of the Year in the said [airy] triplicity–or if
130

=== Page 131 ===
he were not the Lord of the Year, but he were to receive the disposition of
the Lord of the Ascendant of that revolution–it signifies that in that same
year, and in the aforesaid places, many men will die from earthquake.
Indeed, if he were to receive the disposition of the Lord of the Midheaven,
it signifies battles and contrarieties in the quest for a kingdom or
someone’s dignity, or the destruction of the district of some city, or the
land of a magnate, which he wishes to be taken away by him from another
by force. And he said it signifies a multitude of waters, and the flooding of
rivers, and submersions [or drownings]; even a multitude of snow[falls],
and detriment in the
annona
; and there will be a multitude of winds, and
death will be signified in males.
And if his latitude were northern, it signifies the vehement blowing of
winds, and the shadowiness and corruption of the air, and the changing of
its color almost to black;
[338]
 it even signifies earthquake, and especially
in the areas of the sign in which he is. If however his latitude were
southern, it signifies the heat of the air and its dryness; also a scarcity of
rains, and a multitude of pestilences, and of pestilential [or noxious] and
mortal things.
If however he were oriental, it signifies infirmities are going to come to
the magnates of the land of Babylon, and to their king. Indeed if he were
occidental, it signifies the dryness of the air, and a scarcity of rains–and
this, if he were direct (because [if] retrograde, he will harm less).
Chapter 70: On Libra, if Saturn were in it
Abū Ma’shar said if Saturn were in Libra, and his latitude were
northern, it signifies the heat of the air and its dryness; and it signifies few
rains in that revolution, and the wasting
[339]
 of waters. And if his latitude
were southern, it signifies the goodness of the air, and its sweetness; nor
will there be harmful winds.
And if he were oriental, it signifies the desire of shameful, criminal
men. But if he were occidental, it signifies infamy is going to fall upon
fornicators, and those abusing shameful sexual intercourse.
If however he were retrograde, it signifies the infirmities of male and
female slaves, and of low-class people. And if he were direct, it signifies
the middling quality of supplies, and particularly of barley.
And Abū Ma’shar said it signifies the rupturing of the
census
 upon the
king.
[340]
131

=== Page 132 ===
Chapter 71: On Aquarius, if Saturn were in it
Indeed if Saturn were in Aquarius, and his latitude were northern, it
signifies a multitude of rains, and the severity of cold and frost. And if his
latitude were southern, it signifies a scarcity of waters, fountains, and
rivers.
If he were oriental, it signifies a scarcity of the acquisition of
inheritances, and the scarcity of the substances of the rustics. And if he
were occidental, it signifies a multitude of, and the strength of, burning
fires.
And if he were retrograde, it signifies the severity of the same thing.
And if he were direct, it signifies the death of animals which men use for
their own usefulness.
Chapter 72: On Cancer and its triplicity, if Saturn were the Lord of
the Revolution, and were in it or its triplicity
If however Saturn were the Lord of the Year, and were in Cancer or in
its triplicity, Abū Ma’shar said whatever he were to signify (whether good
or evil) will be in the northern part. But if he were in Cancer, it signifies
the multiplication of waters and rains, and fishes, and locusts, and things
creeping on the earth. And if Mars did not aspect him, the cold will be
severe, and locusts will be multiplied; and there will be infirmities in the
lands which are in the division of the sign in which Saturn is, and [in the
division] of the sign which is in his opposition or square aspect. And if he
were retrograde, death will be feared concerning the king of that region. If
however Mars were to aspect him, without the aspect of the benefics, it
signifies mortality in the aforesaid land; and evil and impediment will be
multiplied. If however he did not aspect the Ascendant, rains and dew and
cold will be multiplied. Indeed, if he were direct, the evil will be reduced;
and more so if one of the benefics were to aspect him (unless the Moon
were then in the first, because it signifies an impediment that is going to
fall upon the kings and magnates of that region, and death). If however he
were retrograde, and Mars were to aspect him, it signifies ruin and evil
(and even locusts) in the land of the aforesaid sign and its opposition and
square aspect. And if he were cadent, not aspecting the Ascendant, and he
were direct, and Mars cadent from him, it signifies the security of men;
and better so if he had already transited the fifteenth degree of the sign.
132

=== Page 133 ===
However, there will be infirmities in the land of that sign. And if he were
retrograde, and Mars were to aspect him, and the benefics were absent
from him, tribulations and evils will occur to the ignoble people of those
regions, and cold will be oppressive; and waters and locusts will be
multiplied.
And Abū Ma’shar said there will be impediment in the water from
shipwreck, and from the breaking of ships; and those on a pilgrimage by
water will be endangered; aquatic animals (and those similar to them) will
die. He said if indeed [Saturn] were fit, without impediment, it signifies
the good of those things which I said, and the conversion of evil into good,
and fitness in all of their own substances, and his signification of them.
[341]
 And he said, look at the malefic who impedes him (which is Mars);
and the Tail by conjunction and Mars by conjunction and by aspect.
And he said the peculiar signification of Saturn is over the wealthy, old
things, and Jews, and religious men, and farmers, and old men, and the
decrepit. Which if he were impeded at the hour of the revolution, judge
destruction and impediment. And if made fortunate, judge good fortune.
And if his latitude were northern, it signifies a scarcity of waters, and
the decrease of rivers and rains. If however his latitude were southern, it
signifies the vigilance of men
[342]
 in their way of life, and the smallness
of their acquisition.
And if he were oriental, it signifies the corruption of the air and its
shadowiness, and a multitude of cold in its own season. And if he were
occidental, it signifies a multitude of rains and their corruption, and the
impediment of matters from winds.
And if he were retrograde, it signifies the strength of those things which
were said, and that the king of that region (which is in the division of the
sign in which Saturn is) will fall into opprobrium and a very great disgrace
which could not come upon him in a bigger way; and it will be compared
with death. (And Māshā’allāh said
[343]
 there will be a great battle and a
powerful death). While if he were direct, it signifies the benevolent
disposition of the air, and the goodness of its complexion.
Chapter 73: On Scorpio, if Saturn were in it
Indeed if Saturn were in Scorpio, and his latitude were northern, it
signifies a multitude of rains, and an overflowing of waters, rivers, and
their corruption. And if his latitude were southern, it signifies famine is
going to come to men, and the oppressive market value of items of
133

=== Page 134 ===
exchange, and especially of things born from the earth.
And if he were oriental, it signifies a multitude of wars between the
wealthy and the magnates. And if he were occidental, it signifies
destruction and impediment in the sea, and of things belonging to the sea,
and the occurrence of evil in them.
And if he were retrograde, it signifies pestilences in the earth, and
battles. And Abū Ma’shar said if he were direct, it signifies the salvation
of the clime of Babylon.
Chapter 74: If Saturn were in Pisces
And if Saturn were in Pisces, and his latitude were northern, it signifies
much blowing of the northern winds, and the severity of the cold in winter.
And if his latitude were southern, it signifies a tempest in the sea, and the
breaking of ships for that reason; and that impediments will come to those
who spend time on [or in] the water, and who work in it.
And if he were oriental, it signifies the quarrels and contrarieties of the
wealthy, and mutual killings between them. But if he were occidental, it
signifies that the rustics and the common people and the ignoble will be
exalted, and will raise their heels
[344]
 against the nobles and magnates,
and will hurl them down and oppress them.
And if he were retrograde, it signifies the tribulations of the religious,
and battles between men, and of those serving God, and of those
cultivating the ways of religion, and their griefs. And Abū Ma’shar said if
he were direct, he signifies the common people of the houses of religion,
and of the honoring of the divine.
Chapter 75: What Saturn would signify in any house in the revolution
of the year, or of the world, or of nativities, or questions, whether he is
Lord of the Year or not
If Saturn were in a revolution, or in a nativity, or question:
In the first, if it were a revolution of the year of the world, it signifies
the grief of many men because of something owed,
[345]
 or because
of lands. If it were a nativity or its revolution, or a question, it
signifies that for the native or querent.
134

=== Page 135 ===
If however he were in the second, it signifies the disorder of friends in
that year, and men will lose, and they will subtract

from their goods.
Indeed if he were in the third, it signifies quarrels and discords that
are going to come between brothers, more so than usual.
And if he were in the fourth, it signifies the destruction of buildings,
and the pillaging of lands, and the detriment of seeds and treasures,
and danger to come because of that; and death.
And if he were in the fifth, it signifies abortions in that year (more
than usual), and the detriment of children, and griefs because of them,
and contentions with heralds and legates, and that they will not
exercise well what they have business with in that year.
And if he were in the sixth, it signifies the evil wills of male and
female slaves against their masters, and their disobedience; and many
infirmities, and the harming of small animals.
Indeed if he were in the seventh, and the sign is feminine, and its
Lord a feminine planet, it signifies the evil will of women [or wives]
against men [or husbands], and their disobedience. And if it were a
masculine sign, or its Lord a masculine planet, it signifies the evil will
of husbands against their wives; and the fraudulence of partners, and
the wounding of enemies against enemies who are absent (more so
than the open ones);
[346]
 and tribulation because of lands, and often
a detestable end of matters. I would tell you the same if he were so
found in nativities or questions.
And if he were in the eighth, it signifies litigations because of the
seeking of inheritances, or what is left by the dead, and because of the
seeking of ancient things; and affliction because of death. And it
signifies matters whose pain and distress or sorrow will last for a long
time.
But if he were in the ninth, it signifies the destruction of faith, and the
taking away of sympathy and piety, and that certain hermits or
religious men will be changed from their religions, and will neglect
them, and they will even take on bad advice, and likewise with others.
And certain men will be eager for low-class and horrible [matters] of
135

=== Page 136 ===
alien things, like certain people who dig up the dead from their graves
and rob them; and it signifies griefs and sorrows and anxieties to
come to journeyers on their pilgrimages, and a long sojourn in them.
Indeed if he were in the tenth, it signifies (both in nativities or
questions, and in other revolutions) grief and sorrow, and cracking
down and severities on the part of the king or civil authorities,
[347]
and the perplexities of prison.
And Abū Ma’shar said that if the Sun
were the Lord of the 10
th
 house, the king will kill him in his own
prison. And if the Moon were the Lady of the 10
th
 house, it signifies
the same as the Sun, unless she is joined to Saturn. And if the Lord of
the 10
th
 house were Jupiter, the king will kill him and make him
condemn himself without [there being real] guilt. And if the Lord of
the 10
th
 house were Mars, he will die because of his own fault. And if
the Lady of the 10
th
 house were Venus, it signifies prosperity and
sublimity, and joy and advancement will follow from this tribulation,
and the king will repent having done this, and will admit he did not
act well, and he will be humbled. And if the Lord of the 10
th
 house
were Mercury, he will kill him because of an injury without
explanation, when he will bear false testimony against him. And if
Mercury were to aspect Mars, he will be beaten with whips. And if
Mercury were with the Sun under his rays, the king will make a show
of force to him, and take his substance from him, and cause the
rendering of his own goods to himself. And he said, know that,
among the rest of the planets, this peculiar meaning belongs to Saturn
in the 10
th
.
And if he were in the eleventh,
[348]
 it signifies grief and sorrow from
friends, and because of friends, and the scarcity of progress in those
things which one hoped, and in which one had faith concerning the
good; and obstacles in matters, and their duration, and much hope in
false things which profit nothing.
And if he were in the twelfth, he signifies impediments which will
happen on the part of the king or another ruler; it even signifies that
he will be captured by enemies, and one must have fear in all his
affairs.
And according to how I have touched on [these matters] for you above,
all of these things can be considered in revolutions of the years of the
136

=== Page 137 ===
world, in revolutions of nativities, in questions, and the like, in all
headings, and in anything on its own account. And what goes for Saturn is
so for any other planet, both for good and for evil.
Chapter 76: On the conjunction of Saturn and Mars–what it would
signify in a revolution
[349]
You will even look in the revolution, when you are revolving a year
(whether it is of the world or of a nativity), to see if Saturn and Mars were
conjoined [corporally] in one of the twelve houses: because it signifies
burdens and impediments according to the signification of the house in
which they were conjoined.
[350]
For if their conjunction were in the first, it signifies general evil and
impediment is going to come upon the rustics and common people.
If it were in the second from the Ascendant of the revolution, it
signifies the destruction of their substances and homes; and the
wealthy and magnates will be forgotten by the people,
[351]
 and will
be reputed practically as being nothing, and people familiar [or close]
to them will be exalted, and those serving them and their soldiers, and
they will be haughty against them, nor will they wish to obey them,
nor observe [their] faithfulness to them, unless only moderately or
rather practically not at all.
Indeed if it were in the third, Abū Ma’shar said it signifies the
destruction of the houses of religion, and horrible things falling upon
the religious and those cultivating God.
But if it were in the fourth, it signifies the destruction of buildings and
mansions or houses.
If however it were in the fifth, it signifies destruction and impediment
is going to fall upon children; and more abortions in that year than
usual; and the changing of friends’ wills toward each other, and even
of people loving each other; and instead of love, irritation will fall
amongst them, and bad will.
Indeed if it were in the sixth, it signifies impediment and detriment is
137

=== Page 138 ===
going to fall upon small and great quadrupeds, and especially those
which men use (like cows, horses, donkeys, camels, and the like); and
on male and female slaves, and male and female servants [or
attendants]; and it even signifies infirmities.
Indeed if were in the seventh, it signifies that quarrels and contentions
and discords, and likewise dissensions, and many evils, will fall
among partners and others participating together in something, and
even between husbands and wives; and enmities will arise amongst
men.
Indeed if it were in the eighth, it signifies that very many men will
quit their homes and habitations in which they live, and they will go
by wandering through foreign lands and regions; and ruin will fall
upon them, and among men there will be worries because of what is
left behind by the dead, and because of the goods which they inherit
from the dead, and the money of women [or wives].
And if it were in the ninth, it signifies the detriment of the religious
people of the plentiful religions, such as bishops, archbishops,
cardinals, and the like. And [it signifies] cutters of roads and [the
detriment] of journeys (and especially the long ones), and pilgrimages
by which men go far from their habitations by seeking the great and
famous houses of prayer.
If it were in the tenth, it signifies the detriment of kings and
magnates, and the destruction of their condition, and the death of a
great king.
Indeed if were in the eleventh, it signifies dissent and anger and
quarrels and discord that is going to fall between friends. And Abū
Ma’shar said every one who has a friend will be changed concerning
his partner; it even signifies the evil condition of the soldiers and the
household members of kings.
Indeed if it were in the twelfth, it signifies impediments which will
fall upon all quadrupeds, and especially upon the aforesaid (namely
cows, horses, donkeys, and the like); and detriment and worsening
will fall upon every sale of beasts (and particularly the large ones),
both of those for riding and those not for riding.
138

=== Page 139 ===
And Abū Ma’shar said all of these will happen in the regions which are
in the division of the sign in which they were conjoined; and the planet
who is the Lord of the bound in which they are conjoined will be a
participator; and these will likewise happen in the cities or regions which
are in the division of the sign in which [the Lord of the bound of the
conjunction] is.
Chapter 77: What Jupiter would signify in a revolution, in every sign
and in every triplicity (if he were the Lord of the Year), and in every
house (whether he were the Lord of the Year or not)
If Jupiter were the Lord of the Year and were in Aries or in its triplicity,
it signifies the appearance of religions in the eastern parts which the sign
(in which he is) rules; and especially if he were in Aries it signifies their
appearance, and that of sects, and the observation of divine precepts and of
justice and good works in that revolution; and it signifies a multitude of
winds from the area of Khorasan, and the cold of winter, and rains (but not
exterminated),
[352]
 and the flooding of rivers, and the adaptation of
vineyards and trees, and that the storehouses [of grain] will be good.
And if Jupiter were then of good condition, and well disposed, it
signifies the multitude of substances for the citizens of the regions which
he were to rule, and the goodness of their condition, and their joy, and
gladness, and the delight of the common people or rustics toward the
wealthy and the nobles, and the magnates.
And Abū Ma’shar said if he were impeded, or of evil condition, it
signifies the contrary of those things which were said. And he said, know
that the workings in the matter of Jupiter, and the aspects of the planets
toward him, can be compared equally to the work in the matter of Saturn.
And he said Jupiter is the significator of the nobles, and judges, and
bishops, and consuls and the religious, and citizens of sects. And if he
were impeded, every detriment which is his, will be suffered. And he said
that if he were in the human signs, or the fiery ones, it will signify the
dejection of the wealthy, and the smallness of their donations, and their
observing of their rank, and their worries about their neighbors; and the
destruction of the kingdom of Babylon and of the Arabs, and the smallness
of substances and the desire for knowledge. And this will be over the
citizens of the cities which are in the division of the sign in which Jupiter
were to come down. And the practicing of lies in the broad swath of men,
139

=== Page 140 ===
with an assenting to evil and injury, and infirmities of the body, and the
weakness of acquisitions.
Chapter 78: On his location in Leo
And if he were in Leo, it signifies the cold of winter, and a multitude of
waters, and powerful and raging winds eradicating trees; and it signifies
the temperance of the air and its clarity in the last half of the winter, and
cold in its end, and intemperate rains in the spring more than usual; and a
scarcity of waters [and] springs, and a scarcity of fodder for animals
grazing in fields in the winter; and many coughs; and it signifies a fertile
year.
Chapter 79: On his location in Sagittarius
And if he were in Sagittarius, it signifies the proper mixture of the air in
the beginning of winter, and cold in its middle, and in its end, severe
winds; and snow and ice in the spring, and southern winds, and a multitude
of fodder for field animals, and the impediment of vineyards from snow
and cold, and a scarcity of fruit, and the impediment of trees.
Indeed if his latitude were northern, it signifies the good complexion of
the air, and a scarcity of rains. And if his latitude were southern, it
signifies the corruption of the winds, and their severity.
And if he were oriental, it signifies joy and happiness, and the good
condition of wealthy and great men, and the nobles, and their joy and
happiness, and that they will be [engaged] in games and dancing. And Abū
Ma’shar said if he were occidental, it signifies the loftiness of the wise and
the wealthy and the nobles.
And if he were retrograde, it signifies impediment in the sea; nor will it
be wholly safe to sail. And if he were direct, it signifies a multitude of
fishes and of animals spending time in water, and their health.
Chapter 80: What Jupiter would signify in every revolution of the
year, whether of the world or a nativity or a question, whether he is
the Lord of the Year or not
And if Jupiter (in a revolution or nativity or question) were in the first, if
140

=== Page 141 ===
it were a revolution of a year of the world, it signifies in that year that
[people] will show respect, one to another, according to how it will be
fitting to show respect to everyone according to his condition; and they
will observe honesty and beauty, and cleanliness and faith, and religion,
and will spend their time in instruction and reason, and the purpose of their
intention will be to be engaged in those things which pertain to the
salvation of souls, unless Saturn and Mars were to work to the contrary.
And [these things] will happen to men whom pre-eminence is suited, and
the like. If however it were a nativity or question, or their revolution, it
signifies something else for the native or querent.
Indeed if he were in the second, it signifies their eagerness and
intention to aggregate money, and in their accumulation and
attainment; and this with the restraint of a good and licit and fitting
mind.
And if he were in the third, it signifies good fortune from one brother
to another, and between them; and men will rejoice because of their
relatives, and especially younger ones, and first or older sisters.
But if he were in the fourth, he signifies the increase of the goods of
many men from what is left behind by the dead, and from
inheritances and estates, or from hidden or unexpected treasures, and
from ancient things; and griefs will be taken away from men, and
often things about which they could be happy and rejoice will happen
to them, and evil and sad thoughts will be taken away from them;
even quarrels and every horrible thing will cease.
Indeed if he were in the fifth, it signifies an increase in children, and
their good condition, and that there will not be abortions in that year,
except perhaps some chance ones. And it signifies success because of
them, and honest matters will come to be which merit praise. And it
signifies the good condition of the wealthy and magnates, and of the
nobles, and the usefulness of things about which men have trust in the
good.
But if he were in the sixth, he signifies good and profit in quadrupeds,
and especially in small ones (like sheep and the like); and he signifies
the health of persons, and a scarcity of infirmities, except for in the
regions and places naturally infirm (however, infirmities will be
141

=== Page 142 ===
decreased in them). And it signifies usefulness from male and female
slaves, and the obedience of male and female servants
.

If however he were in the seventh, it signifies usefulness and good
and joy from the direction of women and marriage or marriage
celebrations, and good from the direction of partners, and their
faithfulness; and it even signifies victory over enemies from that
region; and even for a native or querent.
Indeed if he were in the eighth, it signifies the general taking away of
evil, death, and suspicion in that region, if it were a revolution of a
year of the world. If however it were a revolution of a nativity or
question, it signifies the evil condition of the native or querent, which
will come to him because of enemies; and that he himself will fall
into their hands unless he watches himself well; and that burdens and
impediment will follow from thence. However, ultimately it will be
ended in an end that must be borne. And he will not be evil, or rather
he could be praised in a certain manner.
And if he were in the ninth, it signifies profitable journeys, and
especially long and useful ones in that year, and that there will be
faith between men, and honesty and good; and there will be dreams,
and often true ones; and the course of the dreams will take place
according to the nature of the planet who is being separated from
Jupiter then, or from whom he may be separated, if he were separated
from one; and the dreams will have to be laid out in that revolution
according to the nature of the significations; and this can even play a
role in other dreams.
Indeed if he were in the tenth, it signifies the accumulation of
substances, and their collection, and men will strive to be praised, and
those who must be praised will be praised according to his condition,
and honesty will reside among them.
If however he were in the eleventh, it signifies praise and good
reputation from the direction of friends, and that men will rejoice, and
they will be in gladness; and a good effecting and profiting in matters
about which men will have trust, and about which they hope for good.
Indeed if he were in the twelfth, it signifies impediments which will
142

=== Page 143 ===
occur from the direction of servitude; and it signifies poverty and
need; and it signifies the burdens which will take place from the
direction of slaves, and on the occasion of them; and even from the
direction of the servitude into which men fall; and they will be
saddened by accidents which will come to them on the occasion of
quadrupeds, and especially large animals like horses, cows, and the
like.
Chapter 81: What Mars would signify if he were the Lord of the Year,
in any triplicity and in each sign; and in each house, whether he is the
Lord of the Year or not
However, if Mars were the Lord of the Year and were in Aries or in its
triplicity, it signifies powerful winds and many and varied mutations of the
air in the eastern parts. It even signifies pains of the eyes, and a scarcity of
rains; and it signifies war in the same parts, and the overflowing of
the
annona
. It even signifies evil and anger and injury and quarrels that are
going to be in the same parts, in the cities in which he rules, and those
which are in the division of Aries. And it signifies victory in war for the
citizens of those cities and the inhabitants of that region, over their
enemies who have come from other parts to these in order to harm them;
and [the enemies’] flight; and it signifies their [own] and their king’s
engagement in martial things; and that fathers and more aged people will
teach and instruct their children, and other young men, in the struggles and
exercise of wars.
And if Mars were then of good condition, it signifies victory for the
citizens or inhabitants of the aforesaid (or for their king) over their
enemies; and that they will beat them and all who will have contended
with them; and it signifies the greatness of [the king’s] heart, and [that he
is] quick in will and quickly changeable, and [quick] in apprehending
things. It even signifies that his own rustics and subjects will love and
revere him, and each of them will obey him according to his own
condition.
And if Mars were the Lord of the Year, and the Lord of the Ascendant,
and he were of good condition, not impeded, it signifies that there will be
fertility in that same year, and it will be a rainy year, and there will be
pestilences and earthquakes; and this will be moderate. And there will be
joy and happiness in that same year, and workers and bearers of arms will
struggle and will find good; and there will be war and contention close to
143

=== Page 144 ===
the king of that region.
If however he were of bad condition, it signifies he will rarely beat his
own enemies, and that it will be enough for them if they can protect
themselves from them–or rather it seems more likely that the enemies will
beat or overcome them. And it signifies that the king will not be very
stable over the things which he ought to be engaged in, and especially over
the nobles, and useful and just things; nor will he keep his own secrets
well, but rather he will reveal them; and he will exercise his operations in
martial matters more so than in others.
And if his latitude were northern, it signifies the heat of the air, and the
scarcity of rains. If however his latitude were southern, it signifies
thunderings, flashings, and lightnings.
And if he were oriental, it signifies wars that are going to fall between
the wealthy, magnates, and nobles. And if he were occidental, it signifies
confusions and fears that are going to come to men.
And if he were retrograde, it signifies infirmities of the eyes, and of the
entire human body. And if he were direct, it signifies a multitude of
hypocrites who appear in the clothing of sheep, but inwardly they will be
rapacious wolves.
Chapter 82: If Mars were in Leo
If however he were in Leo, it signifies wars and contentions, and a
scarcity of the
annona
 in the eastern parts; and there will be death in men,
and especially in young adults from 40 years to 50 years (however in boys
it will be stronger).
And if his latitude were northern, it signifies a scarcity of waters. If
however his latitude were southern, it signifies a multitude of waters from
springs and rivers.
And if he were oriental, it signifies the impediment of animals and the
like, which men use. And if he were occidental, it signifies a scarcity of
fishes; and the death of animals spending time in water.
And if he were retrograde, it signifies impediment and trouble which
will fall among the wealthy and magnates. And if he were direct, it
signifies the blowing of the western winds; and ships at sea will be safe.
Chapter 83: If Mars were in Sagittarius
144

=== Page 145 ===
And if Mars were in Sagittarius, it signifies a war that is going to be in
the western parts; and that there will be little power in those parts; and
there will be an evil impediment and death in the habitations of those
regions, and in those doing business; and there will be infirmities and
coughing and pains of the eyes; and there will be intestinal worms killing
boys, and even wounding others; and it signifies a scarcity of rains; and
that cold will be generated in its own seasons, so that because of it trees
and herbs and the
annona
 will be devastated; and bees will suffer
detriment in that revolution.
Which if he were well disposed, namely made fortunate and strong, it
signifies the good condition of those responsible for wars, and their
advisors, and bearers of arms, because of fighting battles and those
fighting battles; and [the good condition] of those who seek injustice, and
cutters of roads, just as those who work by these [methods] think their
condition is good.
And Abū Ma’shar said that if Mars were in the human signs, like
Gemini, Virgo, Libra, the last half of Sagittarius, and Aquarius, it signifies
a multitude of wars and battles; and that men will rise up against their own
king. It even signifies sudden death, and tertian fevers, and other strong
and severe fevers, and a multitude of infirmities; even a multitude of
cutters of roads, and the shedding of men’s blood; and burning fires and
lightning bolts.
Indeed if he were badly disposed, it signifies [that] the malice of all the
aforesaid [will be] more serious, and worse, and more harmful–unless
Jupiter were to work to the contrary.
Indeed if his latitude were northern, it signifies the goodness of the air,
and its excellent [or beautiful] disposition. And if his latitude were
southern, it signifies the wealth of those doing business [or negotiators],
and the excellence of their wealth.
And if he were oriental, it signifies peace and rest, and security; and
wars will be few or practically none. And if he were occidental, it signifies
the health [or saving] of trees, and a multitude of fruit.
But if he were retrograde, it signifies coughing that is going to come to
men, and pains in the rear parts of the head. If however he were direct, it
signifies pestilences that are going to come to animals which live next to
the seashore.
Chapter 84: On another wicked signification of Mars
[353]
145

=== Page 146 ===
One must even consider, in a revolution of a year of the world, whether
Mars is in Gemini or not. For if Mars were in Gemini in a revolution of the
year, and Gemini were the 9
th
 house [domicile?], and the inferior planets
were to follow him,
[354]
 it signifies the Roman Church is going to take up
a temporal sword in that year, and that it will wield it; and it will strive for
the shedding of the blood of Christians, both of the innocent and the guilty.
[Mars in the houses or domiciles]
[355]
If Mars were in the first in a revolution of the year (whether he were the
Lord of the Year or not), whatever kind of revolution it was, whether of
the world, or a nativity–or it is a nativity or question–it signifies something
horrible (and sorrow and fears, and contrarieties and contentions) is going
to come to men, or to a native or querent, in that year; and men will strive
to take away substance, namely one from the other; and [to take] things
which do not pertain to them, with skill and cleverness, [and] not in a
praiseworthy way.
And if he were in the second, it likewise signifies the taking away of
substance by injustice, and without reason;
[356]
 and it will be
poverty and need inducing them to do it; and household members and
ministers will be thrown into confusion against their masters (or those
with whom they live or stay). Certain people wanted to say that Mars
in the second is not to be denounced, for they said that he signifies
mercantile dealings. But I have not found this to be proven, that I
remember.
And if he were in the third, it signifies that anger and hatred, and
enmity, and contrariety and contention, is going to fall between
brothers and lesser blood-relatives; and that many of them will kill
each other on trifling pretexts; and more strongly so if the 3
rd
 house
were Capricorn or Aquarius. And Abū Ma’shar said if the 3
rd
 house
were of the domiciles of Venus, it signifies joy from brothers and
sisters. And if it were of the domiciles of Jupiter, it signifies a
multitude of substances, and the acquisitions of those doing business.
And if it were of the domiciles of Saturn, it signifies the robbing
[357]
of the dead placed in tombs; and the undermining of walls, and the
taking away of other things by means of robbery. And it signifies
men’s engagement in making money; and in extorting money
wherever they can by means of illicit domination and by false
146

=== Page 147 ===
attestations, and by malicious and fraudulent words; and men will
suffer dangers and tribulations. And if it were the domicile of the
Moon, it signifies robberies and the undermining of walls so they may
be robbed, and they will pilfer by a wicked deed; and robbers will be
safe and bold in stealing. For they will steal in public and in places of
doing business, not to mention at night, but even in the day. And if it
were the domicile of the Sun, it signifies the cutters and cutting of
roads; and pillaging in villages, and sometimes in cities and in other
habitations; and even of those staying at inns, [and it signifies] public
speakers and pilgrims. And Abū Ma’shar said, know that this is a
peculiar feature of Mars among the rest of the planets.
And if he were in the fourth, it signifies death and ruin from illness;
and killing by swords; and the shedding of blood, and its suspicion
(and these things will come to an end in the south, from whatever
direction they aspect, and in Khorasan); and from an extended
tribulation; however the beginning of them will be more from the
north.
And if he were in the fifth, it signifies that there will be fornications
in that year, and that many children will be born from them, of which
more will be considered legitimate when they are adulterous, from
which their parents will profit little or nothing; but the sustenance [or
provisions] of men will be suitable in that year.
And if he were in the sixth, it signifies hot illnesses, like hot fevers,
and dry ones which will be motivated by corrupted blood, and from
cholera that is going to some into men in that revolution. It even
signifies griefs and sorrows which will arrive because of male and
female slaves, and servants, and by other causes which are signified
by the 6
th
 house.
And if he were in the seventh, it signifies contentions and
contrarieties, and confusion in all matters, and harm for this reason.
And it signifies business transactions with fraud and deception; also
grief and sorrow in it.
And if he were in the eighth, [it signifies] acquisition from the
substances of the dead for some men, and this both in the revolutions
of nativities or questions, and also in their questions, and in the
147

=== Page 148 ===
revolutions of the years of the world; and justice will come to be for
those acquiring them for this reason; and they will lose them after
their acquisition; and they will fall into poverty and need; and it
signifies death and mutilation, or the loss of limbs (namely hands and
feet); and they will fall into disgrace and very shameful and
reprehensible accusations.
And if he were in the ninth, it signifies the destruction of the status of
the religious; it even signifies the seeking of horses and arms for the
sake of making war and doing battle; and men will likewise seek
wars; and they will strive to pitch camp and go into the army. And it
signifies drinking bouts and drunkenness, and lack of self control by
dishonest and illicit people; and men will be very unfaithful, and liars,
and will strive to relate their dreams [to others], and relate them with
lies.
And if he were in the tenth, it signifies tribulation is going to come to
the rustics and common people from the direction of the king or the
wealthy and powerful; and it signifies the wounds and blows of
swords and whips, and distress from them, and prison, and the want
or need of sustenance. And it signifies wars and contentions over
matters which do not belong to those who seek them, nor pertain to
them.
And if he were in the eleventh, it signifies a scarcity of wealth or
profit in matters concerning which usefulness is hoped; and that they
will fall into the enmity of their friends; and it signifies the
destruction of substance; and men will lose hope over matters in
which trust was had, and about which it was hoped–likewise [for] a
native or querent.
And if he were in the twelfth, it signifies skills in thievery, and in
things similar to these; and laziness and delay in these things which
they ought to and are able to do; the destruction of the substances of
men; and it signifies grief and sorrow is going to come because of
large animals, both the ones that are ridden, and those which are not
ridden, unless God averts it.
Chapter 85: On Mars in Taurus–what he would signify
148

=== Page 149 ===
And if Mars were in Taurus or in its triplicity, those things which are
signified will appear in the southern parts, and especially if he were in
Taurus. For then it signifies strong winds are going to come, and the
destruction of fruits which are in the places from which they ought to be
collected; likewise [the destruction] of trees, and this because of heat
exceeding the required and natural measure. It even signifies a multitude
of clouds and cloudy weather; also rains and thunder and lightnings.
And Abū Ma’shar said it signifies the death of women and cows; and it
signifies wars are going to come between the citizens of the east and the
citizens of the west. It even signifies pains of the eyes, and more of the left
ones than the right ones; and it will abound more in women than in men;
nor will the cultivation of lands be very useful; and there will be a scarcity
of
the
annona
.
And if his latitude were northern, it signifies a multitude of rains and the
goodness of herbs, and usefulness from them. And if his latitude were
southern, it signifies a multitude of northern winds.
And if he were oriental, it signifies there is going to be peace in that
revolution, in the parts of Babylon and in the western parts, and the
security of their citizens. And if he were occidental, it signifies a multitude
of infirmities and death.
And if he were retrograde, it signifies the infirmities of boys. And Abū
Ma’shar said if he were direct, it signifies the hatred of women.
Chapter 86: On Mars, if he were in Virgo
And if Mars were in Virgo, it signifies battles, and sheddings of blood in
the parts of the north, and it even signifies pains of the eyes, and the
abundance of the
annona
 and wine and butter. And Abū Ma’shar said [it
signifies] mortality in women.
And if his latitude were northern, it signifies impediment in the bodies
of men; and seeds and harvest will suffer detriments. And if his latitude
were southern, then it signifies the salvation of seeds.
And if he were oriental, it signifies the death of old men. And if
occidental, it signifies the blowing of winds in the parts of Spain.
And if he were retrograde, it signifies battles are going to come between
men. And if he were direct, it signifies the honesty and good condition of
wealthy and great men.
149

=== Page 150 ===
Chapter 87: On Mars in Capricorn
And if Mars were in Capricorn, it signifies wars and pillaging, and
tribulations, death in young men. Likewise tremors are going to come in
the eastern parts. And it even signifies rains in the same parts, and the
multiplication of the
annona
 and butter and oil. And the aforesaid wars
will be between the citizens of the east and the citizens of the west.
And if his latitude were northern, it signifies a multitude of snow in the
required and usual seasons. And his latitude were southern, it signifies the
heat of the air, and its darkness, in its own seasons.
And if he were oriental, it signifies the killing of the Emperor of the
Romans;
[358]
 and more strongly so if the Moon (since she is naturally [the
Emperor’s] significatrix) were in the 8
th
 or joined to the Lord of the 8
th
, or
Mars himself were in an angle, wherever she were joined to him. And
more strongly again, if she were joined with him in the 8
th
, or the Lord of
the 8
th
 were to aspect her from the opposition or square aspect. And again
more strongly so, and infallibly, if there were mutual reception between
them (or at least the Moon were to receive the Lord of the 8
th
); nor could
Jupiter work to the contrary, for only God could avert this. And if [Mars]
were occidental, it signifies blisters, also carbuncles, and similar things
that are going to befall the bodies of men.
And if he were retrograde, it signifies the scarcity of the
annona
. And if
he were direct, it signifies an abundance of wine and oil.
Chapter 88: On Gemini and its triplicity
And if Mars were in Gemini or in its triplicity, it signifies that whatever
he were to signify, the arrival of those signified things will be in the
western parts. But if he were in Gemini, it signifies [that] impediment is
going to befall men because of thunders and lightnings, and a scarcity of
rains, and the severity of heat and its harmfulness. And there will be wars
and contentions and robberies in the northern parts; and the king of [those
parts] will be exalted in that revolution, and they will have victory over
their enemies. And there will be pains of the ears, and likewise blisters,
carbuncles, and the like.
And if his latitude were northern, it signifies a multitude of rains. And if
his latitude were southern, it signifies a scarcity of waters, springs and
rivers.
150

=== Page 151 ===
And if he were oriental, it signifies a multitude of blisters and the like;
and if he were occidental, it signifies the impediment of conciliators and
scribes and judges, and [the impediment] of cavalry commanders, and their
hiding and flight.
And if he were retrograde, it signifies the dissent of the religious, and
their diversity and sects. And if he were direct, it signifies that men will
uncover secret things, both their own and others’, nor will they keep them
[secret].
Chapter 89: If Mars were in Libra
And if Mars were in Libra, it signifies winds are going to come, and
infirmities and mortality in the cities or regions which are in the division
of Libra. And this will be stronger in men than in women. And Abū
Ma’shar said if Mars were there it signifies rains and winds, also clouds
and fog [or mists]. It even signifies that there will be infirmity and
mortality in the southern parts; and there will be a middling amount of
wind and butter and oil. And thieves and cutters of roads will be
multiplied, and there will be quarrels and evils between men; and there
will be fears and tremblings or terrors in them.
And if his latitude were northern, it signifies lightning bolts and
flashings which will come and appear in that year or in that revolution.
And if his latitude were southern, it signifies illnesses in men on the left
side.
And if he were oriental, it signifies there are going to be wars and
contentions between wealthy and great men. And if he were occidental, it
signifies the salvation of the wealthy and magnates, and writers of letters
and the wise.
And if he were retrograde, it signifies illnesses are going to come to
wealthy and great men, and to writers, and judges and the wise. And if he
were direct, it signifies the wills of the wealthy and great men or the
nobles, will differ amongst themselves.
Chapter 90: If Mars were in Aquarius
And if Mars were in Aquarius, it signifies burdens and tribulations that
are going to come to men in that revolution; and snows will be abundant,
and rains, and cold, in their own seasons. And the
annona
 and wine and
151

=== Page 152 ===
butter will be decreased in the western parts, and in the land which is said
to belong to businessmen;
[359]
 and it signifies the death or the change of
the king or ruler of that region in which you were to revolve the year. And
Abū Ma’shar said if Venus were then to aspect the Ascendant, and she
were northern, it signifies a good springtime; but the wine will be of a
middling amount.
And if his latitude were northern, it signifies a multitude of snows and
cold in their own seasons, and in the usual regions; and locusts in its own
season. And if his latitude were southern, it signifies the darkness of the
air, and its thickness, and the severity of the heat.
And if he were oriental, it signifies the good condition of the wealthy
and great men, and the nobles; and their joy and happiness. It [also]
signifies a multitude of boughs.
[360]
And if he were retrograde, it signifies the severity of heat, and that
impediment will fall upon trees for that reason. And if he were direct, it
signifies the impediment of trees and a case of vermin in them (and more
strongly so if the Head of the Dragon were there, or in Gemini).
Chapter 91: On Mars in Cancer and its triplicity
And if Mars, in the revolution of the year, were in Cancer or its triplicity
(and especially in Cancer), the appearance of the things which he would
signify will be in the northern parts. But in Cancer it signifies shipwrecks
happening suddenly, from a strong and sudden blowing of winds; and it
signifies quarreling and contention and war in the western parts; and men
will be oppressed because of rendering tributes, and there will be fevers
and other illnesses, and there will be pains of the throat and chest; and heat
will be oppressive, and rain will be decreased. And Abū Ma’shar said it
will be a dangerous year, and there will be a middling amount of oil and
butter or fat; and it even signifies the death of quadrupeds (but more of
horses).
And if his latitude were northern, it signifies the severity of the frost in
its own season, and a scarcity of waters from springs. And if his latitude
were southern, it signifies winds are going to come upon, and impediment
is going to befall, trees.
And if he were oriental, it signifies pestilences are going to befall
grazing animals. And if he were occidental, it signifies the worry and
concern of the vulgar or rustics and common people about their own
particular business matters.
152

=== Page 153 ===
And if he were retrograde, it signifies lasciviousness, and that men will
love and be eager for venereal cultivations, and they will fornicate, and the
like. But if he were direct, it signifies the good disposition of the air, and
its fineness and clarity.
Chapter 92: On Mars in Scorpio
And if Mars were in Scorpio, it signifies a multitude of clouds, and the
severity of the cold in winter, and the distemper of heat in the summer, and
the severity of
the
annona
 for that reason, and even [the oppression] of
trees. And there will be pains of the eyes, and robberies and cutters of
roads will be multiplied, and there will be wars and pains, and other
infirmities in young men. And there will be a scarcity of wine and butter
and fat; and these things will happen more in the northern parts.
And if he were in Scorpio and his latitude were northern, it signifies the
scarcity of waters. And if his latitude were southern, it signifies a
multitude of waters from springs.
And if he were oriental, it signifies a multitude of the infirmities that
befall men, and especially in the lower parts of the belly. And if he were
occidental, it signifies a scarcity of men’s piety toward one another.
And Abū Ma’shar said if he were retrograde, it signifies good in that
revolution, and a multitude of business transactions (however, with
trembling and fear). And he said if he were direct, it signifies much taking
of the
census
 and the destruction of the houses in which the wealthy keep
their substances.
[361]
Chapter 93: If Mars were in Pisces
And if Mars were in Pisces, it signifies a multitude of snow and rain,
and there will be mortality in the southern parts, and more fishes will be
caught in that revolution than usual; and more kingdoms will be taken
apart, and it signifies the killing of kings and magnates and the wealthy
and nobles (namely those who are fit for a kingdom). A scarcity of the
annona
 is even signified, and wine will suffer detriment and destruction.
And therefore there will be much less than men would hope for. And
flying animals that impede will suffer detriment, like flies and
gadflies
[362]
 and the like. And Abū Ma’shar said if Venus
[363]
 were to
aspect the Ascendant of the year, death will abound in men, and pains of
153

=== Page 154 ===
the eyes, and thunders and lightnings will be multiplied; and she will break
the badness of the fruits of the earth, and they will begin to increase.
And if his latitude were northern, it signifies the goodness of the air and
its fineness or purity. And if his latitude were southern, it signifies an
abundance of locusts (but they will hardly impede).
And if he were oriental, it signifies the killing of wealthy and great men.
And if he were occidental, it signifies infirmities that are going to befall
male and female slaves, and in male and female servants and in low-class
persons.
And Abū Ma’shar said if he were retrograde, it signifies the salvation
and the wealth of those doing business. And if he were direct, it signifies
the guarding and saving of sheep and small quadrupeds, and of male and
female slaves, and male and female servants, and low-class persons.
Those wise in this profession, and particularly our most reverend
predecessor Abū Ma’shar, did not care to record [the meanings of] the
latitudes except for the three superior planets’, because he did not find
proven truth in the other cases as he did with them. Therefore Abū
Ma’shar said that he sometimes found error in [those of the inferiors]; but
in no way in the superiors; whence he admonishes us to be focused on the
latitudes of the superiors, and not the inferiors.
Chapter 94: On the Sun, if he were the Lord of the Year–what he
would signify
However, if the Sun were the Lord of the Year or Revolution, and he
were well disposed and of good condition (namely made fortunate and
strong, free from impediments), it signifies the sublimities and exaltations
of kings, and glory and honor, and its seeking; and that the king of that
region will be exalted; and he will be worried about the increase of his
kingdom–and not merely the king, but even anyone according to his own
condition and according to his own nature or birth for the purpose of
increasing his own status; and it signifies their usefulness and success; and
that they will turn their faces away from matters displeasing to God, and
from injuries, and from dishonest matters. It even signifies the good
condition of the wealthy and magnates and nobles; and [the good
condition] of those to whom honor is owed by men.
And if he were the Lord of the Year and the Lord of the Ascendant, and
he were free from the malefics, Abū Ma’shar said kings will rejoice and
they will have happiness and security; and the
annona
 and quadrupeds and
154

=== Page 155 ===
birds will be increased; and everything over which the Sun has
signification. If however he were impeded, it signifies the impediment of
all of the aforesaid. And he said if Mercury were with Saturn or were to
aspect him, and were a participant with him and were to receive
disposition from him in different climes, the harvests and the rustics will
suffer detriment; and robbers will be multiplied, and fear will enter in upon
men, and especially in those who are of the nature of Mercury, or [in]
those for whom he was the significator; and animals will be decreased in
the land of the west, or in the land of the Arabs, if [Mercury] were in the
figure of the quadrupedal signs, according to the substance of that sign.
And he said, look in addition to the luminary whose authority it was:
because if it were made fortunate and in increased light and number, and
were not impeded, it will repel a great impediment, and prohibit one from
a malefic. If however there were an impediment by one of the aforesaid
impediments in the hour of the revolution, the aforesaid will suffer
detriment and great impediment; and there will be infirmities in the rustics
or the common people. And these things will happen more strongly and
terribly if it were in signs of men (which are Gemini, Virgo, Libra, the first
half of Sagittarius, and Aquarius) and the authority were the Moon’s; or if
it were her own and [the Sun] were in Libra. And if it were in Taurus or
Capricorn, it signifies the oppression of horses, cows, bulls, and gazelles.
[364]
 And if it were in Cancer, Scorpio or Pisces, aquatic things will be
oppressed. And these judgments have a place in revolutions of the years of
the world, in proportion as they pertain to revolutions.
And if one of the malefics were to impede him, look to the malefic
himself, and see in which signs he is, and in which house: because the
impediment will be according to the significations of the house and sign in
which he is.
And if the Sun were made fortunate, and one of the benefics were to
aspect him, it signifies the good condition and the good disposition of all
the aforesaid. For where it signifies evil, when he is impeded, there it
signifies good when he is freed. And where falsity, it will signify truth
concerning the same things; where injustice, there justice; where
depression, there exaltation; where need, there abundance. And
concentrate your mind so that you understand this well, lest you fall into
error concerning them.
And Abū Ma’shar said if the Sun were in Aries or its triplicity, it will be
in the eastern part.
And if the Sun were of good condition in his own place, it signifies the
rectitude of the wealthy, and their justice and their achievement, and
155

=== Page 156 ===
victory over their enemies, and over those who contend with him. And he
said, if indeed he were of bad condition in his own place, it signifies the
appearance of the wealthy and great men; and the scarcity of their
achievement over their enemies, and the fall of their honor in those cities.
And he said, if it were in Taurus or its triplicity,
[365]
 the appearance of
their comings (which I spoke of) will be from the parts of the south and
from the cities which that sign rules; and that which belongs to it from the
substance of the earth, seeds, and trees. And he said if he were in Gemini
or its triplicity, it signifies the appearance of those things (of the events
which I said), and in all those things which belong to it concerning high
matters, will be in the parts of the west. And he said if he were in Cancer
or its triplicity, the appearance of those things (of the events), will be in the
parts of the north, of the animals which are signified by it.
And he said the operation in the matter of the Sun in the aspect of the
planets to him will be just like the operation in the matter of Saturn in this,
equally concerning good and evil.
Chapter 95: What the Sun would signify in every house in a revolution
of years, nativities, and years of the world, and in nativities, whether
he is the Lord of the Year or not
If the Sun were in Aries or in the first in the revolution of a nativity or a
year of the world, it signifies the preeminence and sublimity and greatness
of the matters of the native, and the same in a revolution; likewise in a
revolution of the years of the world it signifies the status and increase of
the good of the citizens of the revolution in which the year were revolved
(unless Saturn and Mars, or either of them, were to work to the contrary,
and [the Sun] were appearing
[366]
 maliciously).
And if he were in the second, it signifies delight between men, and
their proper condition; however there will be some deformities in the
eyes.
And in the third, it signifies the mutation from one region into
another, and that the king of that region will perfect his own matters,
and [those] of his own subjects for the good and in a good direction;
likewise a native his own matters from the direction of the king.
However, in the fourth, it signifies praise between men, and their
156

=== Page 157 ===
sublimity and honor. And matters will appear which had long stood
hidden nor appeared. And it even signifies the discovery of treasures
or their aggregation or acquisition.
In the fifth, however, it signifies the change of the status of many men
because of children; and a native will change his own status because
of his own children; and that he will be revered by the common
people; and the common people will revere those greater than they,
and they will honor them; there will even be joy because of
donations.
Indeed in the sixth, it signifies infirmities and detriments because of
slaves and other people who are signified by the 6
th
 house, and that the
rustics or the ignoble will envy those greater than they (and likewise
for a native).
And in the seventh, it signifies contrariety which will happen to the
vulgar from noble or great men or kings. Likewise these same things
will happen to a native.
In the eighth, it signifies the depression of the wealthy and of great
men or nobles, and the powerful, and their destruction and death and
reproach.
In the ninth, it signifies the good disposition of men’s minds toward
one another, and in thoughts pleasing to God, and in those things
which pertain to faith.
In the tenth, it signifies the honor of kings and their exaltation, and
their glory and advancement.
In the eleventh, it signifies men’s joy and happiness because of
friends and mutual love between them, and [because of] things about
which trust in the good is had (likewise this will happen to a native
from these things); and good from great men who are below kings.
Indeed in the twelfth, it signifies the destruction and depression of the
wealthy and magnates, also nobles–and their death; and the taking
away of their dignities, and injuries to them that are going to be
introduced by the ignoble; and it signifies contrarieties which will
157

=== Page 158 ===
happen to a native from his enemies, and even from others (and more
from low-class people than from great men).
Chapter 96: On Venus, if she were the Lady of the Year–what she
would signify
If Venus were the Lady of the Year, and of good condition and well
disposed, it signifies the good disposition and good condition of women,
both of adults and girls, both of ones corrupted and virgins, and likewise
eunuchs. And if she were the Lady of the Year and Lady of the Ascendant,
and were free from impediments and from the malefics, it signifies a year
of security and rest, and matters will be appropriate. There will be good in
honors, and justice, and abundance, and rectitude, and peace. If however
she were received, the rustics will find good from kings and the wealthy
and great men, and the rustics will love their king and obey him; and
marriage celebrations will be multiplied, and there will be joy and gladness
in women.
If however she were impeded, it signifies little good in that year, and
there will be earthquakes in diverse lands, because of which buildings will
fall; and there will be war, even if [only] a medium-sized one; and the king
of that region will be saddened. And these things will happen in the
deputed region and her clime. Indeed if she were impeded in the hour of
the revolution, it signifies impediment and the bad condition of all of the
aforesaid.
And Abū Ma’shar said if she were in human signs, whatever belongs to
her in terms of men will be impeded. If she were in earthy signs, whatever
belongs to her in terms of the substance of the earth will be destroyed. If
she were in airy signs, whatever belongs to her in terms of the substance of
the air will be destroyed. If she were in a watery sign, whatever belongs to
her in terms of the substance of water will be destroyed. And he said if
there were a benefic instead of [an impeding] malefic, turn your opinion
around, and instead of evil say good; instead of injustice, justice. And he
said, also look to the planet impeding her, to see in what kind of sign it is,
and commingle them: and speak about him according to what was revealed
to you in the matter of Saturn.
Chapter 97: What Venus would signify in every house in a revolution
of the year, whether she were Lady of the Year or not
158

=== Page 159 ===
If Venus, in a revolution, were in the first, and of good condition and
well disposed, then it signifies that men and likewise a native will be in
delights and joys and enjoyments, and they will delight in edibles and
drinking bouts, and they will be eager for living in a beautiful way, both in
victuals and clothing, and in the appearance and displaying of clothing or
ornaments of the body, and the use of rings and necklaces, and the like;
and good-smelling things and the appearance of honest things, and in all
things in which men delight.
And if she were in the second, it signifies usefulness and acquisition
because of women, and from women, and success because of that
acquisition.
But if she were in the third, it signifies the forgetting of religion, and
that few men will care about it (and likewise a native); and lack of self-
control in venereal pursuits, and anger which they pursue because of that;
and that many bad deeds will be perpetrated from that, and that friends will
help friends to commit them.
Indeed if she were in the fourth, Abū Ma’shar said it signifies
undeserved grief and the sorrow of things from the direction of mothers,
and the end will be praiseworthy.
Indeed in the fifth, it signifies detriment because of children in the
beginning of the revolution, but it will be praised, and the end and grief
will be turned into joy.
However, in the sixth, Abū Ma’shar said it signifies infirmities and
tribulations from the direction of male and female slaves, and even from
mothers, and it signifies widowed [or bereft] women. Whence if the Lord
of the sixth were of good condition, it will be well for them, and
vice
versa
. And he said, the Lord of a question will not attain everything which
he seeks of things. And he said, if it were a question about a sick person,
he will be freed from his infirmity. And he said the reason for his
liberation will be according to what I put down for you in the matter of
Saturn in the beginning of the book. And he said, know that if a benefic
were in the house of infirmity, the infirmity will be alleviated; but if a
malefic were there, it will grow worse.
And he said if she were in the seventh it signifies marriage and joy from
the direction of women, and from every quaesited matter by participation.
[367]
 And every matter which he wished, will be accomplished for him.
Indeed in the eighth, it signifies the death of older partners and mothers
and nursemaids.
However in the ninth, it signifies the change of the religious from one
159

=== Page 160 ===
residence to another, and the truth of dreams. And it signifies faraway
pilgrimages.
Indeed in the tenth, it signifies joy from the king and from the direction
of the king.
Indeed in the eleventh, it signifies joy and happiness from good things
which happen to them, and trust and good hope from the direction of
friends, and good fortune from them.
But if she were in the twelfth, it signifies tribulation and enmity from
women, and often from low-class women (likewise it will happen from [or
because of] the native).
Chapter 98: What Venus would signify in every sign in a revolution
[Aries]
If Venus were in Aries in a revolution, and she were Lady of the Year
and of good condition, namely made fortunate and strong, free from
impediments, it signifies the good condition of the wealthy and of
magnates and nobles; it even signifies the good mixture of the air and its
peace in the eastern parts; and it signifies soft and temperate rains, not
harmful ones, and the extinction of wars in those parts; and the good
condition of the Arabs; and an abundance of their supplies [or provisions],
and calm between men, and rest and tranquility and games and dancing in
the lands which are in the division of Aries; and the engaging of their
citizens in venereal matters. If however she were impeded, it signifies
impediment, namely that she will not do good things, nor would she be
able to resist the malefics [or evils].
[Leo]
But if she were in Leo, it signifies the extinction of wars and
contentions, or at least their mitigation and weakness, and mortalities in
the parts of the east; and there will be gladnesses and delights in venereal
matters, and especially in the wealthy and magnates and the nobles (unless
Mars were to work to the contrary).
[Sagittarius]
And if she were in Sagittarius, and well disposed, it signifies quiet and
160

=== Page 161 ===
tranquility, and the extinction of wars in the parts of the west, and in the
land of the Arabs; and the goodness and salvation of the bodies of the
citizens of those regions; and the wealth of their businessmen, and the
health of their children (unless Mars were to work to the contrary). And
rains will be abundant somewhat more than what they ought to be; the cold
of their winter will be tempered; and their honey and wine will bring
profit, and it signifies the little wealth of bearers of arms in those parts
(unless Mars were to oppress Venus, or she were otherwise very impeded
or badly disposed).
[Taurus]
And if Venus were in Taurus in a revolution of the year, and of good
condition, it signifies the appearance of those things which she signified in
the parts of the south, generally speaking; they will even appear in the
areas of Jerusalem, and in the right-hand side of the east, or in the land of
the Turks, and in the land of the Romans.
[368]
 It even signifies winds that
are going to come in those parts (however not harmful ones); and the
saving of the fruits of the trees; and this will happen because of
[369]
 her
benign nature. And it signifies the goodness of the air, and the salvation of
women and cows in those parts; even the salvation of the
annona
; and
likewise the citizens of the lands will be useful (unless Mars were to work
to the contrary, or she were impeded or badly disposed).
[Virgo]
And if she were in Virgo, and were well disposed, it signifies tranquility
and a good condition in the northern parts; and an abundance of wine and
the
annona
 and butter, and fat; nor will there by mortality in them unless
Mars were to work to the contrary.
[Capricorn]
And if Venus were in Capricorn, it signifies a scarcity of wars and
robberies and pillaging and cutting of roads and tribulations; and the
salvation [or good health] of young men; and a scarcity of rains in the parts
of the east and south; and an abundance of
annona
, wine and butter. And
there will be tranquility between the eastern and southern [parts]. But if
she were impeded or Mars worked to the contrary, her signification will be
abolished, nor would she be able to do good.
161

=== Page 162 ===
[Gemini]
And if Venus were in Gemini in a revolution of the year, and of good
condition, it signifies the appearance of the coming of her significations in
the parts of the west; likewise in the land of the Arabs and in the parts of
the north; and it signifies the salvation of men in those parts; and the fit
mixture of the air and rains; and the breaking up of wars and contrarieties;
and the increase of gladnesses in the northern parts.
[Libra]
And if Venus were in Libra, and of good condition and free from
impediments, it signifies the salvation of the citizens of the regions which
are in the division of Libra; and men will be saved more than women; and
it signifies the salvation of men in the southern parts (unless Saturn were
to work to the contrary); and there will be wine and butter and fat in those
parts; and robberies and the cutting of roads and pillaging and contentions
will be mitigated (unless Mars were to work to the contrary, or she were
impeded).
[Aquarius]
And if she were in Aquarius and of good condition and well disposed, it
signifies the good condition of men, and the taking away (or at least the
decrease) of burdens and tribulations which are going to come to men in
that revolution; and the decrease of snows and rains and cold in winter;
and the saving of the wine and butter in the parts of the west and in
Alexandria; and in the whole land which is said to be of those doing
business;
[370]
 and the safekeeping of the king of that region in which you
are revolving the year. Which if she were to aspect the Ascendant and she
were northern, it signifies a scarcity of wine–however the spring will be
good and useful and sweet (unless Mars were to work to the contrary, or
she were otherwise badly disposed).
[Cancer]
And if Venus were in Cancer in a revolution of the year, it signifies
there will be an appearance of those things which it signified in the
162

=== Page 163 ===
northern parts. It signifies the salvation of those sailing, and peace between
men in the western parts; and alleviation from things rendered and from
tributes, more so than usual; and there will be a diminution of fevers and
other illnesses, and heat will be diminished; and there will be rains; and
dangers that are going to come will be alleviated in that year or in the
revolution; likewise the death of quadrupeds [will be alleviated], and
especially that of horses (unless Mars were to work to the contrary, or she
were otherwise badly disposed).
[Scorpio]
And if she were in Scorpio, free from impediments, it signifies the
diminishment of clouds, and the good disposition of the air, and the
alleviation of the cold of winter, and of the heat of summer, and the
salvation of the
annona
 and trees. And illnesses will be decreased (and
particularly pains of the eyes), and especially in youths; and robberies and
the cutting of roads, and wars [will be decreased]; and wine and butter will
be saved; and these will happen more in the northern parts than in others.
[Pisces]
And if she were in Pisces, it signifies the diminishing of snows and
rains; and mortalities in the parts of the south; and the catching of fish; and
the kingdoms in their parts
[371]
 (and the wealthy and nobles and
magnates) will be saved; and the
annona
 will be saved so that it does not
suffer serious detriment (likewise wine). Which if she were impeded and
badly disposed, and were to aspect the Ascendant, it signifies thunders and
flashings, and death in men, and pains of the eyes; however, things born of
the earth will be increased (unless Saturn were to work to the contrary).
Chapter 99: On Mercury, if he were the Lord of the Year–what he
would signify
If Mercury were the Lord of the Year or Revolution, and of good
condition, and well disposed, free from impediments, it signifies the good
condition of those doing business, of the wise, and writers, and those of
great works, and arithmeticians, and of those using number by means of
teaching, and geometers; it even signifies the good condition of boys,
according to how he is joined with the planets. For if he were joined with a
163

=== Page 164 ===
masculine planet, this will happen in males; if with a feminine one, this
will happen in females; and better than this if the Lord of his own domicile
were to receive him.
But if he himself were the Lord of the Year, and he were the Lord of the
Ascendant, free from impediments,
[372]
 and one of the benefics were to
aspect him, men will find good from the king. And anyone will find good
from his own rulers; and he will be heard by them, and he will find honor
and praise and a good and praiseworthy status from them; and the year will
be useful for [these] said persons. If however he were impeded, nor were
he received, it signifies the contrary of what was said: because men will
find difficulties from kings and their rulers, and be pressed down by them;
and the year will be contrary to boys, the wise, and those doing business,
and the other aforesaid people.
And Abū Ma’shar said, if however a malefic were to aspect him in
addition, his condition will be destroyed from the position which I said.
And he said if the Moon were free from the malefics, rains and cold will
be multiplied, and legates will rejoice and find good; and better and more
dignified that that, if she were received: because then they will find a
position of dignity from a king or kings, and it will rain in its own season
when it is necessary. If however he were of a bad condition, and badly
disposed, it signifies the impediment and bad condition of the aforesaid,
and their evil disposition, of each one according to his position.
[373]
 If
however he were joined
[374]
 to masculine and feminine ones at the same
time, it signifies that this will happen generally in boys and girls. And Abū
Ma’shar said whatever belongs to him will suffer detriment from this.
Second, the the narration will be on those things which pertain to him, and
on the human, earthy, airy, and watery, and bestial figure [he is in]; also on
the aspect of the malefics and the benefics to him, and his being
clothed
[375]
 by them. And he said the narration of all of these will be in
the way I made clear to you equally so
[376]
 in the chapter on Saturn.
[Aries]
Which if he were in Aries or its triplicity (and especially in Aries), it
signifies an abundance of waters or much rain; and a scarcity of the
annona
 in the parts of the west, and the detriment of wine, and it signifies
there are going to be powerful winds in that revolution, and dew and fine
and soft clouds, and the death of boys, as I said. If however the Moon were
joined to him, it signifies a multitude of fishes. If however he were joined
to the Sun, it signifies an abundance of wine, and the salvation of women;
164

=== Page 165 ===
and more strongly so, if Mars and Venus were then with the Sun when
Mercury is joined to him. If however it were Saturn instead of Venus, it
signifies the multiplication of waters. Indeed, if Mars alone were with him,
it signifies pains of the eyes, and a multitude of battles and wars.
[Leo]
And if he were
[377]
 in Leo, it signifies the severity of the summer in its
own times, and [the severity] of the summer winds. And if he were beyond
the 10
th
 house, up to the 7
th
, it signifies impediments in that direction, and a
scarcity of the
annona
, but not one totally ruined. And if one of the
benefics were to aspect him, the malice will be abolished; and it signifies a
scarcity of wine and fat (however, dates will abound in the parts in which
they grew); and there will be pains of the eyes, and there will be death in
wolves and other quadrupeds living by preying.
And Abū Ma’shar said the condition of the nobles will worsen in
Khorasan.
[378]
 And the aspect of the malefics increases evil, and the
aspect of the benefics spares and restrains, with the aid of God.
[Sagittarius]
If however he were in Sagittarius, it signifies there are going to be
snows in that revolution, in their customary times, and a diversity of air
and its inconstancy, and the scarcity of the
annona
 and produce, trees, and
lands, and a scarcity of waters; however there will be wine and butter and
oil and fat, and there will be battles and wars in the parts of the west.
[Taurus]
Abū Ma’shar said if Mercury were in Taurus, it signifies a multitude of
waters, and the destruction of the harvests and the detriment of wine, and
this could happen because of the diversity of the air, and its diverse
alteration; and a scarcity of butter and oil or fat, and pains of the eyes from
the direction of the east, and the death of nobles (namely princes and great
men, or the wealthy), unless Jupiter and Venus were to work against it
(because if they were to aspect the Ascendant of the revolution, they will
abolish all malice and every impediment that Mercury would have
signified). Indeed if Mars were to aspect the Ascendant of the revolution, it
signifies the severity of war, and it even signifies the death of cows. And
this will happen more in the parts of the south.
165

=== Page 166 ===
[Virgo]
And if he were in Virgo, Abū Ma’shar said rains and harvests will be
multiplied, and pains of the eyes will be abundant; and death in the parts of
Animarot.
[379]
[Capricorn]
And if he were in Capricorn, it signifies battles and tribulations are
going to come in the parts of Khorasan. And Abū Ma’shar said, if however
he were conjoined to Venus and Mars, there will be a war in Khorasan
from the men of Abagir.
[380]
[Gemini]
And Abū Ma’shar said if Mercury were in Gemini, it signifies battles on
the part of the Latins, from the citizens of Khorasan and great men; and a
multitude of snows, and detriment in the harvests and oils and butter; and
there will be a multitude of wine; and it signifies pestilence and death in
women, and a multitude of blisters and inflammations beneath the skin; it
even signifies dew and the humidity of the air. And Abū Ma’shar said if
the Sun and Jupiter were to aspect the Ascendant of the year, pestilences
and death will be decreased; and men will be stronger than usual in the
parts of the east, and wealthier, and they will make more wealth, and be
successful.
[Libra]
And if he were in Libra, it signifies the scarcity of wine and the
annona
;
and it signifies powerful and severe winds are going to come in that
revolution. And if Saturn were to aspect or be joined to him, it signifies
pains of the head and belly are going to come to men. But if the Sun were
to aspect Saturn them, it will repel the malice, and abolish it, nor will it
impede.
[Aquarius]
And if he were in Aquarius, it signifies a multitude of locusts in the
parts in which they are accustomed to being; and a scarcity of rains; and it
166

=== Page 167 ===
signifies itching and blisters happening to men from the corruption of the
air and from its diversity. And if he were then corporally joined with
Venus, it signifies an earthquake is going to come in that revolution (and
more strongly so if they were joined with the Sun; and again more strongly
if Mars or Saturn were to aspect them from the opposition or square
aspect). And there will be pestilences, and robbers will be multiplied, and
from the conjunction of Saturn it signifies an abundance of rains.
[Cancer]
Indeed if he were in Cancer, it signifies killing is going to come in the
western parts; and even in Animarot.
[381]
 And [it signifies] the scarcity of
the
annona
 and of fat and butter; and that impediment will fall upon trees
and likewise in seeds, and in wine. And there will be infirmities (and
especially around the parts of the neck and throat because of
inflammation
[382]
 [to the mucous membranes], like sore throats and the
like). And if he were conjoined to Mars and Venus at the same time, it
signifies the killing of the wealthy and magnates or nobles in the parts of
the west, unless Venus and the Moon were to work to the contrary–which
if they were to aspect, they will abolish the malice and repel it.
[Scorpio]
And if he were in Scorpio, it signifies a multitude of snows and rains in
their own seasons, in the usual regions; and it signifies battles and wars in
the parts of the west and north, even if perhaps more slackened; which if
Mars were to aspect, the northern ones will be stronger than the western
ones. And there will be more robbers and cutters of roads than usual; and
there will be pestilences in the parts of the north, and fevers with strong
cold; and there will be abscesses and pains of the eyes with inflammation
and redness and opthalmia.
[383]
[Pisces]
If however he were in Pisces, it signifies winds and rain, and these will
happen more often in the parts of the north. And Abū Ma’shar said there
will be death in the parts of Animarot; and crawling things and fishes will
be multiplied. For all of these will come to be if Mercury were the sole
significator. But if planets were to aspect him, the things signified will be
according to the disposition of the planets and their aspects toward him.
167

=== Page 168 ===
Nor should you wonder if I have put down for you [Mercury’s] position
in the signs, because revolutions do not come to be only according to the
entrance of the Sun into Aries, but rather they come to be according to his
entrance into every movable sign, namely when the revolutions are
according to halves or according to quarters, as often happens.
[384]
 And
then it could be what I said, even if not always.
Chapter 100: What Mercury would signify in every house in a
revolution of the world, whether in a nativity or in the revolution of a
nativity, whether he is the Lord of the Year or not
If Mercury were the Lord of the Year, and were in the first in a
revolution or in a nativity, [then] if it were a revolution of a year of the
world it signifies the training of men, for whom wisdom, and likewise
writing and instruction matter; and that they will be more eloquent in
disputations and in the sciences of the
quadrivium
 than usual. If however it
were a nativity or revolution, it signifies that the native will be wise in
literature, eloquent in disputations, and learned in numbers, measures,
harmonies, and in the motions of the celestial bodies, and what happens
because of them.
And if he were in the second, it signifies wealth and profit and the
increase of substance, and the increase of honor and a good reputation with
the king and from the king; and a good status and good condition between
men, both for the native and others.
And if he were in the third, it signifies the good condition of siblings
from brothers and sisters, and of friends from friends.
[385]
 For a native it
signifies an abundance of brothers and sisters according to natural
possibility; and a multitude of the friends of the native
[386]
 and of people
in the household and of those loving him.
And if he were in the fourth, it signifies exchanges of words between
men more so than usual; also contentions and sorrows or griefs that are
going to fall between men.
And if he were in the fifth, it signifies fortune from children; and from
the direction of children, and gladness and from rumors arriving from
some other place; and men will rejoice from dances or games and
delightful things; and that sorrows that already had been, will leave them;
and matters over which they will rejoice and be happy, will come over
them. The same thing will happen to a native both in a nativity and in a
168

=== Page 169 ===
revolution, if Mercury were then so found.
And if he were in the sixth, it signifies contentions which will come to
men, and likewise to a native, from the direction of ignoble people, and
deceptions from the direction of male and female slaves; and likewise that
of male and female servants, and small animals, and the worsening and
breaking apart of matters and honor.
And if he were in the seventh, it signifies playfulness and delight from
the direction of women and from women, and contentions because of that.
And if he were in the eighth, it signifies contentions which fall between
men because of things already past, which will be renewed between them.
And if it were a nativity or the revolution of a nativity, it signifies that
enmities will happen to the native from neighbors and from the direction
of neighbors, which he could hardly or never avoid; and they will speak
lies against him, and contentions will happen to him because of that, and
because of substances which were left to him by the dead or because of a
very antiquated thing.
And if he were in the ninth, it signifies mutual praise between men, and
honesty. And for a native it signifies wisdom, learning; and if he were to
adhere to the
quadrivium
, he will advance well in it, and particularly in
astronomy, and even in the other sciences; and that he will be praised for it
by people known to him and even by others.
And if he were in the tenth, it signifies that a native will acquire a
magistracy and dignities and great honors because of literature and
writings; and the
quadrivium
 [is] of arithmetic, [geometry], music, and
astronomy. It signifies the same in the revolution of the world for those
who are experienced in those sciences.
But if he were in the eleventh, it signifies mutual friendship between
men is going to come; and in a nativity and in the revolution of a nativity it
signifies a multitude of friends, and joy because of nobles and from nobles.
Indeed if he were in the twelfth, it signifies (in a revolution of the year
of the world) the absurdity of men in the revolution, and their ignorance. If
however it were in a nativity or in the revolution of a nativity, it signifies
the stupidity of the native, and the diversity of his mind, and the lack of
knowledge or sense, his imbecility and drunkenness and shallowness and
impudence, and ineptitude in going and returning and asking about unfit
matters, and the matters have no basis. And if it occurred to him to know
or understand or discern something, this will be more in beasts than in
other matters.
[387]
169

=== Page 170 ===
Chapter 101: On the Moon, if she were the Lady of the Year–what she
would signify
However, if the Moon were the Lady of the Year or Revolution, and of
good condition (namely made fortunate and strong, free of impediments),
it signifies the good condition of the vulgar generally; and even the good
condition of sailors and mothers,
lectatorum
[388]
 also, and
gourmands
[389]
 or gluttons, and their diurnal rest;
[390]
 and the goodness
of their way of life. If however she were impeded, it signifies the contrary
of these things which I have said, and the bad condition of the aforesaid,
and of all of their significations.
And if she were in human signs, there will be impediment in men
according to the sex of the sign in which she is. And if she were in fiery
signs, impediment will fall upon everything that she were to signify of
fiery things. If however she were in earthy ones, it will fall upon all that
she were to signify of earthy things. If indeed she were in airy signs, it will
fall upon all that she were to signify of airy things. Likewise if she were in
watery signs, it will fall upon all that she were to signify of watery things.
And if she were in a sign formed in the image of some other animal, it will
fall upon animals shaped in the image of that sign.
And Abū Ma’shar said, [see] in what kind of sign [the planets] are being
aspected: the narration will be about all of this in the way I revealed to you
in the chapter on Saturn. And he said, know this, and understand well,
because all of these belong to the secrets of the science of the stars. And he
said there will be nothing in them which would be hidden from you, with
the aid of God.
However, you can attend to a certain thing whose basis I have not
found, nor even was it said by any sage: that whatever kind of revolution
of the year it was, or of whatever kind its Lord was, if it were to rain
noticeably on the eleventh day of the entrance into June,
[391]
 that evil and
detriment and impediment will fall in fruits and things born of the earth,
and their destruction by one-sixth. And if the Lord of the hour of the
Ascendant of the revolution were impeded, detriment will be suffered by
one-fifth. Indeed if the Moon were then impeded, it will happen to one-
fourth. Indeed if the Lord of the Ascendant of the revolution were
impeded, one-third of the aforesaid will be destroyed.
Again, you will consider whether it rains on the sixth day of the
entrance into October
[392]
 or not: because if it rains by means of rain,
[393]
 you will judge there are going to be harmful rains; and more strongly
and more harmfully so, if the conjunction of the Sun and Moon or their
170

=== Page 171 ===
opposition were to be present on that day; and more strongly so if the
conjunction were in a moist mansion [of the Moon].
[394]
Chapter 102: What the Moon would signify in a revolution of the year
of the world or [in a] nativity in every house, or in the revolution of a
nativity, whether she is Lady of the Year or not
If the Moon were in the first in a revolution of the year of the world,
whether she is Lady of the Year or not, it signifies fast changes of men in
that revolution–from place to place, from one thing to another, from one
proposal to another; and it signifies the effecting of things into which men
introduce themselves. And it signifies preeminence and dignities for those
for whom it is appropriate, and even that men will acquire good from their
elders [or those greater than them]; and those who have mothers will
acquire good from them; and men will rejoice over women. And if it were
a nativity, good will happen to the native. The same in his revolution.
If however she were in the second, it signifies grief and sorrow which
happen to the native because of substance, and that they will lose their
goods in that revolution; likewise for a native it will be destroyed [or
diminished].
And if she were in the third, it signifies that men will be friendly to one
another, and especially in lands which are in the division of the sign in
which the Moon then is; likewise it will happen between brothers, for their
love will be increased. And if there were enmity between them, it will be
decreased; and men will perfect the matters which they begin, and for the
perfection of which they strive; and they will even acquire good from the
wealthy and the magnates; and dignities from kings and nobles and
wealthy and great men who are fit for a kingdom. And pilgrimages will be
suitable and useful (unless Saturn or Mars were to work against it). You
may say the same about the affairs of a native, and that he will strive to be
with nobles and wealthy people who are not slaves to money.
But if she were in the fourth, and the revolution were diurnal, it signifies
its beginning to be evil, and impediment; however the end will be
praiseworthy. If however it were nocturnal, neither the beginning nor end
will be praised; men’s affairs will be restricted,
[395]
 and even persons will
suffer detriment, unless Jupiter were to work to the contrary. And if it were
a nativity or its revolution, the same will happen to the native. And if it
were a question, the querent will be saddened because of it. And he will be
happy just as was said about the diurnal or nocturnal revolution.
Abū
171

=== Page 172 ===
Ma’shar said [this will be so] unless it was a question about an acquired
treasure or a buried thing (because it is the best in this, for the thing will
appear and be uncovered).
And if she were in the fifth, it signifies having children in that
revolution. And if it were a nativity, it signifies a multitude of children.
And if it were the revolution of a nativity, it signifies having children in it,
if [the native’s] nature were fit to be able to do this. And this signifies
masculinity in a nocturnal matter; if however it were diurnal, it signifies
femininity. You may say the same in nativities and their revolutions, and
questions; nor will many horrible things appear. And Abū Ma’shar said it
signifies the arrival of rumors from faraway parts, about which men will
rejoice, and particularly parents whose children are absent. And he said if
you wished to know what the rumors were, look at the planet from which
the Moon is being separated, because the rumors will be according to its
nature. And if you wished to know whether the rumors were written on
paper, or a legate had brought them by mouth, look at the Moon and
Mercury to see if she is joined to him or is being separated from him. And
if she were separated from the Lord of the seventh and were joined to
Mercury, the rumors will be written on paper. Indeed if she were separated
from Mercury or from his
[396]
 Lord, the legate relates his own rumors.
And if she were in the sixth, Abū Ma’shar said it signifies quarrels and
contention from the direction of fathers, and wealth from quadrupeds, and
the health of the body.
And if she were in the seventh, he said it signifies wealth from the
direction of women and marriage, and success because of them.
And he said if she were in the eighth, it signifies the ruin, and being
finished, and the deposing, of the king (or his death); and confusion in
works, and men will testify falsely, namely one against another; and they
will quarrel with each other, and one will strive to chase away the other
and eject him from his own place. And there will be tribulations and
anxieties in men, and infirmities of the spirit or mind, like those which
happen to raging people who are not in their right minds
[397]
 (who are
called lunatics by the vulgar). For it signifies enchanters and enchantresses
pretending to know enchantments of this kind, for the reason that they
might extort something from some people, because of which enchantments
certain people in tunics falsely blaspheme astrologers. And there will be
evil thoughts in the hearts of men. And if it were a nativity, the native will
apply himself to these. It will signify the same in the revolution of a
nativity.
And Abū Ma’shar said if she were in the ninth it signifies taking part in
172

=== Page 173 ===
journeys, and evil thoughts, and the changing [over] of the king from
region to region,
[398]
 and the aid of women, and the knowledge of the
dispensation of the kingdom and other things. And he said if the ninth
domicile were of the domiciles of Mercury, it signifies wisdom of the
stars. And if it were of the domiciles of Venus, it signifies the loftiness of
the sciences and singing.
[399]
 And if were of the domiciles of Mars, it
signifies the mastery of instruments and the work or arms. And if it were
of the domiciles of Jupiter, it signifies the divine cult and knowledge in the
law, and the preeminence of judges. And if it were of the domiciles of
Saturn, it signifies the science of alchemy and engagement in it. For men
will be eager for this in that revolution. Likewise [for] a native in whose
nativity the Moon were in the ninth, or in a revolution.
And if there were a benefic,
[400]
 not impeded, in the 2
nd
 or in the 4
th
,
wealth will follow
[401]
 from that; lacking this, however, it will not. But if
a malefic were there, harm will follow from that. And if the malefic were
impeded, the destructions of substance will follow, and it signifies many
and diverse masteries.
And if [the ninth] were the domicile of the Sun, it signifies knowledge
and foresight in all
quadrivial
 disciplines. And if it were her own domicile,
it signifies the general knowledge of all things which are taken from the
waters or which proceed from them. And he said, know that the Moon has
these particular [meanings] amongst the other planets.
And Abū Ma’shar said if she were in the tenth, it signifies the effecting
of matters in [horary] questions, but there will be a command of the king
in this, if it were in the day. If indeed it were in the night, it signifies the
effecting of matters from the direction of the king and women, and this
will be quick. And he said, but a matter in each of the times (namely in the
day and in the night) will not be durable. Likewise if a king were to
undertake to rule in it, he will be deposed quickly; because this place is a
winning one in the signification of the Sun; indeed the Moon is not
sufficient except in a middling way in this signification.
And if she were in the eleventh, it signifies that one friend will follow
from another; it even signifies the attainment of things which men hope
for, and in which they have trust. Likewise for a native, both in a nativity
and in a revolution.
Indeed in the twelfth, it signifies impediment and duress, and the
instability of things, and quarrels and prisons from the direction of
enemies.
And Abū Ma’shar said, if you were asked about some matter, when it
will be, and the Moon were your significatrix, and she were in the twelfth,
173

=== Page 174 ===
this will be at the hour of the Moon’s exit from that same place: for the
matter will be perfected through this, and the absent person will be and
will come, and especially if this were and the end of the lunar month. And
if the Moon were impeded by Saturn, then judge something horrible and
evil, and you should not have doubt in this, if God wills.
[402]
Chapter 103: What the Head and Tail and comets would signify in a
revolution of the year, both of the world and of nativities
It was spoken above about the significations of the seven planets–what
each one of them would signify in every sign and in every house in the
revolutions of years, both of the world and of nativities, or in nativities
themselves. Now it remains to speak about the Head of the Dragon (what it
would signify in revolutions themselves) and its Tail, and about comets–
what hairy or tailed stars would signify,
[403]
 and how many there are, just
as will be spoken of in its own particular chapter.
Abū Ma’shar said, know that if the Head of the Dragon were in Aries, it
signifies the loftiness of great and noble men, and the dejection of low-
class or ignoble ones. And if the Tail were there, it signifies the bad
disposition and bad condition of kings and nobles, and their injuries from
the rustics or common people. And if one of the comets were there, it
signifies the evil and detriment of the wealthy and the magnates and nobles
in the parts of the east and Babylon; and a multitude of sorrows with the
rustics. And he said if its appearance were in the parts of the east,
[404]
 its
work will be faster. Indeed if it were to appear out of the direction of the
west, it will be slower,
etc.
And if the Head were in Taurus, it signifies the killing of wealthy and
great men in the northern parts; and it signifies a multitude of differences
between the wealthy and magnates and the rustics of the western parts.
And if the Tail were there, it signifies a scarcity of piety and sympathy in
the hearts of men; and there will be useless pilgrimages in those parts, of
little wealth and much labor. And if one of the comets were to appear in its
direction,
[405]
 it signifies the bad condition of men and a scarcity of their
good, and injuries of rebels against those who are in those regions; which
if it were to appear
[406]
 in the parts of the east, its work will be faster.
And if it were to appear in the west, it will be slower,
etc.
And if the Head were in Gemini, it signifies infirmities are going to
come to the wealthy and to magnates, and this will happen because of
winds and earthquakes, and the filthy smokiness of the land, and wars
174

=== Page 175 ===
taking place between middle class men and the wealthy (or nobles and
magnates); and a case of vermin in trees. If however the Tail were there, it
signifies that the rustics will be exalted and will be stubborn and facetious
against the king, and that they will fool him; and they will rise up against
his soldiers and the wealthy (or his representatives). But if one of the
comets were to appear in its direction, it signifies the appearance of
pleasures and fornications, and unclean venereal cultivation in men; and
the religious and those serving God will be thrown down and despised.
And if were to appear in the parts of the east, its work will be faster; and if
it were to appear in the parts of the west, it will be slower.
And if the Head were in Cancer, it signifies the goodness of the king’s
deeds toward the rustics and common people, and the largesse [of those
works] toward them, and that they will collect the substance of the king
(and after it was collected in its own places, they will disperse it). And if
the Tail were there, it signifies a multitude of pestilence and mortality, and
sudden deaths, and fornications, and the abuse of venereal cultivation, and
a scarcity of justice, and the breaking and loss of the
census
; and the
destruction of houses, of substances, and the change of the wealthy and
magnates from place to place, and their pilgrimage; and the bad condition
of the great workings of their own hands, and of writers and other things
signified by Mercury.
[407]
 And if one of the comets were to appear there,
it signifies a multitude of locusts destroying the harvests; and a case of
vermin in grain and in trees, and a scarcity of produce, and a multitude of
vermin in them. And if it were to appear in the parts of the east, its work
will be faster. And if it were to appear in the parts of the west, its work
will be slower, and it signifies the goodness of the king toward
[408]
 the
rustics, and his piety concerning them.
And if the Head were in Leo, it signifies a multitude of rivers and the
appearance of fires in the air, many injuries, and evil and killing. And if
the Tail were there, it signifies a multitude of obscurity [darkness] in the
air, and earthquakes; and the increase of waters and the detriment of trees,
and the destruction of the harvests. And if one of the comets were to
appear there, it signifies an infestation of wolves, and impediment to men
from them; and a case of vermin in the grain, and the destruction of houses
and of substances. And if its appearance were in the parts of the east, its
work will be faster. And if it were in the parts of the west, its work will be
slower.
And if the Head were in Virgo, it signifies the destruction of the
harvests and the rest of the produce; and a scarcity of all things which are
measured, and a case of vermin in trees, and the detriment of those who
175

=== Page 176 ===
remain from the first destruction, even after they were restored in the
places in which they will be believed to be saved or guarded. And if the
Tail were there, it signifies the hatred that is going to fall upon the wealthy
and magnates; and there will be fights and dissensions, and battles between
them; and churches and the great houses of religions will suffer detriment;
and there will be diversities and controversies between men, and debates
and dissensions in faith. And if one of the comets were to appear there, it
signifies the taking away of certain things from the household members of
kings and magnates, and their changing from place to place, or from region
to region; and they will be led practically as captives or deported people,
or sent over to the borders. And there will be a taking away of their goods
without their having it again,
[409]
 nor will they be recovered by them or
through them. And if its appearance were in the parts of the east, its work
will be faster. If however it were in the west, its work will be slower.
And if the Head were in Libra, it signifies that kings and the wealthy
and the nobles or magnates will make use of their own men upon the
rustics, contrary to justice, and especially against those whom they will
rule; and they will strive to extort from them what they ought not to; and
they will accuse them and say they have offended them concerning
something which will not be their fault; and they will think they have
taken from them something which they have not taken, [and] because of
this they will inveigh against them. And they will afflict them with
punishments so much, that for that reason they will come into poverty and
need; and they will fool them. But if the Tail were there, it signifies the
mortality and detriment of quadrupeds; and there will be dryness and a
heaviness of frost in their own seasons, destroying harvests in the fields,
and herbs, and seeds, and trees, so that little produce will be collected from
them. And if one of the comets were to appear there, it signifies robbers
and cutters of roads, [and] pillagers who openly send their own men to the
people, and they will plunder all whom they are able; and men’s thoughts
will be in fear lest they fall into poverty; and they will expect harms, and
they will fear at one time because of cold, at another because of heat, and
this will last a long time in their hearts. And if its appearance were in the
parts of the east, its work will be faster. If however it were in the parts of
the west, it will be slower.
And if the Head were in Scorpio, Abū Ma’shar said it signifies good and
joy in middle-class men, and evil and sorrow in great men; and it signifies
wars and battles and wounds; a multiplication of fornication with
deception. And he said [it signifies] their falling into the hands of the king
in addition to what will happen to them in terms of grief and sorrow. And
176

=== Page 177 ===
he said if the Tail were there, it signifies a case of fevers in men, and
infirmities happening in the chest; and a multitude of catarrhs [or
inflammations] in the throat, with the joy of the wealthy in that time; and
their happiness through much peace, and a multitude of wars; and the
collection of substances, and the destruction of their homes. And if one of
the comets were to appear there, it signifies a multitude of battles and wars
and rebels against the king; and the change of soldiers between them;
[410]
and its investigation by them in addition to what is not in their hands, nor
their power; for they will seek impossible things. And if its appearance
were in the parts of the east, its work will be faster. Indeed if it were in the
parts of the west, it will be slower.
And if the Head were in Sagittarius, it signifies the affliction of the
rustics of Babylon by their own king; and that he will oppress them with
injuries and torments; and that all of their quadrupeds will be impeded
(and particularly horses and other animals which those making war, and
bearers of arms, use)–and more strongly so if it were in the last half of
Sagittarius. And there will be impediments in the instruments of wars, and
their falling apart. It even signifies the heaviness of the air, and darkness
with much corruption; and the heat will be oppressive in its own seasons.
And if the Tail were there, it signifies the dejection of the nobles and great
men, and their bad condition; and the exaltation of low-class people and
the ignoble; and more strongly so if it were in the first half of Sagittarius.
And the wise and scribes and doctors of the law, and consuls or advisors
will be saddened, or hidden impediments will come to them, because of
which they will be saddened. And if one of the comets were to appear
there, it signifies the depression of the aforesaid, and tribulation falling
upon them (and particularly scribes); their annihilation with the loss of
substance because of a concealment. And if it were to appear in the
direction of the east, its work will be faster. If however it were in the west,
it will be slower.
And if the Head were in Capricorn, it signifies the gladness and loftiness
and joy of the wealthy and of great men, or nobles, and their exaltation;
and the fall of low-class and ignoble people who are called “tails” by
certain people.
[411]
 But if the Tail were there, it signifies harmful
earthquakes in certain parts of the earth, and especially in the southern
ones. And if one of the comets were to appear there, it signifies fornication
in men in those times. And if its appearance were in the east, its work will
be faster. If however it were in the west, it will be slower.
And if the Head were in Aquarius, it signifies the detriment of the
religious, and of the faith of sectarians; and the death of certain ones of
177

=== Page 178 ===
them, and of judges and doctors of the law. And if the Tail were there, Abū
Ma’shar said it signifies the investigation of the king against the lords of
inheritances in which they ought not to [have them]; and their being
misleading in the
census
, and injuries and afflictions which he will
administer against them, with their capture and whipping. And if one of
the comets were to appear there, it signifies a multitude of battles, and
killings, and tortures in the same season. And if its appearance were in the
direction of the east, its work will be faster. If however it were in the west,
it will be slower.
And if the Head were in Pisces, Abū Ma’shar said it signifies the
loftiness of the nobles, and the excelling of each man in his own rank more
than he would excel according to his nature, and the collection of
substances in the houses of substance.
[412]
 And if the Tail were there, it
signifies the reaching of the soldiers over the king, and the multitude of the
wealthy and the change of more
[413]
 of the wealthy from their habitations
because of sins, with much talking in a sect, and the appearance of
novelties. And if one of the comets were to appear in the same place, there
will be the greatest war over the relations of the king;
[414]
 and they will
kill each other,
[415]
 and there will be enmities in the others, and a taking
away of their hand from obedience.
[416]
 If however its appearance were
in the direction of the east, it will be faster in this which it signifies. And if
it were in the direction of the west, its work will be slower in this which it
signifies.
However, if you wished to see the direction in which what the comet
signifies will come, it will be in which part its tail is. Because in that same
direction will be what it signified in terms of tribulation and pestilence.
Indeed the hour which I told you, in the remaining works, in this book, in
which everything that was said [will be], will be when [the Sun] will have
come to the sign which was of the substance of those things which I told
you; or to the planet whose nature is in the operation just like the nature of
the effect which appeared to you would be in the same year.
[417]
 And he
said, know this and consider it, because it is of the secrets of the science of
the stars, and its truth; of which work it is a precept that it be hidden,
[418]
and it not be seen except by you, according to how I have expounded it to
you.
Chapter 104: On Comets
However, Ptolemy says
[419]
 there are nine types of comets, of which
178

=== Page 179 ===
the first is called a javelin, the second a
tenaculum
,
[420]
 the third a
measuring-rod,
[421]
 the fourth a
miles
,
[422]
 the fifth the lord of
ascona
,
[423]
 the sixth a morning or dawn comet, the seventh silver, the eighth
rosy, the ninth black. And he said that the first four of these are likened to
stars. And all signify wars and terrors and great events in the world. And
he said that from their color will be known the evil that is to be, and from
the nature of the sign in which they first appear; and it will be known when
the evil will be, for if it were to appear in the east or north and it were to
go toward the south, it will be speedy; and if in the west, [the evil] will be
delayed.
Indeed that which is called a javelin is horrible to see, and proceeds near
the Sun, and appears during the day; which when it appears, signifies
changes and the destruction of produce, trees, and things born of the earth;
and the mortality of kings and of the wealthy, and of those who are fit for a
realm.
Indeed, that which is called a
tenaculum
is practically of the color of
Mars, and has beneath it a ray like the smoke under ashes; which when it
appears, signifies scarcity, but not in an excessive way–but not famine.
And it signifies battles concerning which the religious interject themselves
beyond the degree to which they are competent [to carry out].
That which is called a measuring-rod has a thick ray and it drags a
measuring-rod behind it, and is not very bright; which when it appears, it
signifies dryness and a scarcity of waters, and the smallness of the
annona
;
which if it were joined with one of the planets, it signifies other things
according to the nature and disposition [of that] to which it is corporally
joined. Like if it were joined with Saturn, there will be mortality, and
much of it in old men and Jews and the religious and those who are
dressed in Saturnian clothes. However, if it were joined with Jupiter, its
significations will appear in kings and magnates according to good and
evil, in proportion to how [Jupiter] were disposed (made fortunate and
strong, or made unfortunate and weak). Indeed if it were joined with Mars,
it signifies even more battles, and mortalities by the sword and the
shedding of blood, and the burning of fire. However, with the Sun it
cannot appear. But if it were joined with Venus, it signifies dryness and a
great diminution of waters. Indeed if with Mercury, it signifies the death of
youths and the wise and scribes. If indeed with the Moon, it signifies
mortality what is going to fall between the common people and other low-
class persons.
That which is called a
miles
 is of the nature of Venus and inclines
greatly toward the manner of the Moon; and it has a long ray, and likewise
179

=== Page 180 ===
hair, and extends [the ray or hair] behind itself; which if it were to appear,
it travels the twelve signs; and it signifies the harming of kings and of
nobles and magnates, and that men will rise up in the world who wish to
change the laws and ancient things, and lead new things [into being]; and
its worse signification will appear from the part toward which it extends its
tail and hair.
The lord of
ascona
 is said to be of the condition of Mercury, and its
color is blue. And it appears small in comparison with the other comets;
and it has a long tail, and extends its rays to one side or another in the
manner of a wing having heads underneath it, bringing it down to one
place. Which if it were to appear, it signifies the death of kings or
magnates and nobles who are fit for a realm; and especially toward the part
into which it extends its tail or rays; and it signifies battles. And I saw one
appear in the 663
rd
 year of the era of the Arabs, in which Pope Alexander
died; and not long afterwards King Manfred was killed by a certain brother
of the king of France named Charles; and again, not long after that
Conradin was killed by this same Charles in the kingdom of Apulia (and
many dukes and many barons with him), and this was in [the year] 665 of
the era of the Arabs. And there were many battles and dissensions from the
time of the appearance of this comet, and they lasted a long time.
[424]
That which is called morning or dawn, is red. And it has a long tail, but
less than that of the lord of
asconae
. And it is of the nature of Mars, for it
has his significations; which if it were to appear out of the part of the east,
having its head below it, [it signifies] battles and the burning of fire, and
pestilences and famine in the land of Babylon and in the lands of the Arabs
and the Phormati; and dryness in Egypt and a scarcity of waters; and this
will be extended up to the western parts.
Indeed, that which is called silver, has a ray in the likeness of the purest
silver, whose clarity exceeds the clarity of all nocturnal stars; which if it
were to appear while Jupiter is located in Pisces or Cancer, it signifies an
abundance of grain and produce in the parts in which it were to appear.
Indeed if Jupiter were in Scorpio, these things will happen, but somewhat
less than this.
Indeed that which is called rosy, is big and round, and the face of a
human can be observed in it, the color of which is in between gold and
silver; which if it were to appear, signifies the death of kings and magnates
and the wealthy and nobles, and of those who are fit for a kingdom; and an
event of great matters and of an appearance of those things themselves,
and of the causes of ancient things; but they will change for the better.
That which is called black is of the nature of Saturn, practically of a
180

=== Page 181 ===
similar color to him; which if it were to appear, signifies mortality through
natural death and death by the sword and by beheadings.
Chapter 105: What the Head of the Dragon and the Tail would signify
in every house, both in revolutions and in nativities or questions
In the preceding chapter it was stated what the Head of the Dragon and
its Tail signify in every sign; in this one must be stated what they signify
in every house. Whence in any revolution you must consider in which
house either of them is found.
And Abū Ma’shar said if the Head of the Dragon were in the first in any
revolution or nativity or question, it signifies increase and strength and
loftiness in that revolution, and this according to its conjunction with the
planets. For if the Head were joined with benefics, it signifies the increase
of good. If however it were joined with a malefic, it signifies the increase
of evil (since its nature is to increase).
And if it were in the second, it signifies good fortune in substance, and
its increase; it signifies the same in a nativity or question if it were in the
second.
And if it were in the third, it signifies that the native will be an
interpreter of dreams, and will be of good faith. And there will be useful,
short journeys in that revolution, and acquisitions and profits (likewise for
a native).
And if it were in the fourth, and the fourth house [domicile?] were Aries
or Leo or Sagittarius or Gemini or Libra or Aquarius, it signifies the
increase of good and profit from lands and vineyards, and from other
immovable things. If however the 4
th
 house [domicile?] were Taurus or
Virgo or Capricorn or Cancer or Scorpio or Pisces, it signifies harm and
the decrease of profit.
If it were in the fifth, it signifies the fortune of children and from
children, and their increase and good and joy, and freedom from contrary
and displeasing things.
And if it were in the sixth, it signifies the increase of small animals
which are not ridden; and of slaves. And there will be strong and harmful
infirmities.
And if it were in the seventh, it signifies the increase of partners, and
good from women, and an increase of sexual intercourse, and the strength
of enemies (both of a native or querent, and generally).
And if it were in the eighth, it signifies the good condition of men in
181

=== Page 182 ===
their persons, and the strength of a native or querent in a nativity or
question; and it signifies the taking away of grief (and its scarcity).
And if it were in the ninth, and were joined with benefics, it signifies
religion and good pilgrimages, and useful and profitable long journeys. If
however it were joined with malefics, it signifies the contrary of what was
said.
And if it were in the tenth, it signifies that men will apply themselves to
the investigation of divine and hidden things, and the scrutiny of the truth
of the Most High God. It even signifies loftiness and reverence and
veneration, and strength and fortune in dignities or masteries and honors.
And if it were in the eleventh, Abū Ma’shar said that there is no virtue
of the Head or Tail in it–for good or evil.
[425]
And if it were in the twelfth, it signifies the increase of evil and scarcity
of good.
Chapter 106: What the Tail would signify in the houses [domiciles?]
If the Tail were in the first in a revolution or question, it signifies the
detriment of men and the native, and the separating away of the good, and
eradication and dangers and tribulations. And if a son were to remain rich
after his father’s passing away, he will be reduced to poverty. And if he
were to remain a pauper, he will persevere in it.
And if it were in the second, it signifies the destruction of all substances,
and the poverty of a native, and his being in need, and his being occupied
with evils,
[426]
 and his fall from his own station; and this will happen to
him from a direction from which he will not have fear, nor will it be
suspected.
And if it were in the third, it signifies the detriment of brothers, and
from brothers and sisters, and because of them and their burden. And if the
third house [domicile?] were a masculine sign, this will happen to
brothers. And if it were a feminine one, this will happen in sisters. And
perhaps that they will die from them,
[427]
 since [the Tail’s] nature is to
destroy [or diminish]; or a quarrel will happen to him from his brothers, or
with others of his lesser blood-relatives, or with friends or neighbors.
If however it were in the fourth, it signifies the poverty and need,
enmity and labor which they will sustain in the investigation of matters,
without usefulness.
And if it were in the fifth, it signifies the destruction of fortune and its
expulsion, and a case of horrible things upon children; and that those who
182

=== Page 183 ===
have children will be saddened because of it, and they will be in need; and
that men will carry their own old clothes.
And if it were in the sixth, it signifies the laziness and weakness of male
and female slaves, and small animals, and their decrease (and if it were a
nativity, the native will not have fortune in them), and a decrease of
infirmities. And if there were infirmities they will be decreasing and
diminishing, and decimating
[428]
 or exterminating the bodies of the sick.
[429]
And if it were in the seventh, it signifies that men will not rejoice with
their wives like they are used to rejoicing with them in other revolutions;
and there will be quarrels and contentions between them, and this will
happen more in the rustics and the common people than in others. And if it
were a nativity, it signifies that the native will not rejoice with wives, nor
from wives, nor even from other women, but he will have quarreling and
contentions with them (unless perhaps from those mattering to him), nor
[will he rejoice] because of partners. And it signifies the strength of his
enemies. You may say the same in his revolutions. However, he will not
have many enemies, even if some.
And if it were in the eighth, it signifies the loss of things because of
death, and that those who are supposed to inherit goods from the dead, will
lose many of them. You can say the same, that it will happen to a native.
And if it were in the ninth, it signifies change from place to place
(however, not exile); and the destruction [or decrease] of faith and
religion, and long, useless journeys; but more likely harmful ones than
lucrative ones.
And if it were in the tenth, it signifies the impediment of kings and
nobles or magnates, and the destruction [or diminution] of their honor or
dignities. And Abū Ma’shar said it signifies deposing and dangers, and a
pilgrimage or fall [or mishap]. It signifies the same for a native.
And if it were in the eleventh, Abū Ma’shar said that there is no
operation for [the Tail] in it.
And if it were in the twelfth, it signifies the detriment of large animals
and the destruction
[430]
 of them and of enemies; and few will be
incarcerated in that revolution. And if they were incarcerated, the prisons
will be emptied of them. The same will happen in nativities or in their
revolutions, if the Tail were in the twelfth. Indeed Abū Ma’shar said if the
Tail were in the twelfth, it signifies a scarcity of good fortune, and a
scarcity of evils. And he said, concerning the significations of the planets
and of the Head and Tail in the twelve houses, if they were in a better
condition, say better; indeed if they were in a bad condition, change the
183

=== Page 184 ===
content and say the contrary of the good (namely, the bad), and speak
boldly, and do not fear, nor should you dismiss what I have told you; nor
should you say otherwise, and you will discover [it], if God does not
oppose [you].
Chapter 107: What the [malefic] fixed stars would signify in
revolutions of years, and nativities, and what they would do in them
Having spoken of the revolutions of years, and of the things signified by
the planets, and of the Head of the Dragon and its Tail (what they would
signify in every house and in every sign), it now remains to speak of
certain fixed stars which are found in every sign–of which certain ones
signify serious evil and impediment, certain ones signify good. And this is
a matter with which it is very necessary to concern oneself, because much
concerning the judgments of revolutions and nativities and questions, and
elections, depends on them and from them. For revolutions and nativities
and questions and their judgments are changed by them with a powerful
change, much more strongly than by the planets. And in this, many of the
honest astrologers are often deceived, because they do not consider them
in their judgments, but only the planets and the Parts. And this is the
reason why they are sometimes deceived, and the contrary of what they
judge happens in them, both in the good and in evil; and they are rebuked
and held in slight esteem because of ignorance, when they are not to be
rebuked. Nevertheless, I cannot excuse them from laziness or negligence–
you however, if you were to consider them well in judgments, both of
revolutions and nativities, and questions, you will not go astray, if God
does not prevent it.
If however you were to calculate for every revolution or nativity or
question, and you were to erect its figure, you will consider all the houses
from the 1
st
 to the 12
th
, and you will see whether one of the fixed stars
written below is found in the degree of the cusp of some angle; and you
will judge good or evil according to the nature of the one which you were
to find in it, according to what I will tell you. And I will have told them to
you just as I have found certain ones of them to be understood by the
sayings of the wise, and certain ones by experienced and established
reason.
[431]
And Abū Ma’shar said, know that in the head of Aries are two stars,
of which one is in the thirteenth degree and forty-fifth minute, and the
184

=== Page 185 ===
other in the fourteenth degree and forty-fifth minute, which are of the
nature of Mars and Saturn. And their peculiar nature is to harm, and
they are on the northern side.
Indeed another is in the ninth degree of Taurus and the fifty-fifth
minute, which is called the Pleiades. And another in the thirteenth
degree of the same [sign]. And both are northern. And another is in its
fourteenth degree and forty-fifth minute, and it is called the Devil.
[432]
 And another is in the fifteenth [degree] of the same [sign],
which is called the Head of the Devil or Gorgon.
[433]
 And another is
in its nineteenth degree and fifteenth minute, which is called
Aldebaran; and all are of the nature of Mars. But Mercury and the
Moon participate in the Pleiades.
Indeed another is in Gemini in the eighth degree, which is called the
Shoulder of the Dog,
[434]
 and it is of the nature of Mars and Saturn.
And another is in its tenth degree and fifteenth minute, which is
called Bellatrix, and is of the nature of Mars. Another is in its
seventeenth degree and fifty-fifth minute, and its latitude is in the
south. Another is in its eighteenth degree and fifty-second minute,
which is called the Witch,
[435]
 and it is of the nature of the Sun and
Mars and Saturn.
Another is in Cancer, in its second degree and third minute, which is
called the Camel,
[436]
 and it is of the nature of Saturn and the Moon.
And another is in its seventh degree and fifty-fifth minute. And
another is in its thirteenth degree, of the nature of the Sun and Moon,
which is called Killing the Camel.
[437]
 And another which is called
the Foot of the Dog,
[438]
 in the same degree, of the nature of Saturn;
and another in the seventeenth degree and fifty-fifth minute, which
are both northern, of the nature of Saturn.
Indeed in Leo is one star in the fifteenth degree and fifty-fifth minute,
of the nature of Saturn.
However, in Virgo are two stars, of which one is in the seventh
degree and eleventh minute of the same, and is of the nature of Mars.
The other is in the fifteenth degree, of the nature of Saturn.
Indeed in Libra is one star in the twenty-sixth degree, and it is of the
185

=== Page 186 ===
nature of Saturn.
However, in Scorpio are three stars, of which one is in its first degree
and third minute; and the other in the eighth degree and seventh
minute; and another in the ninth degree. And all are of the nature of
Mars.
In Sagittarius are two small stars, of which one is in the nineteenth
degree and second minute, another in the twenty-first degree and first
minute, and they are of the nature of Saturn.
In Capricorn are two stars, of which one is in its twenty-seventh
degree and second minute, and it is named The Evil One.
[439]
 And
the other is in its twenty-ninth degree and fifth minute. And both are
of the nature of Saturn.
In Aquarius is one star in the ninth degree and fourth minute, of the
nature of Mars and Saturn.
[440]
Indeed in Pisces is one star in its fourth degree and seventh minute,
and it is of the nature of Mars and Mercury.
Chapter 108: On the peculiar nature of the aforesaid [malefic] stars in
every house
[441]
If you were to see the Lord of the Year or Revolution, or of the nativity
or question, joined with one of the aforesaid fixed stars in the same degree
in the revolution of the year of the world, know that evil and impediment
will fall upon the kings and the wealthy or nobles and magnates. You may
say the same about the affairs of a native in nativities and questions and in
the revolutions of nativities. And griefs and sorrows and malign thoughts
will fall upon them, and infirmities from headaches, and fevers and death.
And more strongly so if this were in Aries. And by how much their
conjunction were less than one degree, by that much greater will its
impediment be, until the conjunction then reaches to one minute. And if
their conjunction were in one and the same minute, it will not only signify
their impediment, but it will even signify their destruction and death. The
same thing will happen if one of the aforesaid stars were to fall in the
degree of the Ascendant of the revolution and of a nativity or question, by
186

=== Page 187 ===
coming down up to one minute by means of the aforesaid conditions. And
if one of the aforesaid stars were in the degree of the Ascendant of some
nativity, the native will be unfortunate, bad, afflicted, and full of labor, and
of many illnesses; and he will never rejoice in his own life; and his
infirmities will more often by from headache; and more strongly so if the
Ascendant of the nativity were the Ascendant of the year in which one of
those stars was in the Ascendant of the revolution.
But if one of those stars were to fall in the 2
nd
 from the from the
Ascendant of the revolution, or the Lord of the 2
nd
 were with one of them
in the same degree (as was said) it signifies impediment is going to fall in
the substance of men, and the destruction [or diminution] of them; and
especially [that] of the wealthy and great or noble men; and dullness of
mind will fall upon them; and they will weep from need and poverty, and
will believe everything has forsaken them. And for this reason they will
fall into sorrow and blaming; and the infirmities of that revolution will be
from the impediment of the ears, neck and throat (like inflammation and
dry catarrh, and the like); and more strongly so if this were in Taurus. And
if one of the aforesaid stars were in the 2
nd
 in someone’s nativity, or if [the
nativity’s] Ascendant were the 2
nd
 from the Ascendant of the revolution, or
the Lord of the 2
nd
 of the nativity were joined with one of the stars, it
signifies that the native will be of bad condition, a pauper, of little wealth,
and will lose what he will earn. Nor will his own substance be capable of
growing because of his own wealth. He will be dull, lazy, of little skill, and
will be reputed very little, or rather as virtually nothing in relation to his
birth status. And if he were wealthy, he will be impoverished, and his
substance will run through his hands, with him not knowing how. Even
with him wanting and trying to keep or guard it, it would fly away.
[442]
And he will have many illnesses, and often his illnesses will be in the ears
and throat and neck and shoulder; and more strongly so, if the 2
nd
 house
were Taurus.
And if one of the stars were to fall in the 3
rd
 from the Ascendant of a
revolution, or the Lord of the 3
rd
 were with one of them in the same degree
(as was said about the 1
st
 and the 2
nd
) it signifies the evil and impediment of
the houses of oration [or prayer], and that short journeys will not be useful
in that revolution; and that there will be quarrels and contentions between
brothers, and one will be saddened because of the other, without a reason
why it should be so; and there will be severe and chronic infirmities in
men; and they will be more often of the shoulder blades and shoulders and
arms; and more strongly so if this were in Gemini. And if one of the
aforesaid stars were in the 3
rd
 in someone’s nativity, or his Ascendant were
187

=== Page 188 ===
the 3
rd
 from the Ascendant of a revolution, or the Lord of the 3
rd
 of the
nativity were joined with one of the stars, it signifies that the native will be
evil to his own brothers and to those who give one [brother] preferment
over him, and who think him to be a friend of theirs, and to his own lesser
blood-relatives and neighbors. And he will be inclined to see another
person as evil,
[443]
 and he will rejoice if he were to see adversity or
impediment happen to someone; and he will be intent on acting badly, and
his thought will not be on the good. Nor will he see good for himself, or
usefulness, from his own journeys (and especially the short ones); and if
he were to strive to go abroad on the aforesaid pilgrimages,
[444]
 he will
lose his own substance in them; however it will not
[445]
 be a great matter
for him to lose his substance, only if he were not to lose his person with it.
And the greatest proportion of his illnesses will be of shoulder blades and
arms.
And if one of the aforesaid stars were in the 4
th
 from the Ascendant of
the revolution, or the Lord of the 4
th
 were with one of them in the same
degree, as was said regarding the other houses, it signifies evil and the
impediment of farmers and harvests and things born of the earth; and it
even signifies battles between cities and estates, and among other
habitations; and that there will likewise be quarrels between fathers and
sons, and disputes and envy, and one will be saddened because of the
other, and
vice versa
. And the end of those things which men will do, or
which will come in that year, will be to the bad. And if someone were to
buy land or another estate or inheritance, he will not see from it what he
believed [he would], or what he hoped or intended. And there will be
many infirmities of men in the chest or of the lungs, and from the parts
adjacent to them (and more strongly so, if this were in Cancer). And if one
of the aforesaid stars were in the 4
th
 in someone’s nativity, or [the
nativity’s] Ascendant were the 4
th
 of the revolution, or the Lord of the 4
th
 of
the nativity were joined with one of the stars in the same degree, as was
said regarding the others, it signifies evil for his parents, and that he will
hate them. And the end of all things about which he interjects himself, will
be bad; nor will the works which he himself accomplishes be praised, even
if they were good and things to be praised; and his infirmities will often be
of the chest and lungs, and of the parts adjacent to them.
But if one of the aforesaid stars were to fall in the 5
th
 from the Ascendant
of the revolution, or the Lord of the 5
th
 were in the same degree with one of
them, as was said regarding the other houses, it signifies evil and
impediment which will fall upon children, and hate which parents will
have for them, and it signifies the detriment and decrease of sexual
188

=== Page 189 ===
intercourse in that revolution; and that discord or litigation and
impediment will fall between lovers and between those who loved each
other at first; and between whom there was domestic relations
[446]
because of donations and other delightful things. And the infirmities which
happen to men in that revolution will often be in the their bellies and
stomachs, and in parts prohibiting venereal worship.
[447]
 And if one of
the aforesaid were in the 5
th
 of someone’s nativity, or the Ascendant of the
nativity were the 5
th
 of the revolution, or the Lord of the 5
th
 of the nativity
were joined with one of those stars (as was said regarding the others), it
signifies that the parents of that native will hate him, and this according to
the substance of the sign which is the 5
th
 of the nativity, or in which the
Lord of the 5
th
 of the nativity is; for if this sign were masculine, the father
will hate him more, and the mother less; and if it were a feminine sign, his
mother will hate him more, and his father less. Nor will the native be
obedient to his parents, nor will he persevere in loving someone who loves
him, nor even [in loving] other people. And if he were to undertake to be
good, he will not persevere in his goodness, nor will he be fortunate in
children (if one of [the stars] were in the 5
th
), nor in these things which are
signified by the 5
th
 house. And perhaps that he will avoid having children
altogether. And his infirmities will more often be of the chest and stomach,
and because of them (and more so if the 5
th
 were Leo).
If however one of the aforesaid stars were to fall in the 6
th
 from the
Ascendant of the revolution, or the Lord of the 6
th
 were with one of them in
the same degree, as was said regarding the other houses, it signifies
impediment is going to fall upon quadrupeds (and especially upon small
ones).
And Abū Ma’shar said this even signifies [impediment] upon the
body of the king, and upon his male and female slaves; likewise upon
other slaves; and in male and female servants; and upon low-class people,
paupers or persons in the nature [or substance] of that sign. And there will
not be wealth for those wishing to engage in the trade of slaves or animals
(and particularly small ones). And Abū Ma’shar said, for him who flees in
that same year, he will find impediment; and certain ones of them will not
be returned; and infirmities will abound in men, and the majority of them
from an overflowing of choler abounding in the intestines. And if one of
them were to fall in someone’s nativity, in the 6
th
 of the nativity, or the
Ascendant of the nativity were the 6
th
 of the revolution, or the Lord of the
6
th
 of the nativity were joined with one of those stars in the same degree
(just as was said in the others), it signifies that the native will not rejoice
from male or females slaves and male or female servants; nor will he be
fortunate in them; nor will he care to own one of them, even if he were to
189

=== Page 190 ===
use them; nor will he be fortunate in them nor because of them nor because
of those things which are signified by the 6
th
 house, if one of those stars
were in the 6
th
 of his own nativity. And Abū Ma’shar said, from his
childhood he will want to flee from his parents, nor will he see good from
quadrupeds, but rather evil (and worse from small ones than from others),
for they will die in his possession and in his harm. And the majority of his
infirmities will be in the lower parts of his body (and more strongly so, if
the 6
th
 were Virgo).
And if one of the stars were in the 7
th
, or the Lord of the 7
th
 were with
one of them in the same degree, as was said regarding the other houses, it
signifies a multitude of battles and those making war upon the king of that
region, or its greater magnate, and there will likewise be fights and
quarrels, and contentions between kings; and there will be a subsiding and
contentions between partners and those participating together, and many
men will drive out their wives in that revolution, and will quarrel with
them. And it even signifies that kings and magnates will grow angry with
their subjects and with their household members, and against them; and the
hearts of men will harden. Nor will piety reside in them, nor empathy, nor
will men care to celebrate nuptials, nor will they be satisfied to contract
marriage; and faith and legality will recede from them. And if someone
were to accept something mutually from another, or someone else’s
possession were to reach him, he will deny the truth, nor will he want to
return it to him; nor will men care to exercise their arts nor their sciences,
nor their professions. And Abū Ma’shar said there will be more infirmities
of men in the bladder and kidneys and hips and rear parts. And if one of
the aforesaid stars were to fall in the 7
th
 in someone’s nativity, or the
Ascendant of the nativity were the 7
th
 of that revolution, or the Lord of the
7
th
 of the nativity were joined with one of those stars, the native will not
rejoice from wives or from other women, nor will he see good from them,
nor from partners, nor from those cooperating with him, nor concerning
things which he is in charge of, nor concerning any matter which is
signified by the 7
th
 house. And more often he will lose his fights, and his
battles, and his lawsuits or contentions; and likewise others’ possessions
which he is in charge of. And if he were skilled in the law, he will not be
fortunate in his advocacies. And Abū Ma’shar said his infirmities will be
more from the throat and from the kidneys and legs and rear parts (and the
more so if the 7
th
 were Libra).
If however one of the aforesaid stars were in the 8
th
, or the Lord of the 8
th
of the revolution were with one of the aforesaid in the same degree, as was
said regarding the other houses, it signifies impediment and evil is going to
190

=== Page 191 ===
fall upon those who were used to going here and there, by injuring some of
them by means of robbery, and [it signifies] their return to the places in
which they are used to staying, from their robberies or from their thefts.
And it signifies the taking away of some things of the region in which you
were to revolve the year, and belonging to the civil authorities of that city
or community (if another king were not in charge of it), or belonging to
him who had the direction of the community or the city; nor will the lost
thing be found again. And it signifies quarrels or discords falling between
those who inherited the goods of the dead; nor will they agree with each
other, unless by the interposition of others. And it signifies the death of
low-class persons and of those who are forced to eat the bread of suffering
(namely something averse) by need forcing [them],
[448]
 according to the
nature [or substance] of the sign that is the 8
th
 house [domicile?], or in
which the Lord of the 8
th
 is: like if it were a masculine sign, it will be more
in males; if however it were a feminine one, it will be more in females.
And if the 8
th
 were a masculine sign, and the Lord of the 8
th
 in a masculine
sign, it will be only in males. And if the 8
th
 were a feminine sign, and the
Lord of the 8
th
 were in a feminine sign, it will be only in females. And if
one were masculine and the other feminine, it will be in each, however
more according to the nature [or substance] of the 8
th
 than of that in which
the Lord of the 8
th
 is; and there will be pestilences in them. And Abū
Ma’shar said impediment will be multiplied upon the substances of those
contending with a greater king (of the kings of the clime). And he said
they will need the aid of the greater king (namely of Babylon and of the
Romans and the Indians). And there will be more infirmities of men and
women in the genitive organs and in the private parts, and around the parts
adjacent to them. And if one of those stars were to fall in the 8
th
 in
someone’s nativity, or the Ascendant of that nativity were the 8
th
 of the
revolution, or the Lord of the 8
th
 were joined with one of them in the same
degree, just as was said with the others, Abū Ma’shar said that the native
will be wandering, a fugitive, not turning aside toward a place to stay, nor
will he enter under a roof. And he said he will be of those who collect
people inimical to him, and seek to be with demons; and love being alone,
and will not see in himself that he is loved for his labor and his pilgrimage,
[449]
 and this will be more in the places of the dead and in a place of
stinking corpses; nor will he rejoice in those things which are signified by
the 8
th
 house. And more infirmities will be because of the private parts and
around the private parts and the areas adjacent to them (and more strongly
so if the 8
th
 were Scorpio).
And if one of the aforesaid stars were in the 9
th
, or the Lord of the 9
th
 of
191

=== Page 192 ===
the revolution were with one of them in the same degree (just as was said
regarding the other houses), it signifies impediment and destruction and
evil is going to fall upon bishops and upon other religious men, and those
cultivating God, and especially those who are signified by the planet
disposed worse: like if it were Jupiter, it will fall upon bishops and the
like; if it were Saturn, it will fall upon those wearing rough clothing. And
by how much more powerful and more famous the religion is, by that
much more will the impediment fall upon its cultivators; and the sects or
religions approved of by the Roman Church will be diminished and
pressed down, and even the other religions of men; and dullness and ruin
will fall upon them, and the forgetting of those serving God and his
praises; and they will recede from it, and certain of them will deny him,
and will desist from His commands; and doubt will fall in them, and they
will believe something else is better than that which they believe or
observe. And detriment and sorrow will even fall upon pilgrims on
faraway pilgrimages, and long journeys will go contrary to journeyers, nor
will good happen to them from thence, but their thoughts will be empty
and of a bad end. And certain people will rise up and reveal their own
severity, and they will machinate to bring about the ruin of the king of
Babylon, however they will not be able to perpetrate the evil deed they
have planned in that year; and fights and battles will be broken up. And
there will be more infirmities of men next to the thighs and the hips. And if
one of the aforesaid stars were to fall in the 9
th
 in someone’s nativity, or the
Ascendant of the nativity were the 9
th
 of that revolution, or the Lord of the
9
th
 of the nativity were joined with one of those stars in the same degree (as
was said with the others),
Abū Ma’shar said the native will be practically
stupefied in his affairs, and in his own care,
[450]
 nor will a pilgrimage and
changing [from one place to another] agree with him. And his infirmities
will be more because of the thighs and hips (and more than this if the 9
th
were Sagittarius).
But if one of the aforesaid stars were in the 10
th
, or the Lord of the 10
th
 of
the revolution were joined with one of them (namely in the same degree),
just as was said regarding the other houses, it signifies that dejection and
evil and impediment is going to fall upon kings and the wealthy, and the
nobles and magnates or powerful people ([that is,] upon those who are
preferred above other men); and there will be weakness in them, and
discord and contention and mutual envy will fall between them; and
impediment will fall on their substances and matters; and their complaint
will be puny,
[451]
 and little money will be given to them as tribute, except
perhaps for what they might extort from people by violence or by another
192

=== Page 193 ===
reprehensible method; nor will men revere them in the usual or required
way; and they will suppress their dignities and professions and kingdoms,
and the rustics or common people will be elevated, and they will resist
against them, and will condemn and deride and despise them; and they will
change their names with derision. And they will do this, not to mention
[the fact that] if the magnates were to cross through villages or plains,
there will not be even one base man from the crowd who will not deride
them. And these things will happen to them throughout the entire
revolution. And there will be more infirmities of men from the knees and
from the parts adjacent to them. And if one of the aforesaid stars were to
fall in the 10
th
 in someone’s nativity, or the Ascendant of the nativity were
the 10
th
 of that revolution, or the Lord of the 10
th
 of the nativity were joined
with one of them in the same degree, just as was said for the others, it
signifies the low position of the native, and his dejection, and he will be
despised among those who ought to exalt him, if they can, and particularly
among those close to him; and he will be laborious in his life, and have
little wealth (less so than he does expenses); nor will he earn wealth in
those things about which he were to have trust in the good, and that which
he does earn will not be turned to his own usefulness, unless by accident;
and it will be middling [in amount]. And Abū Ma’shar said, what I have
told you will be according to his nature. And his infirmities will be more
from the knees and those [parts] adjacent to them (and the more so if the
10
th
 were Capricorn).
Indeed if one of the aforesaid stars were in the 11
th
, or the Lord of the
11
th
 of the revolution were joined with one of them in the same degree (just
as was said regarding the other houses), it signifies discord and anxiety is
going to fall between friends. And one will strive to overthrow
[452]
 or
despise the other; and he will be eager for his wounding or harm. And the
trust of men will be annihilated; nor will what they intend, follow from
those things in which they have hope. And the substances of kings and the
wealthy or magnates will be diminished; and they will suffer detriment–
likewise the soldiers of the king of the region, and his ministers, and his
allies; nor will they have good faith toward him, nor a good will; nor will
they use arms to his benefit, nor in his aid, if he were to need it; but they
will be unfaithful. And the infirmities of men will be more because of the
legs and around the legs. And if one of the aforesaid stars were to fall in
the 11
th
 in someone’s nativity, or the Ascendant of the nativity were the 11
th
of the revolution, or the Lord of the 11
th
 of the nativity were joined with
one of them in the same degree (just as was said for the others), it signifies
the native is going to be of middling trust, so that he will not believe
193

=== Page 194 ===
something is able to profit him; and something good will hardly or never
happen to him. And if it were to happen to him, it will be middling; and it
signifies him to be hateful and despised by the common people; and so
great will be the worthlessness of his heart, that he will not believe himself
able to avoid anything evil or any contrary, dangerous thing. Nor will his
thoughts be on anything good; and he will rejoice when he sees an unlucky
stranger.
[453]
 And his intention will be to do evil, even if he cannot
perfect it; he will not praise anyone, nor will he be praised by anyone. Nor
will he be advanced to any secular or clerical dignity, unless perhaps to the
sort which redounds to his harm or the contrary. And his infirmities will be
often because of the legs (and more strongly so, if the 11
th
 were Aquarius).
Indeed if one of the aforesaid were to fall in the 12
th
, or the Lord of the
12
th
 were joined with one of them in the same degree (just as was said in
the other houses [domiciles?]), it signifies a multitude of robbers and of
cutters of roads. It even signifies the fraud of male and female slaves
against their masters; and fall and detriment; the destruction of those
dejected and of low-class persons; for they will be thrown down, and it
will go badly for them, and likewise for the incarcerated; and prisons will
be emptied with the detriment of the incarcerated. And larger quadrupeds
will suffer detriment. And kings and nobles or the wealthy and magnates,
and the rational and the wise, will be raised up; and they will be raised up
over the vulgar and the common people and the rustics and the ignoble,
and over all who earlier had derided them to their detriment and seizure.
[454]
 And the infirmities of men will be more because of the feet. And if
one of the those stars were to fall in the 12
th
 in someone’s nativity, or the
Ascendant of the nativity were the 12
th
 of the revolution, or the Lord of the
12
th
 of the nativity were joined with one of them in the same degree (just as
was said for the others), it signifies that the native will be evil, crafty with
an evil cleverness, laborious, ingenious with a fraudulent skill, having
many anxieties and hardships, and many enemies; and many men will hate
him, both without cause and with cause. And Abū Ma’shar said, for every
one who sees him will hate him, from his childhood up to old age. And his
infirmities will be more because of the feet–and more strongly so, if the
12
th
 were Pisces.
And Abū Ma’shar said
[455]
 if Jupiter [or Venus] were to aspect [these
places] from out of the place of the image,
[456]
 and were to project his [or
her] own rays to that degree, and he [or she] were strong in his [or her]
own place, it signifies the [breaking of the] strength of those stars. And if
Venus [or Jupiter] were weak in her [or his] own place, something of her
own works that should appear, will not work.
[457]
 And he said the
194

=== Page 195 ===
multitude of [the fixed star’s] evil will be according to the quantity of the
strength or weakness of the [benefic] planet [aspecting it]. And if [the
benefic] were to aspect from a place of enmity and contrariety,
[458]
 it will
not repel any of the evil, especially if it were weak in its own place. But it
will strive to repel the evil, however it will not repel any of it.
And he said, if however a malefic were to aspect in it from a place of
dejection,
[459]
 everything that I told you of the matters of the planets will
be evil; and its [evil] work will hasten and one [evil] will follow another.
And he said if [the malefic] were to aspect out of a place of enmity and
contrariety, everything which I said will be evil, and [there will be]
contrariety from the beginning of the evil’s coming, [and] anticipation up
to its end.
[460]
Indeed if the Sun were to aspect the place itself, he will reveal the evil
itself, and will act to lay it bare.
[461]
 And he said every one who strives to
conceal what will happen, will not be able to conceal it. And he said, this
will be general for the same generation and the cities.
And he said if Saturn were to aspect, tribulation will descend one after
the other.
And he said if Mercury were to aspect, this will be commingled and
colored.
[462]
And he said if the Moon were to aspect, her operation will be [what was
said] concerning the operation of the Sun. And he said it will be a little less
and faster in every thing that she does, on account of the quickness of her
course.
And he said, know that everything which I have told you, will be in the
city which is in the division of that same sign. And he said, therefore
consider this, because you will not go astray, if God wills.
Chapter 109: What the fortunate fixed stars would signify in nativities
and questions and the revolutions of years
Having spoken of the misfortunes which are introduced by the
unfortunate fixed stars into inferior things, now we must speak about the
fortunes which the fortunate fixed stars confer in them. For just as some
unfortunate fixed stars are found in every sign, so in every one of them
some fortunate fixed stars are found, which are causes of contrary things
(namely of fortunate ones).
Therefore, know that in the fifteenth
[463]
 degree of Aries and its
195

=== Page 196 ===
sixth minute, is a certain star of the nature of Jupiter and Venus, and
its latitude is southern; and its peculiar nature is to be useful and to
aid. Indeed another one is in its twenty-sixth degree and first minute,
of the nature of Jupiter.
In Taurus is one star in its first degree and third minute. Another in its
eighth degree, seventh minute. A third is in its ninth degree and first
minute–all of which are of the nature of Venus.
Indeed in Gemini is one star in its nineteenth degree and second
minute. And another in its twenty-first degree and third minute–which
are of the nature of Jupiter and are of the second magnitude.
In Cancer is one star which is called The Good One, in its twenty-
seventh degree and second minute.
[464]
 Another in its twenty-ninth
degree and fifth minute. And they are both of the nature of Jupiter,
and do good.
In Leo is one star of the nature of Jupiter and Venus, [in] its ninth
degree and fourth minute, and it is called Goodwill.
[465]
In Virgo is a certain star in its fourth degree and seventh minute, of
the nature of Venus and the Moon.
In Libra is a certain star of the nature of Jupiter and Venus in its
thirteenth degree and forty-fifth minute. And another in the fourteenth
degree and forty-fifth minute of the aforesaid nature. And they are
both southern and aiding.
And in Scorpio is one star in its ninth degree and fifty-fifth minute.
And another is in its thirteenth degree and first minute. And another
in its fourteenth degree and forty-fifth minute. And another is in its
nineteenth degree and fifteenth minute, all of which are southern
[and] of the nature of Jupiter.
In Sagittarius is one star in its tenth degree and fifteenth minute,
which is called Peacemaker,
[466]
 and is of the nature of Venus.
Indeed another is in its seventeenth degree and fifty-fifth minute, and
it is northern, of the nature of Jupiter.
196

=== Page 197 ===
In Capricorn is one star in its second degree and third minute, which
is called Cow,
[467]
 and it is of the nature of Jupiter. And another is in
its seventh degree and fifty-fifth minute. And another is in its
seventeenth degree and fifty-fifth minute, which are both
[468]
southern and are of the nature of Jupiter.
In Aquarius is one star in its fifteenth degree and fifty-fifth minute,
and it is of the nature of Jupiter.
In Pisces is one star in its seventh degree and eleventh minute, and it
is of the nature of Jupiter himself.
Chapter 110: On the peculiar nature of these [benefic] fixed stars in
the twelve houses
And if you were to see the Lord of the Year or Revolution or of the
nativity or the question joined with one of the aforesaid stars in the same
degree, in the revolution of a year of the world, you would know that good
and fortune will come to kings and the wealthy or nobles and magnates.
You may say the same in nativities concerning the affairs of natives, and in
questions and the revolutions of nativities. And joys and gladness and
soundness of mind, and the safety of the body will come to them. And by
how much their conjunction were less than one degree, up to one minute,
by that much will their status be better and more suitable. And if one of the
aforesaid stars were to fall in the ascending degree of someone’s nativity,
or the Lord of the nativity were joined with one of them in the same
degree, the native will be fortunate and good; and he will lead his life in
rest and joy and tranquility and every good status (and the more strongly
so, if the Ascendant were Aries).
And if one of the stars were to fall in the 2
nd
 from the Ascendant of the
revolution, or the Lord of the 2
nd
 of the revolution were with one of them in
the same degree (just as was said), it signifies the increase of the matters
and substances of men, and especially of the wealthy and great or noble
men (and more strongly so if Taurus were the 2
nd
 house). And if one of the
aforesaid stars were to fall in the 2
nd
 in someone’s nativity, or his
Ascendant were the 2
nd
 of the revolution, or the Lord of the 2
nd
 of the
nativity were joined with one of them in the same degree (just as was said
in the 1
st
 house), it signifies that the native will be of good condition and of
good status, wealthy, and of much
census
 and wealth. And he will retain
197

=== Page 198 ===
what is acquired, and his own substance; and he will be of good skill and
engaged in his own business dealings, and will have repute among other
men; and they will listen to his words, and [his words] will be pondered
(and the more so if Taurus were the 2
nd
 house).
But if one of the stars were to fall in the 3
rd
 from the Ascendant of the
revolution, or the Lord of the 3
rd
 were with one of them in the same degree
(just as was said in the others), it signifies the good condition of the houses
of oration [or prayer], and that short journeys will be agreeable and useful
to those journeying, and that brothers will behave well toward one another;
and one brother will be made happy because of the other; and they will be
in healthy bodies, and will be of sound mind (and the more so if Gemini
were the 3
rd
 house). And if one of the aforesaid stars were to fall in the 3
rd
in someone’s nativity, or the Ascendant of the nativity were the 3
rd
 of the
revolution, or the Lord of the 3
rd
 of the nativity were joined with one of the
aforesaid stars, it signifies that he will be useful and benevolent to his
brothers and his own lesser blood-relatives, and neighbors, and to those
who place him above themselves, or who think of him as a friend. Nor will
he be inclined to look at an unlucky stranger,
[469]
 and he will be
compassionate to whose to whom evils have come; and his intention will
often be benign, and not to the contrary; and his journeys will be useful
(and especially short ones), and they will be safe and advantageous, both
in the affairs and in his person; and he will be sound of body, and
especially around the shoulder blades and arms (and more so if Gemini
were the 3
rd
 house).
But if one of the aforesaid stars were in the 4
th
 from the Ascendant of the
revolution, or the Lord of the 4
th
 were with one of them in the same degree
(as was said regarding the other houses), it signifies the good condition of
farmers and of harvests and things born from the earth. It even signifies
peace and tranquility in cities and between cities and other habitations.
And fathers will behave well with sons and toward sons, and one will
rejoice and be made happy with the other, and on account of the other.
And the end of things undertaken (which were to happen in that year or in
the revolution) will be to the good. And if someone were to buy land or
another estate or some inheritance, what he intends [to happen] will follow
from it. And many men will be healthy, and especially around the chest
and lungs (and more so if Cancer were the 4
th
 house). And if one of the
aforesaid stars were in the 4
th
 in someone’s nativity, or the 4
th
 of the
revolution were the Ascendant of someone’s nativity, or the Lord of the 4
th
of the nativity were joined with one of those stars in the same degree, it
signifies that the native is going to be good to his parents (namely his
198

=== Page 199 ===
father, grandfather, father-in-law, and other more ancient ones), and that
he will love them, and that he will be obedient and favorable to them; and
the end of those things about which he will have interjected himself will be
praiseworthy. And his works will be praised, even if sometimes he were to
do less well; however he will be praised by men, and he will be sound in
body, and his health will remain, especially around the chest and lungs,
and the lower parts of the chest.
But if one of the said stars were to fall in the 5
th
 from the Ascendant of
the revolution, or the Lord of the 5
th
 were with one of them (just as was
said regarding the other houses), it signifies good and fortune that will
happen to children; and the love which their parents will have for them;
and it signifies the increase of licit sexual intercourse, and delight in it in
the revolution; for delight and good will be increased between those loving
each other. And the sharing of households
[470]
 and donations between
them will be more than usual; and there will be health in their bellies and
around the lower parts of the chest, and around the spine and back, more
so than usual (and the more so if Leo were the 5
th
 house). And if one of the
aforesaid stars were in the 5
th
 of the nativity, or the Ascendant of the
nativity were the 5
th
 of the revolution, or the Lord of the 5
th
 of the nativity
were joined with one of those stars, it signifies that the parents of the
native will love him, but he whose nature is the sign of the 5
th
 house will
love him more; and he will be obedient to his own parents, nor will he
ignore their commands. And he will be loving him,
[471]
 and will
persevere in the good, and he will be fortunate in children and in those
things which are signified by the 5
th
 house; and he will be sound of body,
and especially around the chest and stomach and back, and around the
genital parts (and the more so if the 5
th
 house were Leo).
If however one of the aforesaid stars were to fall in the 6
th
 from the
Ascendant of the revolution, or the Lord of the 6
th
 were with one of them in
the same degree, just as was said in the other houses, it signifies increase
and good is going to come onto quadrupeds (and especially smaller ones).
And Abū Ma’shar said it signifies this even in the king and in his male and
female slaves; and likewise in other slaves and in male and female
servants. And the status of low-class persons will be good, according to its
nature (like if it were masculine or feminine). And there will be wealth for
those wishing to trade in slaves or smaller animals, and it will be well for
those wishing to run away; and infirmities will be decreased, and
especially those which customarily come from choler abounding in the
intestines. But if one of the stars were to fall in someone’s nativity in the
6
th
 of his nativity, or the Ascendant of the nativity were the 6
th
 of the
199

=== Page 200 ===
revolution, or the Lord of the 6
th
 of the nativity were joined with one of
them in the same degree, just as was said in the others, it signifies that it
will be well for that native in slaves and from male and female slaves, and
in male and female servants. And he will be fortunate in them and in those
things which are signified by the 6
th
 house; and he will stay willingly with
his own parents, and he will be often healthy in the lower parts of his body
(and more strongly so if the 6
th
 house were Virgo).
And if one of the stars were in the 7
th
, or the Lord of the 7
th
 were with
one of them in the same degree (as was said regarding the other houses), it
signifies tranquility and good and the breaking apart of fights and battles;
and there will be tranquility and quiet between partners and those
participating together, and between other men; and there will be good will
between husbands and wives, and little quarreling (less than usual). And
kings and magnates will be reconciled to and humbled by their own
subjects, and they will obey them more freely than usual; and piety will
remain in men, and they will be intent to celebrate nuptials and to contract
marriages; and faith and legality will remain in them, and they will employ
truth somewhat more than usual; and they will be content to practice their
arts and their professions; and health will thrive in men (and especially
around the bladder and kidneys, and the hips and the hind parts). And if
one of the aforesaid stars were to fall in the 7
th
 in someone’s nativity, or the
Ascendant of the nativity were the 7
th
 of the revolution, or the Lord of the
7
th
 of the nativity were with one of them, the native will rejoice because of
wives and other women, and he will see good from them and from partners
and those participating with him, and from all those who are signified by
the 7
th
 house; and he will win in his lawsuits. And if he were a lawyer or
versed in law it will go well for him in his advocacies; and there will be
health in his throat and kidneys and legs and rear parts (and more so if the
7
th
 house were Libra).
If however one of the aforesaid were in the 8
th
, or the Lord of the 8
th
 of
the revolution were with one of them in the same degree (just as was said
in the other houses), it signifies the good condition of those wandering,
namely of those who are used to going here and there, harming others by
means of robbery; and something of their malice will be mitigated. It even
signifies staying in places in which they are used to living more than usual,
nor will they employ whatever evil people are able to of their robberies. It
even signifies the guarding of the king of that region in which you are
revolving the year, or of the ruler or civil authority of that place, or of him
who must guide the republic. And if he were to lose something of his
things, what is lost will be recovered. It even signifies concord between
200

=== Page 201 ===
those who have inherited the goods of the dead. It even signifies the
safeguarding of the life of low-class persons according to the substance of
the sign;
[472]
 nor will there be those who strive to defraud the substances
of greater kings (namely the king of the Romans and the king of Babylon
and the king of the Indians); and there will be health in men and women,
and especially around the genital parts and around the private parts and the
parts adjacent to them. And if one of those stars were to fall in the 8
th
 of
someone’s nativity, or the Ascendant of the nativity were the 8
th
 of the
revolution, or the Lord of the 8
th
 of the nativity were joined with one of
them in the same degree (just as was said regarding the others), it signifies
that the native will be of those who freely associate with men, and who
flee solitude, and who live readily with good things. And he will see in his
own person what he wants, and will rejoice regarding them and in those
things which are signified by the 8
th
 house. And he will be sound in body,
and especially around the private parts and the parts adjacent to them (and
more so if the 8
th
 house were Scorpio).
And if one of the aforesaid stars were in the 9
th
, or the Lord of the 9
th
 of
the revolution were with one of them in the same degree (just as was said
regarding the other houses [domiciles?]), it signifies joy and happiness and
the good status of bishops and other religious men, and those serving God,
as the planet signifying them were better disposed: like if it were Jupiter, it
will be more in bishops and other clerics who are called secular. If it were
Saturn, this will be more in religious men wearing rough clothing, and
more likely in blacker clothing, and in more renowned men. And the sects
or religions approved by the Roman Church will be increased; and they
will be serving God and praising Him. And pilgrimages or long journeys
will be useful and profitable; and the citizens of Babylon will be obedient
to their king; and men will be healthy, and especially around the thighs and
hips (and more so if the 9
th
 house were Sagittarius). And if one of the
aforesaid stars were to fall in the 9
th
 in someone’s nativity, or the
Ascendant of the nativity were the 9
th
 of the revolution, or the Lord of the
9
th
 of the nativity were joined with one of them in the same degree (just as
was said regarding the others), the native will attend closely to his own
matters, and choose the better part regarding his own affairs, and even over
strangers; and pilgrimages and long journeys will be useful to him; and his
health will thrive around the thighs and hips–and more so if the 9
th
 house
were Sagittarius.
And if one of the aforesaid stars were to fall in the 10
th
, or the Lord of
the 10
th
 were joined with one of them in the same degree (just as was said
regarding the other houses [domiciles?]), it signifies good and the increase
201

=== Page 202 ===
of good is going to come to kings and great men who are fit for a kingdom;
and there will be strength in them for the good; and there will be quiet and
security between them, and it will be well for them; and the
census
 will be
rendered to them without contention and without impediment; and men
will revere them, and their dignities and professions or realms will be
exalted; and health will thrive in men, and especially around the knees and
the parts adjacent to them. And if one of the aforesaid were to fall in the
10
th
 in someone’s nativity, or the Ascendant of the nativity were the 10
th
 of
the revolution, or the Lord of the 10
th
 of the nativity were joined with one
of them in the same degree (just as was said regarding the others), it
signifies the goodness of the native and the greatness of his mind, and the
increase of honor for him; and he will be honored by his own [people] and
even by strangers, and he will lead his life without great labor, and he will
live as though at rest; and he will be a man of wealth or advantage, and
that which he earns will be turned to his usefulness; and there will even be
the health of his body, and especially around the knees and around the
parts adjacent to them–and the more so if the 10
th
 house were Capricorn.
Indeed if one of the aforesaid stars were in the 11
th
, or the Lord of the
11
th
 of the revolution were joined with one of them in the same degree (just
as was said regarding the other houses), it signifies good and fortune is
going to come between friends, and one will strive to support the other and
exalt [him]; and one will be eager to aid and help the other. And the
substances of kings and the wealthy or magnates will likewise be
increased. And the soldiers of the king of that region, and his ministers,
and his allies, will have good faith and a good will toward him. And they
will gladly employ arms for his usefulness; and they will be faithful to
him. And men will be healthy in the legs and around the legs (and the
more so if the 11
th
 house were Aquarius). And if one of the aforesaid stars
were to fall in the 11
th
 in someone’s nativity, or the Ascendant of the
nativity were the 11
th
 of the revolution, or the Lord of the 11
th
 of the
nativity were joined with one of them in the same degree (just as was said
in the others), it signifies that the native will have great confidence, indeed
so that, regarding everyone concerning whom he gets involved, he will
hope that good and usefulness will be able to follow. The contrary of those
things which he hopes and about which he gets involved, will hardly
happen to him; and he will be loved by the vulgar, and he will have so
much trust and so much boldness, that he will not believe something evil
or something contrary could happen to him. His thoughts will be on the
good, and he will have pity for those for whom things go adversely. And
his intention will be in doing well; for he will be praised by others and he
202

=== Page 203 ===
will praise them. And he will be inclined to have an office or honors, he
will be promoted to them, and his health will thrive in the legs and around
the legs (and the more so if the 11
th
 house were Aquarius).
Indeed if one of the aforesaid were to fall in the 12
th
, or the Lord of the
12
th
 were joined with one of the aforesaid in the same degree (just as was
said concerning all the others), it signifies the decrease of robbers and
cutters of roads, and their detriment; it even signifies the obedience of
male and female slaves toward their masters; and it signifies the good
condition of low-class persons, and the easing [of the condition] of those
incarcerated. And larger quadrupeds will be saved. And it even signifies
that kings or magnates and nobles will behave themselves well toward the
rustics or common people. And there will be health in men, and especially
in the feet and around the feet (and the more so if the 12
th
 house were
Pisces). And if one of those stars were to fall in the 12
th
 in someone’s
nativity, or the Ascendant of someone’s nativity were the 12
th
 of the
revolution, or the Lord of the 12
th
 of the nativity were joined with one of
them in the same degree (just as was said in the others), it signifies that the
native will be good, ingenious with a good and licit and praiseworthy skill,
having little labor, and few anxieties and few worries and few needs, few
enemies (and especially hidden ones), but rather he will be loved by men–
as a boy, youth, and when he is an old man. And health will thrive in him,
and especially in the feet and around the feet (and more strongly so if the
12
th
 house were Pisces).
And if Jupiter were to aspect the degree in which the star then was (and
[Jupiter] is in good condition), or the Head of the Dragon were there, their
fortune will be increased. Indeed if Saturn were to aspect (or the Tail were
there), it will be decreased. Indeed if Venus were to aspect, it will increase
a little, practically unnoticeably. Indeed for the rest they will work nothing
that may be sensed. However, if the Sun were to aspect the place, he will
make what the fixed star signified come to act more quickly. And if the
Moon were to aspect, it will hasten more again.
Chapter 111: On the varieties of manners
[473]
Abū Ma’shar put this chapter in his book of revolutions, which it does
not seem we should omit, since I have followed in his footsteps in this
(even though I have made a longer speech than he had). And he said that in
the circle
[474]
 there are ways of life which are not likened to other ways
of life. For he said, in the king is a way of life which is not likened to the
203

=== Page 204 ===
way of life of the household members; and in the household members is a
way of life that is not likened to the way of life of kings. And in a kingdom
is a manner which is not likened to the manner of nativities. And in
nativities is a use which is not likened to the use of a question.
Chapter 112: On the impediments which the Lord of the ascending
sign of the revolution introduces, if it were impeded (whether it is the
Lord of the Year or not)
If the Lord of the Ascendant of the revolution of a year of the world
were impeded in the hour of the revolution (whether he is the Lord of the
Year or not–because if another were the Lord of the Year, he is his
participator in these things; and the significations are taken more naturally
from them, even if they are taken from the Lord of the Year), and the
impediment were in one of the angles, he will send in tribulation upon
men. For if he were
combust in the 10
th
, the impediment will be because of
the kingdom or because of a kingdom of equal significance. And if the Sun
were in the Midheaven, or otherwise were the Lord of the 10
th
, it signifies
that sorrow will occur to men, or restriction, by the king or because of him.
If however the combustion were in the 4
th
 (and this closer to the cusp than
near the end of the 4
th
), mortality will be feared in that same revolution–
and this according to the nature [or substance] of the ascending sign and of
the planet who is its Lord. Like if it were a feminine sign, it will be more
in females; and if in addition its Lord were a feminine planet, it will be
wholly in females. If however the sign were masculine, and in addition its
Lord were a masculine planet, it will be wholly in males.
And if the Lord of the Ascendant were Mercury, it will be more in boys
up to the beginning of adolescence. And if the Lord of the Ascendant were
Saturn, it will be more in old men and decrepit people, and in those who
are signified by Saturn. And if the Lord of the Ascendant were Jupiter, it
will be more in the wise and in those trained in law, and in men whose
youth has been completed. And if the Lord of the Ascendant were Mars, it
will be more in youths from the twenty-first year up to the forty-fifth. And
if the Lady of the Ascendant were Venus or the Moon, it will be more in
women. Indeed if the signification belonged to Venus and she had escaped
from combustion, and were outside the rays of the Sun, and were oriental,
it signifies that this will happen in young women.
[475]
 And if she were
occidental, it will happen in those of greater age. And if the signification
belonged to the Moon, and she were from the New Moon up to the first
204

=== Page 205 ===
quarter, it signifies young women up to thirty. And if she were from the
first quarter up to the full amount of her light [the Full Moon], it will be in
those who are from the thirtieth year up to the forty-fifth. And if she were
from the fullness of her light up to the third quarter, it will be in those who,
from thence up to now have already begun to grow old. And if she were in
the fourth quarter, this will be in old women or little old ladies. And if by
chance it were to happen in men, she signifies their ages by means of the
same method.
On the signification of the Lord of the Ascendant, if it were combust in the
7
th
 or the Ascendant
And if the Lord of the Ascendant were combust in the 7
th
, it signifies
battles and plunderings and contentions are going to fall between men. If
however he were combust in the 1
st
, his impediment will be harmful. You
will even see of what nature the sign of the Ascendant is: because
impediment will fall in the substance which is signified by that sign. Like
if it were Aries or Capricorn, it will be in smaller animals. If however it
were Taurus or the last half of Sagittarius, it will be in larger animals, and
especially in cows and the like. And if it were Gemini, Libra or Aquarius,
or the first part of Sagittarius, it will be in men. And if it were Cancer or
Pisces, it will be in animals of the water which men use for their own
usefulness. If however it were Scorpio, it will be in poisonous animals,
both terrestrial and aquatic. And if it were Leo, it will be in wild animals
who prey on living things, like lions, wolves, and the like. And if it were in
Virgo, it will be in seeds and things born of the earth, and in girls who are
not corrupted. And know that if the impeded planet were received by a
strong, unimpeded planet, that the reception cancels the malice, and
destroys it. If however the malefics were to aspect him without perfect
reception, they increase [the malice], and the more strongly so if the aspect
were a square or opposition.
Chapter 113: On the impediments which the Lord of the Midheaven
will introduce, if he were impeded in the revolution
After you looked at the Lord of the Ascendant of the revolution and you
were to see his significations, it remains for you to look at what is signified
by the Lord of the Midheaven. For if he were combust in one of the angles,
it signifies destruction which will happen to the king in that revolution:
205

=== Page 206 ===
like if he were combust in the first, and the Sun were the Lord of the first,
it signifies that the rustics or common people or subjects are going to kill
the king in that revolution, and at least they will conspire to ruin him and
betray him. Whence, for this purpose, so that your judgment might profit
him, and discretion may triumph, and so that the will might be believed to
be free, and that you could avert the evil that (according to the stars) is
going to come, counsel him that he should not believe the common people
nor be assured of them.
[476]
And Abū Ma’shar said if you wished to know in what sort of way it
should be feared for him, see which of the planets aspects the Sun at the
hour of the revolution. And if Mars were to aspect him or were joined to
him corporally, it signifies the killing of the king, which will happen to
him by means of the advice of vulgar or common people, from everyday
robbers and murderers and cutters of roads (who kill men for a price).
[477]
If however Saturn were to aspect him, or were joined to him corporally, a
fearful infirmity will be feared concerning the king, or perhaps that he will
be poisoned. And he said, if the Sun were to burn up the Lord of the
Ascendant of the year, even what I said will be feared for him, in the same
way by which I described it. And he said, but what there would be of this
will be in his own region in which he is, nor will he go out of another land
to it. But if the Lord of the 10
th
 were combust in the 4
th
 or in the 7
th
, these
things will happen because of those coming from another land to the one
in which he himself is. And it signifies that the aforesaid will come
according to what was said above. And again he said, speak of evil things
according to what I said in the chapter of the Sun for the king and his
rustics, except that in the chapter on the malefics you will look in this
matter to the revolution of the year.
[478]
 And he said that if the Lord of
the Midheaven were conjoined to a malefic in an angle, in the way he said
in the first chapter, and the aspect were from the opposition or square
aspect of the malefics in this place, it is more severe than the conjunction.
And he said if the Sun were the significator of the king, and were to aspect
Jupiter from the opposition in the revolution, the king will be inimical to
the nature [or substance] of that same planet, and he will destroy it
[479]
just like [the Sun] does Jupiter.
On the significations of Mars in the revolution
Abū Ma’shar said, know that if Mars were in Gemini at the hour of the
revolution,
[480]
 and he were in the Midheaven, it signifies that in that
revolution many men will be tortured. And if he were in the 1
st
 or in the 7
th
,
206

=== Page 207 ===
the hands of many people will be cut off, and many will be mutilated. And
if he were in the 4
th
 (namely in the angle of the earth) it signifies the cutting
off of many hands and feet. And he said, say likewise in the entrance of
two great men [or] kings in their rule. Say the same in the entrance of
some position of authority or any other rule. It can be said that many
malefactors will arrive whom it will be necessary to deal with. Know this
and do not give it over to forgetfulness.
Chapter 114: How evil or horrible accidents that are going to come in
that year, may be known at the hour of the revolution
If you wished to know the severe and horrible accidents which are going
to come in the year which you are revolving, know that the accidents will
be according to the disposition of the two malefics (namely Saturn and
Mars). Which if they were found in the superior circle (that is, in the
northern half), and with it being located above the earth (and more
strongly if they were northern),
[481]
 it signifies harshness and horrible
things are going to come in that year. And by how much more they were
elevated above the earth (and particularly Saturn), by that much more will
their signification be extended to faraway and diverse regions.
And Abū Ma’shar said, know that the condition of the year will be more
oppressive if the two malefics were in the high circle where the pole is, in
the images themselves which, if they were going out to the end of the
circle, will return;
[482]
 and they signify destructions. Therefore if you
were to see the two malefics in that part of the superior circle at the hour of
the revolution, you may know then that the condition of the year or
revolution will be made oppressive, and there will be severe and horrible
accidents. And if one were in the square aspect of the other, their condition
will be worse, for then they will signify a lack of activity in every living
thing,
[483]
 and tribulations will appear in every subject which is on the
earth, and this will be prolonged and will slow down; and more strongly if
Saturn were then in Virgo and Mars in Gemini, and the revolution were
nocturnal, and Mars were to commit his own disposition to Saturn, and he
were to receive him,
[484]
 and each were retrograde (or at least one of
them). But Saturn has greater harm, wherefore then it will signify things
exceeding proper measure in malice, both in burnings and killings; nor
could Jupiter break their malice, unless perhaps one of them were in
Cancer in the trine or sextile aspect of Jupiter, with [Jupiter] being of good
condition and well disposed. For then [Jupiter] could break the malice of
207

=== Page 208 ===
the one whom he aspected, or at least he would diminish its noticeable
destruction. And the weakening of the king of the region (in which you are
revolving the year) will be signified, and that of the other great men and
the wealthy or nobles. And kings and magnates will seek help from the
common people; and religion will decreased; and piety will be taken away
from men; nor will sympathy be found in them; and this will be prolonged
until one of them (namely Saturn or Mars) arrives at the degree which was
the cusp of the 10
th
 house at the hour of the revolution; or it will begin then
and will last even after much, at least through one transit of Mars through
the zodiac. If however Saturn were then in Virgo, and Mars were to
commit disposition from Gemini, just as was said, and the Moon were to
commit disposition to Saturn, with her in Sagittarius, then it will signify
the most horrible of horrible things, the pestilence of pestilences, and it
will signify the destruction of kingdoms and of kings, and the
transmutation of certain kingdoms from certain kings to certain other
kings.
Moreover, if the Moon were to commit her own disposition to Saturn, if
she were joined to him or in his square aspect or opposition, and the Lord
of the sign in which she is
[485]
 were impeded when her conjunction were
perfected with Saturn, degree by degree, and minute by minute, it signifies
many diverse impediments are going to come in that revolution. And if the
Moon had suffered eclipse in the most recent prevention, or she were
supposed to suffer it in the next prevention, the signification of the malefic
will be prolonged by as many months as the eclipse of the Moon lasted by
hours.
But if the Part of Fortune were impeded, and the Lord of the sign in
which she is were impeded when the conjunction of the Moon [with
Saturn] is perfected (whether it is perfected by conjunction or by aspect),
then the conjunction signifies the increase of impediment and destruction.
And Abū Ma’shar said, look at the Sun and his condition, and his aspect
to the impeding malefic, and the Lord of the malefic in the way I told you
regarding the Moon, and the perfection and the Lord of the perfection.
[486]
And
[487]
 make the Part of Fortune and its Lord participants with [the
luminaries], and [make them] give aid by the dignities of the seven planets
who are aided and signify the time.
[488]
 And he said if the significator
were in an angle, the evil will be prolonged (and shortened [if] in the other
[houses]). Likewise, even look at the Sun to see if he had suffered eclipse
in the preceding conjunction, or will suffer it in the following; because
what is signified by the malefic will be prolonged by how many years as
208

=== Page 209 ===
his eclipse will have lasted by hours. And he said, the Lord of the course
and of the perfection signifies according to what the significator signified
in terms of good and evil. And likewise the Lord of the Ascendant and the
Lord of the domicile of the division: if he were to receive the Moon from
Saturn in an optimal place of the circle, in a strong place, he will signify
the repulsing of evil with the help of God, and the prohibiting of the
destruction of evil by its fortune. And he said, likewise in nativities, if the
Moon were in the place of the testifying of the Ascendant, and were
aiding, and she were made fortunate by the Lord of the Ascendant, and [it
was] a good complexion,
[489]
 it signifies the long length of life and
kingdom. And he said, the native will be wise and he will be fortunate.
And he said, the benefics dissolve the evil of the one pushed
[490]
 if it
were strong and in an opportune place, and it were directly his testimony.
[491]
 Indeed if it were to the contrary, they will be weakened and they will
not perfect.
On the kasmīmī
[492]
 of the Sun, according to Abū Ma’shar
Abū Ma’shar said if a star were united under the rays of the Sun, and
especially Mercury, it will be strength and rule for him, unless if [the Sun]
were with Saturn (whose nature is the contrary of the nature of the Sun).
And if there were 15° between Mercury and the Sun, he will be in a
praiseworthy place, if he were received.
When planets go out from under the rays of the Sun, according to Abū
Ma’shar
Abū Ma’shar said, make sure that a significator (or some planet) has
gone out from combustion, [and] that a malefic does not aspect him,
because then he will be like a delicate boy. If however a malefic were to
aspect him, he will lose him and it will end.
[493]
 And likewise if it were to
enter into combustion or were joined to him, he will be [like] a decrepit
old man who suffers some illness.
On the condition of the higher planets in the revolution of a year of the
world, and particularly of Saturn
You will look ahead to the condition of the higher planets of the
revolution of a year of the world, if you were to revolve it, and see where
they were to fall in the circle, beginning from Saturn: which if he were to
209

=== Page 210 ===
fall in the degree of his own exaltation, and he were to receive the
disposition of Venus, he will be the dispositor and significator of a great
matter; for he will signify there is going to be a great matter in that
revolution (and principally in the Roman Empire,
[494]
 secondarily in the
empire of Babylon); and it will be to the detriment of men and in [things
normally contributing to] their usefulness. And if it were so, even though it
is most rare (still, if it were), it will be the greatest signification, practically
exceeding measure in the exaltation and increase of the kingdom or
empire, and it will be a thing to last for a long time. And it could be
perceived from the substance of the sign in which Venus is, and from the
bound of her place. Because if she were occidental from the Sun, direct,
namely made fortunate and strong, in the bound of a benefic, free from
impediments, recently having gone out from under the rays of the Sun,
then she signifies it ought to happen thus; or if some planet were to aspect
her
[495]
 who received her
[496]
 from two dignities, and commits his own
strength to her, with him free, made fortunate, and strong, and well
disposed, of which nothing bad may be said, he will be a participant;
indeed if it were otherwise, such signification will be something else,
namely may God avert it.
[On Jupiter]
You will even see if Jupiter were to fall in the degree of his own
exaltation and were made fortunate and strong, free from impediments;
because it will signify the greatest changes are going to come in that
revolution, in that kingdom and empire, and for the good–and more
strongly and fully so, if the Moon were to aspect him (with her free,
namely made fortunate and strong), and another planet who receives him,
and commits its own strength to him (with it being free from
impediments)–and [the third planet] will be a participator. Indeed if it were
otherwise, he will not observe his promise, unless according to how he is
disposed.
[497]
On Mars
Then look at Mars: which if he were to fall in the degree of his own
exaltation, it signifies great changes (but they will be less than the
aforesaid) which will be of his nature, namely they are battles, burnings,
fires, the cutting of roads, shedding of blood, and the like–unless Saturn
were to aspect him from a trine or sextile aspect, with [Saturn] being made
210

=== Page 211 ===
fortunate and strong, free from impediments, so that nothing bad may be
said about him; or [if] another who received [Mars] were to aspect him,
and commit his own disposition to [Mars], with [the other planet] being
free from impediments, made fortunate and strong, so that if it were
otherwise, the malice of Mars will be increased, and it will happen worse.
On the other planets
Concerning the Sun, nothing needs to be said, because it is impossible
for him to be in the degree of his own exaltation in any revolution.
Of the inferiors, I have not found anything said by the ancient sages,
except what Abū Ma’shar said about Mercury, saying you will look at
Mercury in the revolution to see if there were some planet in his exaltation
who receives him, and receives from him his disposition: it will be the
master of the nature of his signification which I told you (with the help of
God), because he comes together with his exaltation in a revolution of
years and quarters. Indeed if there were a planet in his exaltation who
receives, him, it will be similar to him.
[498]
And he said, concerning the nature of the malefics in the conjunction of
him who is in his own exaltation in the conjunction of the malefics, and
their aspects, the which planet is in the degree of his own exaltation
according to how it was revealed. And he said if the Moon were made
peaceful, and the Sun were strong in his own place in a revolution of the
night, the Sun commits his rulership and regency to the Moon.
[499]
Chapter 115: What the planets would signify in a revolution of the
year in which an eclipse of the Sun or Moon is supposed to take place
When you are revolving a year of the world, see whether there is going
to be an eclipse of the Sun or Moon in that year. Because if an eclipse was
not going to come, the judgment of the revolution will not be changed, but
will remain in its own being. If however one were going to come, see in
which sign its arrival is. Then you will calculate the planets and the houses
for the hour of the middle of the eclipse, and then look at the sign and its
Lord, and see how it behaves with the Lord of the Ascendant of the
eclipse, and how it behaves with the Lord of the Year (or with its
significator), and how it behaves with the significator of the king, and how
it aspects with them, and with the other planets.
Abū Ma’shar said that if some planet who is impeded were to aspect the
211

=== Page 212 ===
hidden [luminary] at the time of the eclipse, [and] afterwards the malefics
were to aspect him, what it signifies will be oppressive, and impediment
will be multiplied–and the more severely so if the significator of the king
were the Lord of the sign in which the eclipse were made; because if it
were so, and one of the malefics were to aspect him, and the malefic were
Mars, the death of the king will be feared in that revolution. And if it were
Saturn, severe infirmity will be feared for him, or another very serious
accident; and this will be when the Sun arrives at the degree which was the
cusp of the Midheaven at the hour of the middle of the eclipse. And if the
Lord of the Year were the Lord of the sign in which the eclipse was going
to come, the ruin of the common people and their great impediment will be
feared (instead of death); and this will be when the Sun arrives at the
degree of the Ascendant of the middle of the eclipse; and this [will be] if
the Ascendant of the eclipse were Gemini or Virgo or Libra, or the first
half of Sagittarius, or Aquarius, according to the kind of persons who are
signified by the sign of the Ascendant, and according to the other things
signified by the signs, just as I have expounded to you above in the chapter
on the impediments which the Lord of the ascending sign of the revolution
introduces when he is impeded. And these significations will last
according to the number which we said above–namely if it were an eclipse
of the Moon, one month is signified for each hour; indeed if it were an
eclipse of the Sun, one year is signified for each hour.
And Abū Ma’shar said,
[500]
 after this, look to the portion [of the
ecliptic]
[501]
 over which you measured from the place of the eclipse and
the place of its Lord, according to the substance of both signs. And he said,
look at the speedy [or flying] stars which are the stars of Jupiter, and
always appear in the place of Mercury. If Mercury were in the east, they
will be seen in the east; and if he were in the west, they will be seen in the
west; and the combustion of Mercury will be their receding.
On the portions
[502]
 of the planets in an eclipse
Abū Ma’shar said,
[503]
 concerning the portions of the planets in an
eclipse, if they were in the lower journey,
[504]
 it will be bad for the role of
Mars and Venus, which are southern and northern; and if they were in the
upper journey, it will be bad for the role of Saturn and the Moon and the
Sun. And he said, after this, look to see in which sign they appear, and of
what sort is the condition of the Lord of the same sign in its place, and
what kind of aspect the malefics and the benefics have to the Lord of the
sign and the staying-place.
[505]
 If it were in a sign of kings [a fire sign],
212

=== Page 213 ===
and the Lord of the sign were to aspect from a strong place, it signifies that
he will leave from the same side which contends in the kingdom [and will
be of] the household members of the king, and he will be famous. And he
said if it were in a sign of a kingdom in the way I said, and the Lord of the
sign did not aspect, he will be of the sons of nobles, and he will be fit for a
kingdom. And he said judge likewise with regard to all the signs. And he
said, know that the signs of the Sun and Jupiter and Mars signify the sons
of kings, and the signs of Saturn signify those famous in former times.
And the domicile of the Moon is less than the domicile of the Sun; and the
domicile of Mercury is less than the domicile of Jupiter, and the domicile
of Jupiter is less than the domicile of Saturn; and [know] that their circles
are below the circles I stated. And he said, for Saturn in Aquarius is
notable, and it is ascribed to the wise [that] in Capricorn he is bad. And he
said, the staying-places in their rising place do not signify unless it is the
condition of the vulgar, and generally [the condition] of kings and great
men. Whence you ought to consider the ascending sign, or the staying-
place, and judge about the aforesaid persons according to the Ascendant
and according to its planet.

How the hour may be discerned
Again, Abū Ma’shar said,
[506]
 indeed the understanding of the hour in
which it will appear, that is, so you might number from the Ascendant of
the eclipse, or from the place of the eclipse to the Ascendant of the middle
of the eclipse for every sign and month. And he said, when you have gone
to the sign itself in which it is (or [to] the Ascendant of the middle of the
eclipse), without a doubt this will exist, whether it were good or evil; or
perhaps this thing will appear if it were faster, at [or toward] the entrance
of the Moon to the Ascendant (especially in an eclipse which is in days):
[there will be] battles, corruption or mutation in weather and adversity.
Chapter 116: How one should proceed concerning the significators of
the king and the rustics, according to Abū Ma’shar
Abū Ma’shar said if the signification of the Sun is over the condition of
the rustics,
[507]
 and you were to understand it, the significator of the king
will be manifested to you, and it will reveal to you what should happen in
his kingdom in that same year. And he said, know from the reception of
the planets towards one another through their lights, and the falling of their
213

=== Page 214 ===
rays in the twelve houses of the circle, and what there is in the signs with
regard to climes and cities, so that their destruction may be laid open to
you; and the adaptation by the rays of the malefics being inimical, and by
the rays of the contrary ones, and likewise by the rays of the malefics
being amicable, and likewise by the rays of the benefics being friendly and
inimical, and speak according to their friendship and enmity toward the
domiciles. For the benefics, if they were made peaceful toward the
domiciles (that is, if they were to aspect the places by a trine or sextile
aspect), signify a multitude of goods; and if they were inimical (that is, if
they were to aspect from the square or the opposition), they signify a
scarcity of good. And likewise if the malefics are inimical to the domiciles
(that is, when they aspect from a square aspect or from the opposition),
they signify a multitude of evil. If however, they were made peaceful
toward the domiciles (that is, [if] they were to aspect them from a trine or
sextile aspect), they signify a scarcity of evil.
And he said, then look to see what is in each sign (in terms of lands) in
the east and the west. And if a sign were impeded in the west, it signifies
impediments from the lands which are in the direction of the east and west.
And if there were an impediment in the Midheaven, it signifies
impediment in the lands which are in the east and the west, and especially
toward the north and south (namely in the areas of Mars and Venus, and in
the land of the Ethiopians).
And he said this is an admirable example through which you may
contemplate a revolution of the year, namely the twelve days remaining of
the month of Ramadan, which is the ninth lunar month of the 35
th
 year of
the Arabs. And the year arrived to Scorpio, and Libra was ascending,
fifteen degrees, the bound of Jupiter; and the planets and their rays [were]
according to what they are in this figure.
[508]
214

=== Page 215 ===
Figure 1: An Ingress by Abū Ma’shar
And he said that the
[509]
 revolution was following Benesaphar
[510]
according to one equal hour and twelve minutes from the beginning of the
Sabbath night, which begins to grow light on the 18
th
 of the aforesaid
month.
[511]
And the
[512]
 Ascendant (by the ascensions of Toledo) was Libra,
fifteen degrees, the planets according to what I will tell you. For Saturn
was in Virgo, 27° 29’. Jupiter in Capricorn, 8° 16’. Mars in Leo, 13°. The
Sun in Aries, the first degree. Venus in Aries, 28° approximately. Mercury
in Aries, 19° 35’. The Moon in Scorpio, 18° and 7’. The Head in Libra,
15° 33’. And the Tail in Aries, 15° 33’.
[513]
And the year arrived at Scorpio. And the erected angles, that is, the
same signs, were by division and by number in the revolution of the year
of the 35
th
 year of the Arabs, with twelve days of the month of Ramadan
remaining. And the Sun was in the opposition of the Ascendant, receding.
[514]
 And the revolution was in the night, and the Moon was in her own
descension in the second sign; and the benefics missing from her,
[515]
 and
she was joined to the malefics; and she was the Lady of the Midheaven.
And Venus and Mercury were in the opposition of the Ascendant. And
Mars [was] in the 11
th
 (namely in Leo), received.
[516]
 And Jupiter was in
the 4
th
 in his own descension, cutting off the light of the Sun from Mars.
215

=== Page 216 ===
[517]
 And Saturn [was] cadent in Virgo, not received, in the 12
th
 house
[domicile?]. And Mars was the Lord of the domicile of the Lord of the
Ascendant (namely of Aries, in which Venus was, and she was the Lady of
the Ascendant), and the Lord of the domicile of the Sun and the Moon.
[518]
And the Lady of the Year, the significatrix of the plebes, [was] Venus,
who had more in terms of testimony;
[519]
 and she was in an angle, in the
opposition of her own domicile, going from the east toward the angle of
the west, not received.
[520]
And the significator of the king was the Moon, because the revolution
was in the night, and it was her authority; and she was the Lady of the
Midheaven and was joined to Saturn, who was cadent in the 12
th
 house
[domicile?], then was joined to Mars (and he was retrograde). [This
signified] that the king of that same clime will be killed by his own rustics,
because the retrograde Mars signified his killing (and he was the Lord of
the domiciles of the luminaries, and the Lord of the domicile of the Lord
of the Ascendant).
[521]
 And on account of the falling of the Moon from
the angle, it signified that he would be killed without contention, and he
would not subdue the aforesaid citizens of his.
And he said, on account of the place of Venus and her being put down
from her own rank,
[522]
 and the opposition, with her being the Lady of
the Year and the significatrix of the rustics, signified that the rustics, after
this, will be given over to battles and the complication of war and
contention in the kingdom.
And he said, on account of the place of the Moon from Saturn, and the
rays of his sextile aspect, it signifies that these things will happen in the
first quarter of the year. And from the place of the Sun (who is the Lord of
the 11
th
, in the square aspect of Jupiter, committing disposition to him),
[523]
 it signifies that he who will succeed [the king] will be just, and the
rustics will be improved in his own time.
[524]
And he said, on account of the light of the retrograde Mars in the 11
th
from the Ascendant, it signifies that he will scatter the houses of the king’s
treasures after killing him by a powerful killing and the shedding of blood.
And he said, on account of the Mars’s presence in the domicile of the Sun,
it signifies the contention of noble men and their kings.
And he said, therefore the light of the opposition of the Sun and
Mercury and Venus was in the Ascendant, and the rays of the second
[525]
square aspect of Jupiter, and the rays of
the first sextile aspect of Mars.
[526]
 This signifies there is going to be a contention in the clime of those
signs, and shedding of blood. And there will be a battle in the area of
216

=== Page 217 ===
Marmon
[527]
 and Sigistan
[528]
 and Aason,
[529]
 and their cattle will be
profitable, and the land will be fertile; infirmities in boys, and the
condition of their businessmen will be improved.
The second [sign] from the Ascendant was Scorpio, and the Moon was
in it impeded, and the rays of the second trine aspect of the Sun, and the
rays of the second sextile aspect of Jupiter, and the rays of the first square
aspect of Mars, and the first sextile aspect of Saturn. And this signifies the
shedding of blood and battles. And the beginning of these will be in the
clime of the Arabs. After this it will change, because the Moon is impeded
outside of the sign in which she is,
[530]
 and after this it will be magnified,
and there will be the shedding of much blood in it, and the condition of the
clime of the Arabs will be made severe, and the death of their cattle, and
the cold of their winter will be severe, and this will be because of the place
of Venus from the Ascendant. And on account of her presence in an angle,
it signifies that a foreign enemy will not enter upon them, and he will be in
the east, and death by means of his role, and the greatest proportion will be
in women.
The third [sign] was Sagittarius, and in it were the rays of the second
trine aspect of Mercury, and the rays of the second trine aspect of Mars,
and the rays of the first square aspect of Saturn; and its Lord Jupiter was in
his own descension. This signifies infirmities and severities which will
find the citizens of the first clime and the citizens of Spain; and a multitude
of robbers, and the death of beasts, and it will be multiplied in the land,
like in Upper Armenia, and more boys will die in this year.
The fourth [sign] was Capricorn, and Jupiter was in it, and the rays of
the second square aspect of the Sun, and the rays of the second square
aspect of Venus, and the light of the first trine aspect of Saturn, and the
light of the first sextile aspect of the Moon. These signify the health of the
clime in the day, and the goodness or fineness of their condition; also the
fitness of the condition of their king, and the felicity of their land, and that
they will beat those who contend with them; and the multitude of their
wealth; and the fertility of the land of the citizens of Asamilier
[531]
 and
Almedehai,
[532]
 and the security of their citizens together with their
largesse and abundance; victory and the fitness of their king.
The fifth [sign] was Aquarius, and none of the planets was in it, but the
light of the second sextile aspect of the Sun was there, and the light of the
second sextile aspect of Mercury, and the light of the first square aspect of
the Moon, and the light of the opposition of Mars, and the light of the
second sextile aspect of Venus–which signifies contention and war in the
area of Kufa,
[533]
 and in its rustics, and battle and rebellions and
217

=== Page 218 ===
consuming [of food]. And he said, perhaps this will be in Egypt and
Gurgan,
[534]
 and on account of this occasion there will be the shedding of
much blood. And he said many pilgrims will be congregated to those
regions.
The sixth [sign]
[535]
 was Pisces, and none of the planets was in it, but
the light of the opposition of Saturn was there, and the light of the first
sextile aspect of Jupiter, and the light of the first trine aspect of the Moon.
And he said the place of the opposition of Saturn signifies the severity of
the cold in Tabaristan,
[536]
 and in its direction, and a burden which will
occur to its king in it, and this on account of the place of Jupiter and the
weakness
[537]
 in which he is. And the bad condition of its rustics, and
they will have power over their king, and they will resolve among
themselves, and there will be dissensions, and their rains and their profits
will be multiplied, and their cattle will be fit, and likewise this will occur
to the areas of India and the land of Armenia (of those who come up
toward Romania).
The seventh [sign] was Aries, and the Sun in it, removed from the angle.
Also Mercury and Venus were in it, and the light of the first square aspect
of Jupiter, and the light of the second trine aspect of Mars (who is the Lord
of the second [sign]). And on account of the place of Venus, which is in an
angle, and the trine aspect of Mars, who is the Lord of the 2
nd
 domicile (and
he is in Leo retrograde), the Sun signified concerning the ruin of the king
of Babylon, and that there will be contention and war in the clime of
Babylon, and the shedding of much blood, and the destruction of their
kingdom. And the beginning of these things will be in another clime, and
this according to the place of Mars, and on account of the place of
Mercury (who is the Lord of the ninth).
[538]
 And the light of Jupiter (who
is the Lord of the 3
rd
 domicile), signifies that there will be in addition a loss
of many men on the occasion of these wars. And he said there will be
religion, and boys and camels and every hairy thing will be successful, and
heat will be oppressive to them. And what I said will even be in the
mountains and in Azerbaijan.
[539]
And the eighth [sign] was Taurus, and none of the planets was in it, and
its Lady Venus was cadent from it. However, the light of the first sextile
aspect of the Sun, and the light of the first trine aspect of Jupiter, and the
light of the second square aspect of Mars (who is the enemy of this
domicile), and the light of the opposition of the Moon (who is the Lady of
the exaltation of this domicile), signifies that the king of Antiha
[540]
 and
the city of Ortona
[541]
 (which are said to be continuous with Nueria,
[542]
and particularly Sigistan
[543]
 and Tabaristan,
[544]
 because it is in the
218

=== Page 219 ===
areas of the west) will go out upon all the enemies who are near them, and
they will find severity from them; and robbers and arrogant men and
contradictions will be multiplied everywhere; and their harvests will be
destroyed, and the rustics will put down their king, and their cattle will
perish, and their security will be from the king,
[545]
 and they will find
good from pilgrimage.
And the ninth [sign] was Gemini, and none of the planets was in it, but
the light of the first sextile aspect of Mercury was there, and the light of
the second square aspect of Saturn, and the light of the second sextile
aspect of Mars.
[546]
 The commixture of the light of Mercury (who is the
Lord of the ninth)
[547]
 signifies that those from Adaliam
[548]
 and
Exanos,
[549]
 and their parts, [and] Thebut
[550]
 will be strengthened over
those who are inimical to them, and who are of their opposition and are
enemies; and this will be on account of the strength of the place of
Mercury and his reception. And on account of the commixture of Mars
with Saturn, it signifies many infirmities and pains in these regions, and
many men will die; and this will be particularly in youths.
[551]
 And
because the second square aspect of Saturn has more degrees, it signifies
that they will be satisfied with their king and will obey him. And he said,
and what we said will be in Gurgan
[552]
 and Lower Acebirutaba,
[553]
and Upper Alem,
[554]
 and Amacil.
[555]
And the tenth [sign] was Cancer, and none of the planets was in it, but
the light of the [second] trine aspect of the Moon (who is the Lady of the
10
th
 domicile) was there, and she is impeded in her own descension; and
the light of the second sextile aspect of Saturn, and the light of the first
square aspect of the Sun, and the light of the first square aspect of
Mercury, and the light of the first sextile aspect of Venus. And he said,
what I said is signified by the malignity of the Lord of the domicile and the
Lord of the exaltation in addition to what the square of the Sun signifies,
that the king of the clime of Iraq
[556]
 will perish and their kingdom will
be destroyed, and it will be mixed together,
[557]
 and there will be
contention between them in their princes, and there will be infirmity in
men generally from cold and moisture, and their produce will be
destroyed, and the condition of men will be oppressed, and acquisition will
be decreased; and likewise the land of Balab
[558]
 and Allaharara
[559]
(that is, of the two seas), and of Egypt, Emarius
[560]
 and Addul.
[561]
And the eleventh [sign] was Leo, and Mars is in it retrograde, and the
light of the first trine aspect of the Sun, and the light of the first trine
aspect of Mercury, and the light of the second sextile aspect of Saturn,
[562]
 and the light of the second square aspect of the Moon, and the light
219

=== Page 220 ===
of the first square aspect of Venus. And he said the place of Mars and the
light of the second square aspect of the Moon (who is the luminary of the
night, and the significatrix of the king), signify that in the clime of
Altoio
[563]
 and in Aeratus
[564]
 there will be war and the shedding of
blood, and detriment from robbers, and this
[565]
 will be in Albafrah,
[566]
and many men will perish in that same year, and there will be contention
in the kingdom. And it will be on account of the light of the second square
aspect of the Moon–understand this.
And the twelfth [sign] was Virgo, and Saturn was [there], retrograde,
and the light of the first trine aspect of Venus, and the light of the second
trine aspect of Jupiter, and the second sextile aspect of the Moon–which
signifies infirmities from cold and dryness, according to the nature of this
sign. And he said, on account of the place of Mercury they will be freed
[from the infirmities] with the help of God, and they will not be destroyed.
And their strength will not belong to the heat of summer
[567]
–understand
this.
How the condition of the king might be seen in this year
The 10
th
 of this figure was Cancer. And the Moon (who is its Lady), was
the significatrix of the king, and she was cadent in the second place. And
he said, therefore we looked to see whether her light was in the Midheaven
(which is her place) or in the Ascendant. And the light of her trine aspect
was in the eighteenth degree and seventh minute of Cancer. Therefore we
looked to see to whom she committed her own disposition in this place,
and it was to [the light] closer to her apart from the other lights, the light of
the first square aspect of Mercury, and it was in the nineteenth degree and
a fraction.
[568]
 We subtracted the light of the Moon from this, and one
degree and a fraction remained. We divided this by fifty-nine minutes and
eight
[569]
 seconds, and one day and a fraction came out. [Therefore] the
Moon disposed one day and a fraction through her own light out of the
Midheaven.
[570]
 And because the disposition was committed to Mercury
(who was the Lord of the house of enemies, and the Lord of pilgrimage
and faith), this signifies the sorrow of the king in this disposition by the
accusation of the religious, and [people] of faith, and from their sayings,
and from enemies. After this, Mercury will receive the disposition from
the Moon by his first square aspect. And he is the Lord of the 9
th
 house
[domicile?] and the 12
th
. His rays are in the 9
th
 domicile from her;
[571]
[and] this signifies every work which is hoped for, having a good measure
of accusation because of penances and prayer and fasting, and they will
220

=== Page 221 ===
find marriage celebrations in that disposition.
Then Saturn will receive the disposition by the light of his second
sextile aspect, from the light of the first square aspect of Mercury, and he
will dispose the remainder of the sign in which his light is, in the following
sign from the same place. And he is the Lord of the fourth and fifth (which
is the eighth from the place of disposition). Therefore, in this disposition it
signified in this place (because he received the light from the square aspect
of Mercury), that little notes and rumors will come to him
[572]
 in these
days from the direction of the west, which will make him sad; and he will
be confused about them, and he will be of bad mind over it, and he will
envy the citizens their work, and his own children,
[573]
 which will make
him sad.
After this the Sun will receive the disposition from Saturn by the light of
his first trine aspect (and he is the Lord of the 2
nd
 domicile from the
Midheaven,
[574]
 and it is also the second [sign] from the house of the
king), which signifies expenses because of women, and this is on account
of the place of the Sun [in Aries], and because he commits disposition to
Venus,
[575]
 and Venus receives the light of her [his?] own first square
aspect, and the light of the first trine aspect of the Sun, and Venus is the
Lady of the Ascendant, and [Libra] is in his opposition.
Therefore [Venus] receives the disposition from the Sun and renders it
to the Moon, and this signified the entrance or involvement in this
disposition, and contention with the rustics because of the kingdom, and
the marriage celebrations of his own son from the direction of women,
[576]
 and their consolation by the light of the second square aspect from
the square aspect of Venus (and [the Moon] is the Lady of the Midheaven,
and is in the 2
nd
 from the Ascendant), which signifies the entering of the
king [into these situations] in that same year, and in the same disposition,
and generally in the disposition of the planets from the Midheaven up to
the place of the cutting [of the light] by his [her?] rays, up to seventy-three
and one-half days, and one-sixth of a day.
[577]
Therefore consider by this, and what it is necessary for you to employ in
it, in a revolution of years of the world, if you worked it out in the
disposition of days by the projection of rays according to what I told you
concerning the domiciles and their Lords, and the reception of light and its
sending toward a reception from a trine or square aspect, or from the
opposition. After this, know the light of the reception and its impulse,
[578]
and work in the lights of the contrary and inimical malefics, and in the
lights of the harmonious or peace-making malefics. And he said, likewise
[regarding] the inimical benefics, if they were inimical to the houses, say
221

=== Page 222 ===
[there will be] a scarcity of good; and in the lights of the malefics (if they
were inimical to the houses), and multitude of evil; and if they were
pacified, a scarcity of good.
[579]
Likewise concerning the two Parts
[580]
 in a revolution of the years of the
world

Abū Ma’shar said if you were to find two Parts in one place or sign,
those people will prevail whose significator was better disposed. And that
one will be called better disposed (how much it is) in this, who better
aspects his own Part, or were joined corporally with it. And Abū Ma’shar
said this is like if a Part

is joined to its own Lord in the watery triplicity,
and their presence or conjunction coincides in one of the signs of the
triplicity from which the conjunction has been changed. So Gemini: the
conjunction is changed from it, and it will summon
[581]
 its presence or
conjunction in the circle of the conjunction, or in the two others outside
that triplicity in Aquarius. Therefore in addition the citizens of this
triplicity are strengthened. And he said if it were Saturn and the
conjunction were in Scorpio, they will be strengthened. If however he
were to receive the disposition of Mars in Scorpio, and he were in the
Midheaven, and ruled the year, and Mars were in the Ascendant and ruled,
with the commission of his own disposition to Saturn in the Midheaven in
Scorpio, it signifies that the king will perish in the direction of the east,
and he will leave his kingdom. And if it were to happen in addition that
Venus were strong in her own exaltation, and the conjunction were in
Scorpio, it signifies the strength of the Arabs, and their seeking in the
kingdom.
Another chapter on the revolution of the years of the world according to
Abū Ma’shar
If you were to erect the figure of the revolution of one of the years of the
world, look at the significator or Lord of the Year, which is called the
significator of the rustics. And look at the Sun and the significator of the
king. Even see if one of them were to fall
[582]
 in the opposition of Mars,
unless perhaps Mars is made very fortunate (so that nothing bad can be
said of him, which tends to happen most rarely): because it signifies wars
and terrors and bloodshed. And if two of the aforesaid significators were to
fall in the opposition of Mars, they will signify greater evil.
And Abū Ma’shar said the removal of the malefics from the angle into
222

=== Page 223 ===
the third or ninth
[583]
 signifies war and a scarcity of religion (both of the
king and the rustics). You ought to consider the Sun and his condition,
which if he were well disposed (namely made fortunate and strong), it
signifies the good disposition and fitness of the land of Babylon and its
citizens. If however he were impeded, it signifies their bad condition and
the detriment of them and of their king. If the Sun were alone, impeded in
the 2
nd
 or in the 6
th
 or in the 12
th
, or he were impeded somewhere by the
conjunction or [square] aspect or opposition of one of the malefics, it even
signifies the bad condition of the aforesaid king (namely of Babylon).
You will even see the disposition of the Moon: that if she were free
(namely made fortunate and strong), it signifies the strength of the Romans
and their king, and the weakness of their enemies. If however she were
alone, impeded in whatever place she is (but more in the aforesaid houses),
it signifies the impediment and evil of them and of their king, and the
strength of their enemies.
But someone might say, “Why does the Sun signify the king of
Babylon, and the Moon the king of the Romans–because the kingdom of
the Romans is bigger than any other, and the Sun is the greater luminary?”
To which it must be said that the Sun is the higher luminary, but he is not a
universal participant in things like the Moon is; and the kingdom of
Babylon existed before the kingdom of the Romans, nor is it a universal
kingdom, wherefore the Sun was attributed to it as its significator. Indeed
the Moon, because she is the universal luminary participating in every
matter, was attributed as the significator of the kingdom and king of the
Romans, because that kingdom is universal beyond all other kingdoms, to
which all kings and all kingdoms were then subjected and put under.
You will even look at the disposition of Saturn: which if he were well
disposed, and in the conjunction of the benefics, and especially from the
Ascendant, and he were the Lord of the Year, free from impediments, he
will not impede, nor will he be an evildoer then; and the impediment
which he will bring into inferior subjects by nature will be removed if he
were [not]
[584]
 impeded (and more powerfully if he were in Scorpio, and
Scorpio were the Midheaven, because then the Ascendant will be
Aquarius, and he will be the Lord of the Year). For it signifies the
shedding of blood and other pestilences are going to come in that
revolution; and it seems that the evil is supposed to begin when Saturn
reaches his own bound. If however Mars were to aspect him from the
opposition or square aspect, it will increase the evil; but if the aspect were
a trine or sextile with reception, it will not bring in so much, and the evil
will be decreased.
223

=== Page 224 ===
You will even look on at Mars, and you will see if he were to fall in
Cancer (which is his detriment and descension). Because if it were so, Abū
Ma’shar said it signifies that the citizens of the clime of Iraq
[585]
 will fall
into oppression because of the leader.
[586]
 And likewise in Sagittarius.
And he said, because these signs belong to their clime, and that Mars is the
significator from the leader;
[587]
 and he said that Mars in the Ascendant
signifies the diminishment of the eastern direction in that same year. And
he said that the fitness of Venus in Pisces or in one of her own domiciles,
signifies the fertility of the regions of the Arabs, and their security. And he
said if she were to commit disposition from a place similar to a planet who
receives her in the Midheaven, and she were in an angle, not removed, and
receiving, and the luminaries were in the sign of the profection from
Scorpio,
[588]
 the Arabs will contend in the kingdom and will seek it from
their own citizens because she is joined to a planet in the Midheaven, and
had fallen in a good place (and even better if the sign of the Midheaven
were to be congruent with her nature).
And he said, the fitness of Venus signifies the fitness of the Arabs in
their own bodies, and the fitness of their sustenance [or way of life]. He
said, if however she were to fall into the enmity of the Ascendant, it
signifies wars and mutations in the middle of the year, and in ignoble
people and robbers. And he said the impediment of the Lord of the
Ascendant in a malign place
[589]
 in the Midheaven signifies the
oppression which will present itself to the rustics from their rulers. And he
said the occurrence of a planet in the 7
th
 from the Ascendant (which is the
place of its enmity), signifies that the king will contend–if the signification
of the planet in its
[590]
 place were concerning the kingdom or concerning
the year. And he said if the first party
[591]
 were in the Midheaven
[592]
 in
its own dignity, and the second party were in the fourth, it signifies that
war will generally abound in the earth.
In like manner you will see if one of the malefic planets were to fall in
the second from the Ascendant of the revolution: because if it were so, and
he were to impede the Lord of the second from the opposition or a square
aspect, it signifies the destruction of substances, and their dispersion or
expenditures, and often on useless things.
You will even consider the malefic planets, and you will see if one of
them were opposed to the other: because if it were so, it signifies the
coming of a great matter in the world, and in a time that is not far off.
Likewise you will see whether Mars is found to be combust (unless
perhaps he were in the
kasmīmī
 of the Sun), and he were the Lord of the
sign of the 10
th
 house and removed from the angle: because if it were so, it
224

=== Page 225 ===
signifies that one [man] will go out from the kingdom, who will punish
[the kingdom], and the end of this matter will be by the sword. And if the
Sun were then to commit disposition to Saturn, and Saturn were the
significator of the rustics, and the Ascendant were Capricorn or Aquarius,
and he were to aspect the Ascendant with an aspect of friendship, and were
in a good place from it, and the authority were the Moon’s,
[593]
 and she
were to commit disposition to him from the Ascendant, it signifies that the
rustics will conspire together toward the ruin of their king, and death by
them will be feared for him in that revolution.
And if Saturn were the Lord of the year, and the
al-mubtazz
 of the
Midheaven were impeded by him, not receiving him, but there were no
testimony on the condition of the rustics from Venus and the Moon to the
Lord of the tenth (and Saturn were in the eleventh),
[594]

and the Moon
(whose authority it is) in the Ascendant, Saturn is given more testimony in
the condition of the rustics.
And Abū Ma’shar said if Mars does not aspect his own place [or
domicile], nor is he received, nor likewise the Moon, Saturn signifies from
the place of the Moon (who is the luminary of the night) what the matter of
the Sun signified.
[595]
 And by the committing of disposition and strength
to Saturn, the king will perish in that year, and the rustics will kill him.
And he said there will be poverty and tribulation in the rustics, and
likewise oppression and a battle, and the burden of the
annona
, and it will
be in the sixth month, on account of the fact that there are 6º between
them.
[596]
 And he said the cattle will be profitable in that same year; and
the cold of their winter will be middling.
You will even see at the hour of the revolution if Saturn were the
significator of the vulgar or the Lord of the Year or the
al-mubtazz

over the
Ascendant of the year, nor did Mars impede him, and the benefics were in
the Ascendant, and Mars cadent from them and from the Ascendant:
because it signifies the fitness of the affairs of the vulgar (and more
strongly so if he were in an angle or in another good place from the
Ascendant, and [Saturn] were to receive the benefics).
And Abū Ma’shar said moist and watery planets in the Ascendant
signify the cold of the year in that same city or region, and locusts and the
fitness of cattle; and likewise if the benefics were to descend in the
Ascendant with the Sun.
[597]
 And he said the presence of the Lord of the
Midheaven falling into the third with Jupiter, signifies the ease of the king
and his being dispatched throughout his rulership.
[598]
225

=== Page 226 ===
TREATISE 10:
HEAVY RAINS

On heavy rains and on mutations of the air, and what is associated with every part
of them

Preface
Since
[599]
 it would seem to me that I have satisfactorily observed the
things promised (of those which I promulgated in the beginning of this
work) in what has preceded, lest perhaps you would say you are deceived
in something I think it would be appropriate, in this Treatise, to make
mention of the mutation of the air–and of those things (of those mutations)
that coincide with them, and what will result from that coinciding, and of
those things which we can perceive from thence, and to which the human
mind can attain–as compendiously as I can.
And even though the action of heavy rains (and of other things which
coincide with the mutations of the air) is very particular, and more
particular than the rest of the other particular things, still those things
which can be said of it, and known, do not seem to me they should be
omitted; and according to the sayings of our wise predecessors and
[according to] those things which, besides, will be able to be seen, which
would seem will be useful; [and according to] the truth of it, just as one
will be able to discuss [it] more certainly; nor to deviate from their
opinions;
[600]
 according to to how it seemed to our most reverend
predecessors Jafar [the Indian]
[601]
 and Lencuo, Ptolemy, and others who
strove to light the way for us in this. To put it briefly, therefore, so we can
more quickly arrive at the main topics devised, and not to [make] a great
introduction to the beginning of this,

I do not intend to make you burdened
by means of a lengthy talk, but to [arrive] at those things which will
conduct you more quickly to the desired matter, and to focus my mind and
intention faithfully on them.
[602]
What things are set out in this work
Among
[603]
 those things which pertain to this work are all the planets
and the mansions of the Moon (even though certain other things are
considered at first, as is necessary). And as has already been said, it is
necessary to consider the Moon before the others, and that her conjunction
226

=== Page 227 ===
with the Sun be considered, and their opposition, not to mention their
square; and then to their aspects of others
[604]
 and their corporal
conjunction, and even the increase of the light of that luminary [the Moon]
and the speed and slowness of her course, and her rising, ascent, descent,
and likewise setting, not to mention those things which seem to make for
generation and corruption from her motions:
[605]
 because in the aforesaid
times the effects of the mutations of the air, and their coincidings are
apprehended more, just as will be shown extensively in the following, God
willing.
And Jafar said,
[606]
 nevertheless also, [her] quite similar [departure
and] return into the south
[607]
 and the north, and the application of the
same, and whatever things happen to the figure, this same thing is brought
in, the actions of all of which (and her efficacy, and the power
[608]
 of the
Moon, by means of begetting animals and of the earth, the which things
sense perceives and vision discerns), are easily distinguised.
[609]
On the knowledge to be had of the benefics and malefics, and of all
temperate or convertible things
If
[610]
 it is intended that a greater knowledge of the mutation of the air
be had, it must be known first which of the planets are benefic, which
malefic. Likewise it is necessary for you to know first which are now for
fortune, which now for misfortune. For as the ancient sages unanimously
decreed, it is true that Jupiter and Venus are naturally benefics and
workers of fortune. Indeed Saturn and Mars are naturally malefics, and of
their own nature bring in misfortune, just as the same sages affirm, and
[as] will appear by the most open test of truth. Indeed they said the Sun
and Mercury and the Moon are common and temperate: namely [they say]
the Sun sometimes [works] fortune and sometimes misfortune, but
Mercury and the Moon are convertible, so that they are converted to the
nature of those to whom they are applied (whether they are benefics or
malefics).
[611]
To know when coming rains would be signified, and when not
Indeed
[612]
 in the knowledge to be had of future rains, it is necessary
for you to consider the conjunction of the Sun and the Moon (as was
touched on above), and [to consider] if any of the planets is then joined
with them, or aspects them by any aspect. Because if Jupiter or even
Venus is joined corporally to them, or Jupiter aspects them from a trine or
227

=== Page 228 ===
sextile aspect, nor did one of the malefics appear
[613]
 with them, nor does
it project its rays to them, or [Jupiter] were to aspect [the Moon] after her
separation from the Sun, it will indubitably deny future rains. If however
the aspect of Jupiter to the luminaries were a square or opposition, without
the admixture of the malefics, as I said, it will signify there are going to be
light rains or practically none. But if one of the malefics were to aspect,
without the aspect of a benefic, or after the conjunction the Moon were
first joined corporally or by opposition [to it], without a doubt you could
announce future rains.
For
[614]
 the peculiar nature of the benefics is naturally to make the air
fine, and to clear it of thick vapors, and likewise to resist the malice of the
malefics; and on the other hand the malefics strive to resist the goodness of
the benefics. And because the nature of their heaviness and impurity
agrees with the thick vapors collected together in the air, they generate
heavinesses which bring in a disturbance of the air into the lower parts, on
account of that heaviness and impurity of the air, and likewise [they bring
in] powerful rains descending into the thickness.
Nevertheless, even though Venus is of the fortunate stars, still, because
her nature comes down
[615]
 in a certain manner on the side of moisture, if
she is mixed with one of the malefics (nor were another benefic to aid
[her]), it allows rains to move–not, however very harmful ones, unless
perhaps she were exceedingly weak, and strong malefics were found, so
that she could not mitigate their badness (however she always alleviates
something).

On the prognostication of rains in general

However, in the prognostication of rains it is necessary that you bring
discernment to bear, and that you consider the places, sites,
[616]
 seasons,
climes, regions, and the like which occur to you to be considered. For the
mutations of the air tend to be diversified in different ways: for it most
often and most forcefully tends to rain and likewise snow in the Alps than
in flat places, on account of the thickness of the air and the rushing of
vapors; more in the seventh clime (on account of the aforesaid reasons)
than in the sixth; more in the sixth than in the fifth; more in the fifth than
in the fourth; more in the fourth than in the third; more in the third than in
the second; more in the second than in the first–and you may understand
thusly for every clime, and every region according to its nature, and
according to their sites.
228

=== Page 229 ===
Which mansions of the Moon are wet, which dry, and which common
[617]
You
[618]
 will even consider in which, and from which mansions of the
Moon, the aforesaid conjunctions and aforesaid aspects come to be.
Because certain of the mansions are wet, certain ones dry, certain ones
common, certain ones lucky or fortunate, certain ones unlucky or
unfortunate, just as I will expound to you in what follows.
For indeed the aforesaid mansions are 28,
[619]
 of which:
[620]

 The first is called:

 Albarain,

 the second:

 Altamazer,

 the third:

 Aldebaran,

 the fourth:

 Albachia,

 the fifth:

 Alvata,

 the sixth:

 Alziraa,

 the seventh:

 Albiathia,

 the eighth:

 Altarfin,

 the ninth:

 Algetua,

 the tenth:

 Alaracen,

 the eleventh:

 Alzarfa,

 the twelfth:

 Alafraze,

 the thirteenth:

 Alzamee,

229

=== Page 230 ===
the fourteenth:
 Achafre,

 the fifteenth:

 Alzebene,

 the sixteenth:

 Aliachil,

 the seventeenth:

 Alchabin,

 the eighteenth:

 Astiala,

 the nineteenth:

 Abuaarca,

 the twentieth:

 Albelaca,

 the twenty-first:

 Azea,

 the twenty-second:

 Bolah,

 the twenty-third:

 Zacazad,

 the twenty-fourth:

 Alasboa,

 the twenty-fifth:

 Alhumadez,

 the twenty-sixth:

 Almaiehe,

 the twenty-seventh:

 Alahut,

 the twenty-eighth:

 Anathe.
[621]
And each one of the stated mansions contains 13 degrees and 20
minutes, to which another 28 secondary [mansions] are subordinated (that
is, they are enclosed by them). Namely:

 The first is:

 Alazelazenet,
230

=== Page 231 ===
the second:

 Agasie,

 the third:

 Azulierie,

 the fourth:

 Alchil,

 the fifth:

 Alchali,

 the sixth:

 Alzula,

 the seventh:

 Almara,

 the eighth:

 Albeldie,

 the ninth:

 Alzabel,

 the tenth:

 Alialciz,

 the eleventh:

 Zaudazaa,

 the twelfth:

 Zaudolabia,

 the thirteenth:

 Alsuganfaboel,
[622]

 the fourteenth:

 Alsurgalabet,

 the fifteenth:

 Racamavide,

 the sixteenth:

 Alnatha,

 the seventeenth:

 Albucan,

 the eighteenth:

 Alciraze,

 the nineteenth:

 Aldabaran,
231

=== Page 232 ===
the twentieth:

 Alchada,

 the twenty-first:

 Aluzana,

 the twenty-second:

 Alamoha,

 the twenty-third:

 Alirazma,

 the twenty-fourth:

 Alcaubua,

 the twenty-fifth:

 Alcebira,

 the twenty-sixth:

 Alararen,
[623]

 the twenty-seventh:

 Alzaut,

 the twenty-eighth:

 Alaacen
–just as these names were found in the translation of John.
And the secondary ones are subordinated to the aforesaid primary ones,
in this way.
[624]
 For:

 Alazelazenet

 is
subordinated
to:

 Agasie

 is
subordinated
to:

 Azulierie

 is
subordinated
to:

232

=== Page 233 ===
Alchil
 is
subordinated
to:

 Alchali

 is
subordinated
to:

 Alzula

 is
subordinated
to:

 Almara

 is
subordinated
to:

 Albeldie

 is
subordinated
to:

 Alzabel

 is
subordinated
to:

 Alialcim
[627]

 is
subordinated
to:

 Zaudazaa

 is
subordinated
to:

 Zaudolabia

 is
subordinated
to:

 Alsuganfaboel

 is
subordinated

233

=== Page 234 ===
to:

 Alsurgalabet

 is
subordinated
to:

 Racamavide
[628]

 is
subordinated
to:

 Alnatha

 is
subordinated
to:

 Albucan

 is
subordinated
to:

 Alciraze

 is
subordinated
to:

 Aldabatan
[630]

 is
subordinated
to:

 Alchada

 is
subordinated
to:

 Aluzana

 is
subordinated
to:

 Alamoha

 is
subordinated
to:

234

=== Page 235 ===
Alirazma

 is
subordinated
to:

 Alcabua

 is
subordinated
to:

 Alcebira

 is
subordinated
to:

 Alararen

 is
subordinated
to:

 Alzaut

 is
subordinated
to:

 Alacen

 is
subordinated
to:

Twenty-seven of which twenty-eight mansions, with their subordinates,
are reckoned in their effects. The twenty-eighth, namely that in which the
conjunction of the Sun and the Moon is, is not reckoned (even if,
nevertheless, it does something practically imperceptibly).
[632]
 But the
virtue which the Moon has in that mansion is bequeathed to the Sun
(likewise the strength of that mansion). Nevertheless however, the Moon
gives to [the Sun] the virtue which she acquires for herself (which belongs
to a planet when she is joined to him).
[633]
Of which mansions, six are dry: Alzarfa, Alafraze, Alzamee, Alchabin,
Alasboa, Albelaca. Of which six mansions, four are lucky and fortunate,
namely: Alzarfa, Alzamee, Alchabin, Alasboa. Indeed the other two,
namely Alafraze and Albelaca, are unlucky and unfortunate.
Indeed nine are wet, namely: Altamazer, Aldebaran, Albachia, Alziraa,
235

=== Page 236 ===
Albiathia, Abuaarca, Bolah, Alhumadez, and Alahut. Of which seven are
lucky and fortunate, namely: Albachia, Alziraa, Albiathia, Bolah,
Abuaarca, Alhumadez, Alahut. However, two are unlucky and unfortunate,
namely Altamazer, Aldebaran.
The thirteen left over are temperate or common, which are: Albarain,
Alvata, Altarfin,
[634]
 Algetua, Alaracen, Achafre,
[635]
 Aliachil, Astiala,
Azea, Alzebene,
[636]
 Zacazad,
[637]
 Almaiehe,
[638]
 Anathe. Of which
thirteen, six come down more on the side of fortune than misfortune,
namely: Altarfin,
[639]
 Algetua, Alaracen,
[640]
 Astiala, Azea, Zacazad.
Indeed five come down more on the side of misfortune than fortune,
namely: Alvata,
[641]
 Achafre,
[642]
 Aliachil, Almaiehe,
[643]
 Anathe. The
other two, namely Albarain, Alzubene, remain in their own quality, not
coming down more on the side of fortune than misfortune.
All
[644]
 of these having been individually considered, you will look to
see in which of the aforesaid mansions both of the luminaries come
together, and in what sign and in what place of the circle, and which of the
planets regards her, and to whom the Moon is first joined by body or by
aspect after the separation from the Sun, and in which of the mansions he
is (to whom she is then joined). For if the conjunction of the luminaries
were in a wet mansion, and in a wet sign, without the aspect or corporal
conjunction of some benefic, and the said planet were in a wet sign or in a
wet mansion, without a doubt you could announce an abundance of future
rains. Nor could you resist that in any judgment (and more so if the aspect
were from the square or from the opposition, and the planet to which she is
joined were a malefic).
[645]
 But if it were a benefic, it will mitigate the
badness in a certain sense. If however the conjunction of the luminaries
were as I said, and the planet to which the planet is joined were in a dry
mansion, even if it were in a wet sign, [and] even if it were a malefic, still
the rains will be somewhat more decreased (indeed if [it were] a benefic,
they will be decreased more). Which if it were a dry mansion and a dry
sign, the rains will lighten more. But if the aforesaid conjunctions and
aforesaid aspects were in dry signs and dry mansions, the rains might
cease altogether, whether the one to whom the Moon is then joined (or
whom she aspects) were a benefic or a malefic, unless the planet whose
dignity the mansion was, worked to the contrary. For if it were the dignity
of Venus (because her nature comes down more on the side of moisture), it
will help the rains somewhat, and will temper the dryness somewhat (even
if not much). And our ancient sages wanted to note all of these things
carefully.
And Jafar said
[646]
 they were drawn out by means of a center of lines
236

=== Page 237 ===
in the circles, namely whose arcs are referred to the tetragon, trigon and
hexagon, by means of a certain condition
[647]
 of knowledge. Nevertheless
also the places (out of which the application of each of the stars comes to
be), strongly configured to the place of each star, obviously whence they
apply from (he said) a masculine or feminine one, obviously of the nature
of the places related to the four elements; even thence if they might apply
themselves from a certain longitude and latitude.
[648]
Therefore, the application of the stars from places of this kind having
been understood, the matching [or agreeing] and firm reception that is had
[shows]
[649]
 the effects and means. Learned antiquity
[650]
 wanted to
sketch out and distinguish
[651]
 these mansions (which it called “knots” or
rather “bindings”), to note them, and to attend to their effects;

for they
wanted us to consider all the aforesaid, so that definite judgments could be
handed down on rains and the mutations of the air.
On the air’s mutation and its variation, and the knowledge of future heavy
rains
For
[652]
 the knowledge of the mutation of the air and its variation (and
likewise of heavy rains), it is necessary to know the degree of the
conjunction of the luminaries, and the degree of their opposition, and the
last [degree], I say, of the first quarter, and likewise of the second one, and
the middle [degree] of the quadrature of any lunar month (even though
these four aforesaid places are secondary), and principally [those] of the
dichotomies.

Indeed
[653]
 it is necessary to consider more principally the
conjunction and prevention, and even certain other things which will be
said in their own place and time (namely that other places are subject to
these aforesaid places).
And
[654]
 these twelve are called the
centra
[655]
 of the Moon, which
are when the Moon stands up from [or leaves] the degree in which her
conjunction with the Sun is supposed to come to be, by exactly twelve
degrees in front or behind; but in the prevention it does not happen so
necessarily, indeed in the angles of the dichotomies more repeatedly, than
it is used to happening in the prevention.
And Mecra said,
[656]
 for this reason they wanted principally and
especially to note that which is called Biabene,
[657]
 because the two stars
fill up the sign of Libra and its figure in every way. And he said, for, the
Moon is snatched in the hands of Virgo,
[658]
 and nowhere else. Even in
the same way, because that degree, where these two stars are placed, sits in
the beginning of Scorpio;
[659]
 and there the Moon tarries while she walks
237

=== Page 238 ===
that path, the peculiar nature [of which stars] they henceforth took up [in]
an introductory speech.
Indeed Mecra
[660]
 preserved all of these hidden things from the
ancients so far as reason goes, not so far as the effects of [their] operating.
And he said, for how it is with the rest of the mansions of the Moon and
the things connected to that, let the business of this follow [later]. I will
bring it up in what follows, even though above it was spoken about this
when I was going to speak about the natures of the mansions; and I will
adjoin the opinions of individuals which pertain to this chapter in the
required places.

For the greater clarity of the reader I will preserve [it] by
means of a fitting order, and I will disclose [it] in the following, in the way
I ought to proceed in these [matters].
Indeed Jafar
[661]
 listed the names of certain aforesaid mansions, just as
is found in another translation.
For he calls the first of them (which signify moisture, and which have
the virtue of making rain fall) Aldebaran,
[662]
 which above was
called Altamazer.
The second one he called Alzama, which was called Aldebaran.
[663]
The third he called Alialbetha, which was called Albachia.
[664]
The fourth he called Alzarfa, which was called Alziraa.
The fifth he called Alzafra, which was called Albiachia.
The sixth he called Alichil, which was called Abuaerca.
[665]
Indeed the seventh [he called] Autiaim, which was called Bolah.
Indeed the eighth Alelelach, which was called Alhumadem.
[666]
The next, the ninth, he called Alfaraz,
[667]
 which was called Alahut.
Of which aforesaid mansions, six signify rains more so than the other
three, namely: Aldebaran, Alziraa, Alialbetha, Alzarfan, Alzafra, and
Alithil. Indeed the remaining three are less wet, and signify rains less
so than the aforesaid six.
238

=== Page 239 ===
Whence
[668]
 if the Moon were in one of the now-stated mansions, and
especially [in one of] those six which I said earlier (and more strongly [if]
she were to appear joined or applied with

one of the stars signifying dew),
without a doubt you could announce future heavy rains. But in the other
three, it will be less than this, and all of these according to the nature of
him to whom she were joined or applied. If however you were to find her
in dry mansions, you could announce dryness according to the aforesaid
reasons. Which if she were in one of the ones which were called temperate
or common, you could judge the coming disposition of the air according to
the disposition and nature of him to whom the Moon were joined or
applied; likewise in the three of the temperate ones, obviously in those [of]
which Jafar
[669]
 called one Alanatha, and the other Atumech, indeed the
third Adalaz, which come down more to dryness than to moisture.
[670]
From whatever kind of mansion the conjunction or aspect was, the
effecting of the matter will be according to its nature, whether from a wet
one, or a dry one, or from a temperate or common one (and more strongly
for rains, if the aspect were from the square or from the opposition;
however in the prohibition or rains, if it were a trine or sextile, always by
considering that the benefics add in the good and subtract in the bad). And
Jafar said,
[671]
 for Anathe and Altarfin
[672]
 and Alibee,
[673]
 Avaula,
[674]
 Alnayn,
[675]
 and the belly of Pisces,
[676]
 take up that effect,
[677]
and with the rest that follow them, as it was had in the figure of rains, and
it will be something to pursue.
And this is a table:
Figure 2: “One way of [presenting] the mansions of the Moon in a
table”
239

=== Page 240 ===
A chapter on rains and the mutations of the air
If
[678]
 however if suits you to prognosticate on rains and the mutations
of the air, and on clouds signifying rains or dew, or on clouds signifying
neither of them, and on future winds, and likewise at what time and in
whatever part of the year, and at what hour [would be] the coming of the
aforesaid (or any of them), and on their increase or diminishment–it will
be necessary for you to know (as Jafar testifies
[679]
 he heard it from the
most experienced
[680]
 of the Indians) according to the site
[681]
 of the
circle of signs at the hour of the conjunction and prevention of the Sun and
Moon which immediately preceded the entrance of the Sun into the first
minute of Libra; and [to know] the local disposition
[682]
 of all the other
planets in the circle–however, principally that of the luminaries.
And
[683]
 it is even necessary for us to consider (after the Sun enters the
first minute of Libra), his progress up until he has walked through the
whole scorched path,
[684]
 and another five degrees of Scorpio besides;
and this happens in the middle of the seven climes, because Libra and the
first 20º of Scorpio have a signification over rains and winds and
mutations of the air in the whole fourth clime, and likewise in the last half
of the third, and in the first half of the fifth.
And the Indians said,
[685]
 the Sun and the Moon having finally been
rectified to those two hours of the coming-together,
[686]
 (he said) and of
the opposition, or to the aforesaid two signs,
[687]
 therefore it will be
necessary to direct the mind with the greatest
[688]
 exertion regarding the
mansions to be discerned. Therefore from here onwards the task will be to
discern the mansions so,

because wherever the conjunction or opposition
of the luminaries were, from the beginning of Aries to the end of the signs
themselves, you will grant 13º 20’ according to equal degrees. And if you
were to seize on the place of the conjunction or prevention, you will see
whether the mansion is dry or wet or temperate (or common). You will
even see in which mansions the other planets are found, just as you
considered
[689]
 for the Moon. Which if you were to do this, you will see
to whom the Moon would apply after the coming-together or the
prevention, or [to whom] she would be corporally joined. Because
according to how her conjunction or application with some planet in the
circle were to appear,
[690]
 so will be her signification over rains or no
rains, or winds, or dew, or mutations of the air.
For
[691]
 if the Moon were joined to or were applied to Saturn, with her
being of good condition and well disposed, and in a wet mansion, likewise
240

=== Page 241 ===
without any other application, without a doubt you could announce
temperate and suitable heavy rains (likewise dark clouds filling up the
whole air). And if Saturn were impeded or badly disposed, it will increase
rains and winds and the darkness of the clouds, and all the aforesaid, to the
contrary of the good; and all the significations according to the places, the
sites,
[692]
 the significations of houses, mansions, conditions,
conjunctions, aspects or applications, as was said above when we spoke of
the complexions of the mansions of the Moon and what belongs to them.
[693]
And
[694]
 if Venus and Mercury were to apply their own testimonies
and the virtues which were said, they
[695]
 will be very much increased
(and more so, and more strongly so, if their conjunction or application
were in the angles or from angles,
[696]
 for then clashings of winds will be
feared, and their fury; even the ruin of certain houses, and the breaking of
trees, and even the eradication of certain ones of them.
On the hour of showers, heavy rains, and winds
However,
[697]
 in order to know the hour of the aforesaid events, it is
necessary for you to know the hour of the conjunction (if your
consideration were [of] a conjunctional one) or the hour of the prevention
(if your consideration were [of] a preventional one), and see by how many
degrees the fullness
[698]
 of the conjunction or application or prevention or
tetragon were distant from the aforesaid places. Because the effecting of
rains or the mutation of the air will arrive up to so many days or hours, just
as the aspects or applications or conjunctions were from such signs. For if
they were from fixed signs, they will signify days; if from common ones,
hours. But if from movable ones, hours–but the aforesaid movable ones
will portend more quickly than the common ones. The coming of the
aforesaid will even hasten by one-sixth if the course of the Moon were
quick, or even [if] the increase of her light were not missing. But if just
one of them were present, the coming will hasten somewhat less than this.
[699]
If however you were to find the Moon in a place of the degree opposite
to the conjunction (or the prevention), or her course were slower, the
coming of the aforesaid will slow down according to the sign or place in
which she was, like it was said regarding [its] hastening. Indeed if the
Moon were to apply to one of the benefics after the coming-together of the
Sun, and the benefic were to aspect Saturn from some aspect, and were to
receive him from some dignity of its own (or he it)–and the more so if
241

=== Page 242 ===
each receives the other and is received by [the other]–the aforesaid
[effects] will be altered. However, they will not exceed [their proper]
measure, and they will signify slowness, and their coming will be
prolonged by one-sixth of the total. If
[700]
 however the Moon would
apply to [Saturn] from a square aspect or the opposition (nor would [it]
impede any of the others
[701]
 in the effecting of rains), a delay will not
interfere with her parts,
[702]
 and especially if the two aforesaid inferior
[planets] attest to them; and they would grant their own support, as was
said, just as they meet each other,
[703]
 nor will they waver, nor even will
they be decreased.
When Saturn prohibits rains
Indeed
[704]
 if Saturn were to reside in a dry mansion, and the Moon
were to apply to him in a dry mansion, nor are the supports of others
exhibited to them, rains will not be present, even if perpetual clouds
disturb the air much.
On the application of the Moon with Jupiter
And
[705]
 if the Moon were to apply to Jupiter from the aforesaid or
similar places, or she were with him in the same place or mansion (one
which is wet), and Venus and Mercury were to exhibit their own
testimonies, clouds with dew and soft (or practically no) rains will be
signified. If however Venus and Mercury did not exhibit their testimonies
to them, the rains will cease completely. But if one of them were to help
them, indeed the other not, something of the making of rain will come,
even if however middling. And then if Jupiter would apply to Saturn, it
will signify part of the aforesaid (but not, however, exceeding measure) is
going to come.
But
[706]
 if the Moon would apply to Mars from the aforesaid places or
mansions after [her] separation from the Sun, and [if] Venus or Mercury
were to aspect them by the testimony of some masculine planet,
[707]
 and
such an application were in an angle or from an angle, and in a wet
mansion, or from a wet mansion, it will signify a gathering and
commixture of clouds, but it would portend little dew (or practically none).
However, it could signify thunders, and flashings of light likewise; and in
the seasons and in the regions fit for this, there are going to be lightning
bolts without a multitude of rains, provided that Mars would then apply to
Saturn or Jupiter: because if he were then applied to them, it will indicate
242

=== Page 243 ===
future rains.
And Jafar said,
[708]
 even this presents itself to be noted, because Mars
would increase exceedingly the signification of heavy rains from any
aspect;
[709]
 and the Moon (and stars) to which he were to apply here in
the generating rains helps utterly;
[710]
 for there is already a delay
especially and principally by that.
[711]
 And he said,
[712]
 indeed if it were
to happen otherwise, he will not signify this, and the same corrupts;
however, the clouds which the Martial nature brings forth, having

saffron
radiance from above [are] not without radiance.
[713]
On the application of the Moon with Mars
Again,
[714]
 if the Moon were to withdraw after the conjunction with the
Sun [and] were to apply at the same time to Mars and Saturn, and she were
to remain in a wet mansion, and they likewise, it would portend future,
immoderate rains. Which if she were to approach only one
[715]
 of them
(or to both), and the matter would behave that way,
[716]
 and they were
even in temperate mansions, it will signify rains. Indeed if she were to
remain in a wet one, and those two in dry ones (or
vice versa
), it will often
mitigate future heavy rains. Likewise
[717]
 if the Moon were joined to the
Sun and then she would be joined to Jupiter at the same time (or she were
to apply to him by aspect), and they both (or one of them) were to receive
her, they will prohibit heavy rains from remaining so they do not overflow.
And Jafar said,
[718]
 for indeed [if] the Moon [is] precisely then in an
optimal place (that is, under one of the
centra
),
[719]
 that is, [in] places
dedicated to this signification, wherefore she is made fortunate, it would
cancel her peculiar nature and pervert her command, until she has agreed
with fortunate [planets] in some configuration.
[720]
 And he said, therefore
these
[721]
 general occasions must always be noted. And he said, even the
white clouds which are generated will portend much and inconstant dew.
On the application of the Moon with the Sun
And
[722]
 if you were to find the Moon in the corporal connection of the
Sun, nor is one of the other [planets] looking at them nor joined corporally
with them, it will prohibit heavy rains so they do not come. Which if one
of the others were to apply to them then, and [the other planet] were in a
wet mansion (and the more so if this were in an angle), and the Sun were
outside his own dignities and his strengths; and he
[723]
 would apply to
Saturn and Mars at the same time (or would separate from one of them and
243

=== Page 244 ===
apply to the other), it will announce strong rains are going to come about.
If however he were to apply to only one of them, nor would he be
separating from the other one, the heavy rains which it would signify will
be half, or at least one-third, or at least one-fourth, below the aforesaid;
and in the aforesaid cases he will bring in between grey or saffron and
semi-red and dense clouds; nor quickly dissolving ones; but after they
were unleashed,
[724]
 they will announce the air to be slight and fair.
Indeed if the Moon, after her separation (whether they are joined by body
or aspect),
[725]
 were to apply to the Sun from a triangle, [effects] will
come into action according to the nature of the houses [domiciles?] or
mansions in which their significations were. And Jafar said,
[726]
concerning the coming-together and opposition, in no way is it called an
application.
[727]
On the application of the Moon with Venus
If
[728]
 however the Moon would apply to Venus after her separation
from the Sun, and she [were] in watery or airy signs (but less so airy ones)
and in wet mansions, without a doubt it will announce coming rains; and
the more so, and more certainly and ineffably so, if Mars and Saturn would
aspect them. But if only one of them aspects them, their signification will
be something below this, nor will it be necessary that Mercury extend
some help to them in one of the aforesaid cases; but if he were to extend it,
it will increase the future rains. But if the aforesaid malefics did not aspect
them, but Jupiter were to aspect them (or she
[729]
 were otherwise made
fortunate), the rains will cease without a doubt, nor will they come. If
however Venus were to apply to one of the three superiors in the same
knot,
[730]
 nor did it
[731]
 impede any other signification of Venus, it will
portend there are going to be perpetual (nor moderate) rains. And the
aforesaid will happen more strongly so, if their application were to
appear
[732]
 from out of a wet mansion or a watery sign. But if Venus
were free, made fortunate and strong, nor is the Moon found joined to her
in the same knot (nor in a watery sign [or] wet mansion, or she even
remains fortunate),
[733]
 this will signify that the aforesaid heavy rains will
not happen. Nevertheless, if Venus (as was said) behaved in this way, and
the Moon would be joined to her, there will not be rains, but clouds and
some dew will appear in the air.
On the application of the Moon with Mercury
244

=== Page 245 ===
Again,
[734]
 you must look to see if the Moon, when she is joined to the
Sun (or when she is separating from the Sun after her conjunction), would
first apply to Mercury in the same place, and in a wet mansion, without the
aspect and conjunction of another: because it will indicate continuing
heavy rains without a delay in time. Which if she were joined, you could
announce for sure [that] they will come, [but] not exceeding their proper
measure. Indeed if Mars and Saturn attested at the same time to their
conjunction, announcing horrendous and threatening and submerging rains
(and constant ones) is not be doubted. But if Venus were thus far a
participant of the aforesaid conjunction from some dignity of hers, from
the aforesaid places, it will be doubted that the rains will exceed proper
measure. If however, at the hour of the conjunction of the Moon with the
Sun, Mercury [were] applied to Venus in the same place, knot, and a
watery sign, and likewise in a wet mansion, it will indicate rains exceeding
proper measure. Indeed if you were to find the aforesaid from other signs
and mansions, you could certainly announce a middling amount of rains.
And Tilcinius said, likewise with Mercury looking to [aspecting] Venus
from a watery sign and wet mansion, or located in the same knot or
joining, the rains will exceed their limits. If however Jupiter (or another of
the benevolent [planets], however he is the strong one) were then to aspect
the aforesaid malefics, you will judge mediocre rains. And if only Mercury
were applied to the Moon, and he were to signify dew and rains, [if]
Jupiter’s aspect to him were with reception from his own domicile or
exaltation, or from two other dignities, Mercury would assume the nature
and significations of [Jupiter] for himself, nor would he permit the Moon
to exercise her significations; and he will bring in serene air, however with
a multitude of winds; and the quality of the winds will be according to the
nature of Jupiter or another star to whose nature he were applied, if you
were to find him turned around
[735]
 and applied to some other one.
However,
[736]
 if the Moon, after the separation from the Sun, applies to
Mercury and Venus at the same time, before the other aforesaid places, or
even to Mars and Saturn, as was said, they will pervert the things signified
by the Moon, and [the things signified] will be made manifest, unless, he
said, Jupiter and the Sun worked to the contrary, from whatever aspect or
aforesaid conjunction this were to come about; and more strongly and
ineffably so, if the conjunction were with the aforesaid malefics–the rains
and dew will be increased, and likewise the air will become misty. And if
the aforesaid benefics worked to the contrary, they cancel the dew and
rains (still they could not prohibit clouds from being present). And may
you remember in no way to hand over the aforesaid [points] to
245

=== Page 246 ===
forgetfulness, but keep them always in the secret [recesses] of your mind,
so that you will be able to reply eagerly, and likewise to know and see
them ahead of time for your own usefulness.
On the application of the Moon with the benefics or malefics
And
[737]
 if the Moon were to apply to one of the benefics after her
separation from the Sun, it prohibits coming rains. Which if she is joined
to one of the malevolent [planets], or were to aspect from any aspect, and
her application were to depart from that benefic up to 5º or less without the
aspect of a benefic, it will announce future rains in that same week. Which
if the Moon (he said) is joined to one of the planets after her separation
from the Sun, and this were to happen in a wet mansion, or even in some
other one of the places of the circle, nor is she impeded nor received
[738]
by any, it will humidify the air, and will signify clouds and dew and
diverse rains, and the filling up of the clouds of the air; indeed the
incitements [of these things] will come to be due to diverse winds, and
sometimes flashings of light and lightning bolts.
[739]
 Indeed, if after this
the Moon were to apply to one of the planets who makes her fortunate, or
he himself were made fortunate, it will improve [or amend] all the
aforesaid, and convert them into their contrary. If however he were a
malefic, or he himself were made unfortunate, the aforesaid things will be
increased and grow so much that they will seem to be doubled. But if she
were malefic and of bad condition, and badly disposed, in the observance
of malefics, she will be found [to be] strong of promise and stronger, nor
from the observation of the aforesaid, will it weary [or vex] another.
[740]
And even though (of those things which are now and were said in the
past) it should be held more openly that the Moon is converted into the
nature of him to whom she is applied (and that is true), still, thus far it does
not seem that I should omit to tell you again that if she were applied with
the benefics or other stars who are applied to benefics (as was said), or she
were to appear
[741]
 without any impediment of the benefics in their own
dignities (as was said), it will not make heavy rains remain (even though it
does not resist them). But if she were applied to malefics, just as was said
with the benefics, it will announce future heavy rains.
And Jafar,
[742]
 explaining the general influence
[743]
 of the Moon with
individual stars (like in Aligistivia
[744]
), that is, [explaining] the coming-
together,
[745]
 said: for indeed in those things which it will seem necessary
that they must be had for the knowledge of this, the which [points] written
above, I have devised in a fitting order; therefore, next will be expounded
246

=== Page 247 ===
how it ought to be done in the opposition and the tetragons.
On the four tetragons, or on the four dichotomies or the four figures
In
[746]
 this matter it is necessary to look principally at seven places in
the circle: namely the degree of the conjunction of the luminaries, its
tetragons (which are distant from it, one in front, the other behind, by 90º),
[747]
 and its opposite degree, and the degrees of its dichotomies. The first
of which is in the beginning of the month up to seven days, and is the first
dichotomy. The second is from the said seven days up to another seven,
and it is the second dichotomy, and it is even the degree of the prevention.
The third is from those fourteen days up to another seven (namely twenty-
one), and it is the third dichotomy. The fourth is after those aforesaid ones
up to the following conjunction, which is the fourth dichotomy.
[748]
Secondarily, you ought to look at another ten places without the
aforesaid, of which the first is three days
[749]
 before the hour of the
conjunction of the Moon with the Sun. The second is three days after. The
third is three days before the first dichotomy. The fourth is three days after
it. The fifth is three days before the prevention. The sixth is three days
after it. The seventh is three days before the second dichotomy. The eighth
is three days after it. The ninth
[750]
 is twelve degrees before the
opposition, and the tenth is the same amount after it.
Whence, if in the space of three days after the coming-together [of the
luminaries] you were to see her slender and clear around evening, likewise
glittering, without a cover of clouds, nor is she otherwise impeded by the
malefics while she stood in that sign, it will signify the air to be serene.
Which if she were slender, and her color declining to redness [or blush],
and the parts of her which were not illuminated likewise glittering, and
they seem to be moved almost like shaking, it will show that winds are
going to come from that direction against which she is seen to decline.
[751]
Which if the Sun were to remain then in Capricorn or in Aquarius, and
the Moon were found in Taurus or in Virgo,
[752]
 and she were to have
some meeting
[753]
 with Saturn, then coming cold winds will take place,
and the more so if Saturn were then found in Capricorn. If however she
were to come down on the side of blackness or practically greenishness,
with some density, or undoubted thickness, it will indicate threatening
rains and even [regular?] rains. However in the other aforesaid places, you
will announce the future disposition of the air according to the signs and
according to the mansions and according to the conjunctions or aspects of
247

=== Page 248 ===
the planets with her.
In order to know the qualities which will be prolonged more than one day
Which if you wished to know ahead of time the qualities of the air
whose space [of time] are prolonged more than one day, as Ptolemy said,
[754]
 you will consider the hours of the partnerings
[755]
 of the luminaries
in the figure: because for every quality of the figures which there is from
the hour of that figure up to the hour which follows it in the figure, it will
signify to the majority. Moreover, it appears to have seemed to Ptolemy
that we should consider the hour of the conjunction of the luminaries and
its minute, and erect the figure to the Ascendant of that minute, and
construct the four angles, and to see which of the planets is then stronger
over that Ascendant: because he will rule over the disposition of the air
until the Moon then arrives to the next angle of the said figure (namely the
second one); and the air will be disposed according to how that
al-mubtazz
is disposed, unless something else were to work to the contrary, which it
will be necessary that you consider by your own industry, by considering
the things which were said above, and still will be said.
You will even consider when the Moon will enter the first minute of the
said angle,
[756]
 and you will see which of the planets is
al-mubtazz
 over
that Ascendant which it then was, because he will rule over the disposition
of the air until the Moon were then to arrive at the third angle of the said
figure of the conjunction, which will be disposed according to the
disposition of the
al-mubtazz
 of that Ascendant.
[757]
 Again, you will look
to see when the Moon will enter the first minute of the degree which will
be opposite the degree of the designated conjunction,
[758]
 because
according to how the
al-mubtazz
 of [that] Ascendant were disposed, so
will the air be well or badly disposed until the Moon then arrives to the
first minute of the fourth angle of the said figure ([provided that] nothing
else works to the contrary).
Afterwards, you will consider when the Moon arrives at the minute in
which the aforesaid conjunction is: because then the air will be disposed
according to how the planet who was the
al-mubtazz
 over the Ascendant
(which then was) were disposed, until the Moon then arrives at the minute
of the following conjunction, unless something else works against it–
namely that one of the malefics impedes the said
al-mubtazz
, or [the
al-
mubtazz
] himself is in a mansion or sign contrary to the nature of any of
the aforesaid Ascendants, and the like; or even the season works against it,
namely by adding or detracting according to what Ptolemy testifies, just
248

=== Page 249 ===
like it is if that lunar month were in the summer, and [also] the
significators (namely those signifying moisture or rains), wherefore rains
and moisture will abound less. If however it were winter, and they were
significators signifying little moisture, more rains than would seem to be
signified will follow from thence, and
vice versa
.
Indeed ‘Ali
[759]
 seems to have said that Ptolemy divides the lunar
month into only four divisions, namely according to the four dichotomies.
But if I remember rightly, what was expounded above is enough.
And always make the Moon a participator with the
al-mubtazz
 of the
Ascendant of every one of the aforesaid angles, according to how you
were to find her in the places or signs or mansions (whether dry or wet or
common).
Moreover,
[760]
 it is necessary for you to attend to the condition of the
Sun and the Moon when he enters the first minute of Libra (from that
minute until he were then to traverse the twentieth degree of Scorpio)–
[namely] what kind of condition he has either with the benefics or with the
malefics, and in what mansion the Moon is then running through, and
likewise in what kind of sign, and the site
[761]
 of the other planets, and
with which of them one of the luminaries is applied: because the air will be
disposed according to the significations which there were then, until the
entrance of the Sun into Aries–however, with the admixture of the
significations which will happen in the comings-together
[762]
 of the
luminaries up until then.
And Jafar said,
[763]
 for, these things (which I put down) having been
more fully carried out, no variation or ambiguity will come, concerning the
renewal of the air. In a like way the Moon is to be looked at, to see
whether she is traversing in a dry or equal
[764]
 mansion, and applies
Venus or Mercury. Or [whether], as Jafar testifies,
[765]
 she is staying in
watery signs, and were applied to Saturn or Mars: she will indicate future
rains. And he said that the Moon and Mercury are stars signifying dew.
Likewise he said that if, therefore, they are looking at the Moon from, and
staying in, signs of this kind, [and] even the Moon is applying to them
from places of this kind, it means heavy rains. And he said, verily the
Moon applying or looking [from] dry or equal places, on the whole brings
in mediocre rains. And he said, likewise the Moon, by her unique and
peculiar nature, conveys white and thin fog and clouds.
On the circles which are made around the Moon and the Sun, likewise
around the other stars (both the wandering and not-wandering [stars])
249

=== Page 250 ===
However,
[766]
 it is necessary to attend to the circle which is made
around the Moon, and to see whether it is only one or more. However, if it
were only one, and it were thin and clear and of little durability, and it is
gradually moved back step-by-step and conceals itself, it will signify fair
weather and clear and pure air. Indeed if they were more, they will signify
winter wind. But if they were coming down more to a clear redness, and
they seem practically to be cut off piecemeal, they will indicate the
confusion of the air from wherever it comes to be, on the occasion of the
winds. Indeed if they were disorderly with thickness, and obscure, it
portends the disturbance of the air by cold and winds and snows.
And Ptolemy said
[767]
 if they were to come down on the side of a black
greenness, they will signify winter air which happens through the occasion
of each, namely through winds and cold and snows. And he said if the
circles were many, the things they signify will be many, according to what
we have said before.
And Ptolemy said
[768]
 [if] a circle will appear around the wandering
and the lucid not-wandering stars, it will signify by way of similarity those
things by means of the colors of their circles and of their stars which are
enclosed.
[769]
And he said
[770]
 it is fitting for us to observe even the non-wandering
stars, like the Pleiades and Alfecta, and those similar to these, and of their
stars in which many more stars approach each other; we should look at the
collections of the erratic ones, [their] colors, and apprehend their quantities
or number. For if they were to appear of greater light and of greater
quantity than they were made out to be, they will signify blowing winds
that are going to come from that direction in which they are stationed. You
would say the same about certain other stars which are called Praesepe,
and those similar to these which seem practically misty [or nebulous]:
which if they were to appear while the air is serene, almost spreading or
decreased in light and thick (just as Ptolemy testifies), they will indicate
the disturbance of the air and a multitude of rains. But if you were to see
them come down on the side of gleaming and clarity, you could announce
powerful future winds.
And Ptolemy said
[771]
 the method even of those (of the appearances or
the other signs) which happen to take place in some season, is likewise.
[772]
On comets and tailed stars

Indeed
[773]
 comets, which are called “tailed,” when they appear, will
250

=== Page 251 ===
signify winds and the dryness of the air, especially if they appear almost
cloudy [or nebulous]; and the strength of their significations will be
according to the multitude and scarcity of them, and their length and
shortness.
[774]
On the hurling of the stars
Indeed
[775]
 in the hurling of the stars, you will look in calm weather, to
see when they are seen, and if the stars fell, [when] they are moved–the
which motion, and the hurlings, from whatever direction they were, will
announce the blowing the winds is going to come from that direction; and
by how much more and thicker the hurlings were, by that much more will
the thing they signify be increased and hasten. If however they were from
different directions, they will portend disorderly [or irregular] winds are
going to come from here and there. But if you were to see such
significations appear everywhere, [they will portend] the disturbance of the
air everywhere, and likewise thunders and flashings will be looked for
from thence, and they will happen. You would say approximately the same
thing if you were to see clouds likened to light flecks of wool.
[776]
On the significations of diurnal and nocturnal qualities
In
[777]
 investigating diurnal and nocturnal qualities, it is necessary for
us to consider the body of the Sun in that very hour, and in that minute,
when he begins to appear above the horizon, and to understand well and to
see whether his body rises clear and gleaming. Because if it were so, on
that day it will indicate fair weather. But if you were to see the contrary,
you could judge the contrary. If however he were to set, it seems the same
should be prognosticated concerning the qualities of weather of the night.
Which if his body were of diverse colors, as Ptolemy said, or were to come
down more to a fiery red, or the rays of the Sun which proceed from him
or around him were red, or if the clouds which enclose him on account of
excessive clarity were to come down to reddish, and his rays were
extended very far, and were separated from each other outside the circle,
they will signify very strong winds whose blowing will proceed from the
angles in which these signs (which we talked about) were to appear:
[778]
which if they were to ascend black, or decline
[779]
 to greenishness in
mists, or one or two circles were around him, or were to have around
themselves clouds which are called “suns,”
[780]
 and their rays were
coming down to greenness or they were black, they will indicate stormy
251

=== Page 252 ===
air
[781]
 and rains.
On the rainbow, if it were to appear, and in what times, and what it would
signify
You
[782]
 will even look at the rainbow, and see in what weather it were
to appear, and in what weather its appearance will be. For if it were to
appear in fair weather (nor were the fair [weather] of a long time and great
dryness, because then its signification will not be necessary), still one will
hardly or never be deceived, because it will signify either winter air or
rains. And this will happen because the vapors which had been thin, begin
to thicken: because often, or rather almost always, a rainbow will not
appear unless vapors are rarefied or thickened. If however the winter [or
stormy] season were fair, it will demonstrate it is going to be a serene
season, because then the vapors begin to be rarefied and dried out and
annulled, as Ptolemy says.
[783]
Generally,
[784]
 we add that for the most part the peculiar colors which
appear in the air will signify qualities similar to the accidents signified by
the aforesaid colors.
On the investigation of the year, if there should be rains
If
[785]
 however you cared to know whether the year would be rainy, as
was touched on above, you will consider the entrance of the Sun into the
first minute of Libra, and [consider] what kind of condition he has, until he
had traversed through the twentieth degree of Scorpio. You will even see
what kind of condition the Moon has with other stars in those times
[seasons?], because the signification of that year will be taken from them.
Therefore you will even look, in that entrance, to see to which of the
planets the Moon is first joined, corporally or by aspect. Because if the
planet were oriental, as Jafar testifies, it will show the end of the year or
month or week to be rainy. If however it were occidental, it adorns the
beginning of the aforesaid heavy rains with benefit.
[786]
 However this
application will signify (particularly when made with Venus or Mercury)
the things which are aforesaid. But if she were applied to them (with one
oriental, the other occidental), from the middle,
[787]
 it will demonstrate
common
[788]
 and great rains are going to come throughout the whole
year.
And he said,
[789]
 the said multitude of rains while Venus and Mercury
hasten to enter Scorpio, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces, particularly
252

=== Page 253 ===
threaten. And I say more strongly so, if their application appears
[790]
from wet places or mansions, with the Moon in them. Which if they were
to behave this way, they show general rains but useless ones. And if the
Moon were applied to another one who regards her by means of a noted
aspect, however long such an application were to last, and to the full
amount of the application or aspect or conjunction, a multitude of rains
will cease.
[791]
On the application of the Moon with Saturn and with the rest of the planets
Ptolemy said
[792]
 if the Moon were applied to Saturn, it will signify
that soft and sweet or temperate rains are going to come, unless Mars or
Mercury worked to the contrary.
For
[793]
 indeed Jupiter has a serene air and uncommon
[794]
 winds;
also, not otherwise does he help the adjoinings of the rest of the stars.
Should there be a community or admixture of bodies (as was said above),
he will show efficacy, but [he will show] even the chief
[795]
 and
alternating colors of the clouds and variations of the air. It will be
permitted to look through the whole year, these things having been
weighed first.
Which
[796]
 if the Moon were applied to Mars, it will signify clouds
between saffron and reddish [in color], having radiance from above; and
thunders, likewise flashings, and even lightning in seasons fit for this–
unless Jupiter worked to the contrary. But if you were to see her applied to
the Sun, it will indicate saffron clouds, and rains having great drops of
water. If however the Moon would apply to Venus, it will generate soft
and continuous rains, and much dew (practically like clouds). If however
the Moon were applied with Mercury, it will show heavy rains and savage
winds, and their severity, and likewise
[797]
 dispersed and diverse clouds,
likening to smoke [or steam].
On certain extraordinary things
[798]
There are certain other extraordinary things which I do not remember
having found in the sayings of any of the philosophers (but I have seen
them to be often and most of the time veridical), and they especially have a
place here in the whole sixth clime,
[799]
 and on the edge of the fifth, and
in the south of the seventh. Namely, if the Sun were to set (even though in
other parts the air might seem clear and the weather fair), and where his
body were to set there were clouds just like a cloth,
[800]
 that it will
253

=== Page 254 ===
signify, in that same night or in the following day, winds or rains or both.
For if the cloth were thick, and likewise dense, and along with it there was
clear air and fair weather, it will usually indicate winds. Indeed if some
little cloud almost like a little cushion
[801]
 [were] next to the cloth, just
like the
matizotius
[802]
 of paintings, it will indicate rains. But if he were
to set in serene air, and after his setting up to the completion of dusk the
air seems red, likewise it will signify there is going to be serene weather in
that same night and in the following day.
And Christianus says you will consider what kind of weather there was
on the second day of Subat,
[803]
 because up to the entrance of the Sun
into Aries, you will expect the contrary of the weather which there is at
that time. And Gerardus
[804]
 said, you will see when thick and obscure
clouds from out of the direction of the north (directly under the arctic pole
or coming down somewhat to the western direction), were contiguous with
the horizon, because then it will rain practically immediately. But if
mountainous clouds were to appear almost like the bed of a river, and were
set apart from the horizon, they will signify the harmonizing of the air.
Likewise, if you were to see flashings in the same direction in a late hour,
they will show the disturbance of the air is near, so that the arrival of the
disturbance will not be prolonged beyond eight days easily,
[805]
 unless a
great dryness worked to the contrary.
And Alanus said you will even see if clouds opposite the plain and
especially opposite the north, were to seek higher mountains, because it
will be a sign that rains are going to come that same day, or the next one at
the latest. The same tends to happen when thick and dense clouds surround
the peaks of mountains, announcing that winds are going to come at that
time. And the aforesaid will happen more strongly, if the clouds are
extended out from an eastern or northern wind. If however the clouds were
to seek the plain from the mountains, you will announce it is a sign of the
alleviation of the air and its improvement (unless much humidity worked
against it), and by much more if it is moved by a western wind.
And there is another accident which often, or rather most of the time, I
have seen to be veridical–that if a rainbow were to apply in the morning,
then it will indicate rain, unless a great dryness of the air worked to the
contrary. If however it were to appear around the evening, then the
weather will be made fair, unless a great moisture of the air worked to the
contrary. Even when a great and dusky thickness of the stars, or the
greatest thinness were to appear, then the alteration of the air will be
signified, to put it briefly. These accidents, even though they are often true,
still are not necessary.
254

=== Page 255 ===
On the accidents whose spaces of time are prolonged for a little while
You will see, in accidental things, those whose spaces of time are
prolonged a small amount. I think the Sun, if you were to see him in the
southern direction, and Venus were hidden under his rays, with the Moon
applying to them or to one of them (especially to Venus) by conjunction or
by aspect, you will announce heavy rains are going to come on that same
day, likewise at that same hour, and its minute at which such a conjunction
were in that land. You could say the same if you were to find Mercury in
the southern direction with the application of the Moon; or if she did not
apply to him by conjunction [but] she is joined to him diametrically
opposite (and more strongly so, if then the Moon is found in Scorpio). You
could say the same if Mars and Venus are found together in Scorpio.
And Jafar said,
[806]
 moreover, with the Sun in Aquarius and the Moon
applying to him, or placed in his opposition, and Venus is staying in the
same place, there will be rains present in that hour. And he said in the
same way also, the application of Mars or Venus to the Sun, and the Moon
traversing in their opposition or square, while Venus were burned
[combust], makes the judgment of rains certain. Indeed, as was said, if
Venus applies to the Sun, and Mercury were conjoined to her, or at least
they to Venus, it will announce rains are going to come on that same day.
Moreover, if you were to find the Sun in Libra, but Venus in Sagittarius,
and the Moon joined to them (and especially to Venus), minute by minute,
it will show heavy rains that are going to be in the land in which you are,
on that same day. But if the Sun were in Aquarius or in his own exaltation,
and the Moon were to remain in Leo, it will show many heavy rains are
going to come in the day and hour of their conjunction or application. You
could judge the same about Sagittarius as I said about Leo, because
according to the authors who testify [on this matters], the images are said
to be of a river.
[807]
 Nevertheless, Leo effects a greater multitude of
heavy rains than Sagittarius does, and likewise he makes them denser; the
same thing tends to happen in the first face of Taurus. However
Sagittarius, even though it does not make as much rain, still it makes
thicker drops of water. And the aforesaid will happen more strongly and
certainly so, if the Sun were in Sagittarius or were to aspect it, and the
Moon were to aspect Mercury or apply to him; and he pursued Venus, and
on that same day their efficacy will be made known [or spread wide].
Things like the aforesaid will be generated in the domiciles of Mars and in
the domiciles of Venus: great falling rains, flashings, thunders, and hail.
255

=== Page 256 ===
And Jafar said,
[808]
 on the other hand, the Sun traversing in Pisces or in
Aries, the Moon staying in Virgo or Libra or in Sagittarius (that is, in
vaporous places),
[809]
 it will bring in a profusion of heavy rains on that
same day. Again, if Venus and Mercury are joined to the Sun in one of the
aforesaid places outside Leo, and the Moon applies to them (and the more
so if she were applied from Leo), it will show flashings and thunders, even
though with little or practically no rain. And the more so, if the Sun is
found to be joined with one of them (whether it is direct or retrograde)
directly opposite.
[810]
 If however the Sun were in Aquarius, or in Aries,
or in Leo, or in Libra or Scorpio, and the Moon were directly opposite,
namely minute by minute to him, or opposite to Venus after rains or falling
showers, it will signify luminous flashings and likewise thunders. And
more strongly than that if the Moon is exposed
[811]
 before [or opposite to]
her from Leo, because then with the flashings and thunders, if the air were
disposed to this, it will demonstrate generative
[812]
 lightning bolts.
And Abū Ma’shar Trax said,
[813]
 the said things [will] also [take place]
in a like manner in regions subject to the equinoctial line in the second
clime, in the fourth and in the third; their moderateness [or mean] will be
more relaxed
[814]
 in the fifth and in the sixth. But if you were to find the
Sun or Moon in Pisces, and Mars were to aspect them from the square or
from the opposition without the support of some benefic, they will signify
an abundance of rains, lightning, thunder, and flashings. And Trax said
even the Sun in Aries, Scorpio, the Moon in Leo in the coming-together of
the Sun,
[815]
 prefigures the same.
On the consideration of the places of rains
Even if you have apprehended the other, aforesaid considerations, still
you should not forget to consider the places of rains (which are Cancer,
Leo, Capricorn, and Aquarius).
[816]
 Whence, if you were to find the
Moon in one of those signs, and she were applied to Venus corporally or
from some aspect, and especially from the square or from the opposition,
you will announce there are going to be heavy rains. And the more so, if
the conjunction were completed before, from one degree or less.
[817]
However, the first half of Capricorn is less malefic than the other
preceding ones; indeed the last [half] signifies more cold than rain.
However, you will consider all of these with discernment.
On the signs and places signifying less rain than the aforesaid signs
256

=== Page 257 ===
However, there are certain other places in certain signs signifying less
rain than the aforesaid: and these are the last bound of Aries (and this
because of certain moistures which are found in those bounds); Gemini,
Virgo, and Libra are even of the places signifying fewer rains.
In the conjunction of what planets rains are signified

If however the Moon, after the coming-together [with the Sun], is joined
immediately to Mercury and Venus and Mars, or to one of them
corporally, or through some aspect, [then] unless Jupiter were to speak
against it, it will announce rains are going to come. If however she were to
apply to Mars or Venus, it signifies that rains will come to be that same
day. If to Mercury, the footsteps of him to whom Mercury were to adhere.
[818]
If you wished to know, of some month, whether it would be rainy or not
If however in any month you wished to prognosticate
[819]
 whether
there are future rains, in the beginning of any one of them you will raise up
[erect] the figure required for it, and you will adapt the twelve cusps to it,
and you will regard the hour and minute of the coming-together of the Sun
and the Moon, and you will see which of the planets then regards them, or
to whom they apply, and from what places, and from what mansions the
application was. Because if they were to apply to stars bringing in rains,
and from wet mansions, they will indicate stormy rains. If however they
were to aspect planets signifying rains from dry places, their significations
will be less than the aforesaid by at least one-third or one-fourth.
You will even see if Venus is joined with Saturn, and more so if Venus
were to transfer the light of Mars or Mercury or Jupiter: because then you
could announce future rains indubitably. And if apart from this the
aforesaid planets were to have an application with the Sun, they will
indicate some kind of rains, because the nature of the Sun in this case
comes down more to dew than to dryness. You will even consider if the
Sun and Venus were to travel in the same knot, and are in a mansion of the
nature of one of them, and in addition both or one of them are joined to
some star [who is] the ruler of the place which they occupy, and [the star]
were in a good place of the figure; and [the star] were to receive one
joining to it: without a doubt heavy rain will be signified. Moreover, if the
Moon were to transit the degree of her conjunction with the Sun, and were
joined to Jupiter and Mercury at the same time (or to one of them) in a
257

=== Page 258 ===
watery or airy sign (and the more so if she were in the southern direction,
[820]
 and more strongly so if reception were to enter between the aforesaid
planets), great rains will be shown, nor in any way will it be contradicted
by them.
On the conjunction of the Moon with the planets, and on the conjunction of
the other planets individually to each other
You will look, in the forecasting of rains, to see if one of the inferior
planets is joined with one of the superior planets in the southern direction,
and some inferior will be applied to by the superiors, and one of the
inferiors [to or by] them,
[821]
 because immediately when the aforenamed
inferior one were separated from the superior one, rains will be expected
necessarily.
And Abū Ma’shar (the most experienced of the ancient astrologers)
said, on the other hand, looking at the places, still they took care to attend
to the names, whose discernment is this: how many times the Moon is
going back
[822]
 from Venus, the signification of rains is certainly
reduced.
[823]
 And he said, [the Moon] going away from Mercury and
applying to Jupiter or the Sun, or
vice versa
, no other judgment is
available. And he said, these are individually the [types of] information,
and [they are those] certain things which the openings of the planets
(suitable enough) are formally named.
[824]
 And he said, the opposition of
these stars from the third clime to the fourth, it flows with its own rains
toward the southern direction [or part],
[825]

and from that same direction,
the signification of rains happens all together.
And Jafar said,
[826]
 on the other hand again, indeed those things which
were said regarding the opposition in the signs which signify waters, the
application having been made (namely in their degrees) and the coming-
together,
[827]
 or by chance the aspect
[828]
 being unobserved, and the
Moon in her own domicile, applying to Saturn, it brings in manifold heavy
rains.

258

=== Page 259 ===
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abu Bakr,
Liber Genethliacus
 (Nuremberg: Johannes Petreius, 1540)
Abū Ma’shar al-Balhi,
The Abbreviation of the Introduction to
Astrology
, ed. and trans. Charles Burnett, K. Yamamoto, and Michio
Yano (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1994)
Abū Ma’shar al-Balhi,
Liber Introductorii Maioris ad Scientiam
Iudiciorum Astrorum
, vols. VI, V, VI, IX, ed. Richard Lemay
(Naples: Istituto Universitario Orientale, 1995)
Abū Ma’shar al-Balhi,
The Abbreviation of the Introduction to
Astrology
, ed. and trans. Charles Burnett, annotated by Charles
Burnett, G. Tobyn, G. Cornelius and V. Wells (ARHAT Publications,
1997)
Abū Ma’shar al-Balhi,
On Historical Astrology: The Book of
Religions and Dynasties (On the Great Conjunctions)
, vols. I-II, eds.
and trans. Keiji Yamamoto and Charles Burnett (Leiden: Brill, 2000)
Abū Ma’shar al-Balhi,
 The Flowers of Abū Ma’shar
, trans. Benjamin
Dykes (2
nd
 ed., 2007)
Al-Biruni, Muhammad ibn Ahmad,
The Chronology of Ancient
Nations
, trans. and ed. C. Edward Sachau (London: William H. Allen
and Co., 1879)
Al-Biruni, Muhammad ibn Ahmad,
The Book of Instruction in the
Elements of the Art of Astrology
, trans. R. Ramsay Wright (London:
Luzac & Co., 1934)
Al-Fārābī,
De Ortu Scientiarum
 (appearing as
“Alfarabi Über den
Ursprung der Wissenschaften (De Ortu Scientiarum)
,” ed. Clemens
Baeumker,
Beiträge zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters
,
v. 19/3, 1916.
Al-Khayyat, Abu ‘Ali,
The Judgments of Nativities
, trans. James H.
Holden (Tempe, AZ: American Federation of Astrologers, Inc., 1988)
259

=== Page 260 ===
Al-Kindī,
The Forty Chapters (Iudicia Astrorum): The Two Latin
Versions
, ed. Charles Burnett (London: The Warburg Institute, 1993)
Al-Mansur (attributed),
Capitula Almansoris
, ed. Plato of Tivoli
(1136) (Basel: Johannes Hervagius, 1533)
Al-Qabīsī,
Isagoge
, trans. John of Spain, with commentary by John of
Saxony (Paris: Simon Colinaeus, 1521)
Al-Qabīsī,
The Introduction to Astrology
, eds. Charles Burnett, Keiji
Yamamoto, Michio Yano (London and Turin: The Warburg Institute,
2004)
Al-Rijāl, ‘Ali,
In Iudiciis Astrorum
 (Venice: Erhard Ratdolt, 1485)
Al-Rijāl, ‘Ali,
Libri de Iudiciis Astrorum
 (Basel: Henrichus Petrus,
1551)
Al-Tabarī, ‘Umar,
De Nativitatibus
 (Basel: Johannes Hervagius,
1533)
Al-Tabarī, ‘Umar [Omar of Tiberias],
Three Books of Nativities
, ed.
Robert Schmidt, trans. Robert Hand (Berkeley Springs, WV: The
Golden Hind Press, 1997)
Alighieri, Dante,
Inferno
, trans. John Ciardi (New York, NY: Mentor,
1982)
Allen, Richard Hinckley,
Star Names: Their Lore and Meaning
 (New
York: Dover Publications Inc., 1963)
Aristotle
, The Complete Works of Aristotle
vols. I-II, ed. Jonathan
Barnes (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984)

Bloch, Marc,
Feudal Society
, vols. I-II, trans. L.A. Manyon (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1961)
Bonatti, Guido,
Decem Tractatus Astronomiae
 (Erhard Ratdolt:
Venice, 1491)
260

=== Page 261 ===
Bonatti, Guido,
De Astronomia Tractatus X
 (Basel, 1550)
Bonatti, Guido,
Liber Astronomiae: Books One, Two, and Three with
Index
, trans. Robert Zoller and Robert Hand (Salisbury, Australia:
Spica Publications, 1988)
Bonatti, Guido,
Liber Astronomiae Part IV: On Horary, First Part
,
ed. Robert Schmidt, trans. Robert Hand (Berkeley Springs, WV: The
Golden Hind Press, 1996)
Boncompagni, Baldassarre,
Della Vita e Della Opere di Guido
Bonatti, Astrologo et Astronomo del Seculo Decimoterzo
 (Rome:
1851)
Brady, Bernadette,
Brady’s Book of Fixed Stars
 (Boston: Weiser
Books, 1998)
Burnett, Charles, ed.,
Magic and Divination in the Middle Ages
(Aldershot, Great Britain: Ashgate Publishing Ltd., 1996)
Burnett, Charles and Gerrit Bos,
Scientific Weather Forecasting in
the Middle Ages
 (London and New York: Kegan Paul International,
2000)
Carmody, Francis,
Arabic Astronomical and Astrological Sciences in
Latin Translation: A Critical Bibliography
 (Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press, 1956)
Carmody, Francis,
The Astronomical works of Thābit b. Qurra
(Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1960)
Dorotheus of Sidon,
Carmen Astrologicum
, trans. David Pingree
(Abingdon, MD: The Astrology Center of America, 2005)
Grant, Edward,
Planets, Stars, and Orbs: The Medieval Cosmos,
1200–1687
 (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 1994)
Haskins, Charles H., “Michael Scot and Frederick II,”
Isis
, v. 4/2
(1921), pp. 250-75.
261

=== Page 262 ===
Haskins, Charles H., “Science at the Court of the Emperor Frederick
II,”
The American Historical Review
, v. 27/4 (1922), pp. 669-94.
Hermes Trismegistus,
Liber Hermetis
, ed. Robert Hand, trans. Robert
Zoller (Salisbury, Australia: Spica Publications, 1998)
Holden, James H.,
A History of Horoscopic Astrology
 (Tempe, AZ:
American Federation of Astrologers, Inc., 1996)
Ibn Labban, Kusyar,
Introduction to Astrology
, ed. and trans. Michio
Yano (Tokyo: Institute for the Study of Languages and Cultures of
Asia and Africa, 1997)
Ibn Sina (Avicenna),
The Canon of Medicine (al-Qanun fi’l tibb)
, ed.
Laleh Bakhtiar (Great Books of the Islamic World, Inc., 1999)
Kennedy, Edward S., “The Sasanian Astronomical Handbook Zīj-I
Shāh and the Astrological Doctrine of ‘Transit’ (Mamarr),”
Journal
of the American Oriental Society
, v. 78/4 (1958), pp. 246-62.
Kunitzsch, Paul, “Mittelalterliche astronomisch-astrologische
Glossare mit arabischen Fachausdrücken,”
Bayerische Akademie der
Wissenschaften Philosophisch-Historische Klasse
, 1977, v. 5
Kunitsch, Paul, trans. and ed., “Liber de Stellis Beibeniis,” in
Hermetis Trismegisti: Astrologica et Divinatoria
 (Turnhout: Brepols
Publishers, 2001).
Kunitzsch, Paul and Tim Smart,
A Dictionary of Modern Star Names
(Cambridge, MA: New Track Media, 2006)
Latham, R.E.,
Revised Medieval Latin Word-List from British and
Irish Sources
 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004)
Lemay, Richard,
Abu Ma’shar and Latin Aristotelianism in the
Twelfth Century
 (Beirut: American University of Beirut, 1962)
Levy, Raphael, “A Note on the Latin Translators of Ibn Ezra,”
Isis
, v.
37 nos. 3/4 (1947), pp. 153-55.
262

=== Page 263 ===
Lilly, William,
The Starry Messenger
 (London: Company of
Stationers and H. Blunden, 1652). Reprinted 2004 by Renaissance
Astrology Facsimile Editions.
Lilly, William,
Anima Astrologiae
, trans. Henry Coley (London: B.
Harris, 1676)
Lilly, William,
Christian Astrology
, vols. I-II, ed. David R. Roell
(Abingdon, MD: Astrology Center of America, 2004)
Long, A.A. and D.N. Sedley,
The Hellenistic Philosophers
, vol. I
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987)
Māshā’allāh
et al.
,
Liber Novem Iudicum in Iudiciis Astrorum
 [Book
of the Nine Judges], ed. Peter Liechtenstein (Venice: 1509)
Māshā’allāh,
De Receptione
 [
On Reception
] and
De Revolutione
Annorum Mundi
 and
De Interpraetationibus
, in
Messahalae
Antiquissimi ac Laudatissimi Inter Arabes Astrologi, Libri Tres
, ed.
Joachim Heller (Nuremberg: Joannes Montanus and Ulrich Neuber,
1549)
Māshā’allāh,
On Reception
, ed. and trans. Robert Hand (ARHAT
Publications, 1998)
Maternus, Firmicus Julius,
Matheseos Libri VIII
, eds. W. Kroll and F.
Skutsch (Stuttgard: Teubner, 1968)
Michelsen, Neil F.,
The Koch Book of Tables
 (San Diego: ACS
Publications, Inc., 1985)
Mantello, F.A.C. and A.G. Rigg, eds.,
Medieval Latin: An
Introduction and Bibliographical Guide
 (Washington, DC: The
Catholic University of America Press, 1996)
New Oxford Annotated Bible
, ed. Bruce M. Metzger and Roland E.
Murphy (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994)
Pingree, David, “Astronomy and Astrology in India and Iran,”
Isis
 v.
54/2 (1963), pp. 229-46.
263

=== Page 264 ===
Pingree, David, “Classical and Byzantine Astrology in Sassanian
Persia,”
Dumbarton Oaks Papers
, v. 43 (1989), pp. 227-239.
Pingree, David,
From Astral Omens to Astrology: From Babylon to
Bīkīner
 (Rome: Istituto italiano per L’Africa e L’Oriente, 1997)
Pseudo-Ptolemy,
Centiloquium
, ed. Georgius Trapezuntius, in Bonatti
(1550)
Ptolemy, Claudius,
Tetrabiblos
 vols. 1, 2, 4, trans. Robert Schmidt,
ed. Robert Hand (Berkeley Springs, WV: The Golden Hind Press,
1994-98)
Ptolemy, Claudius,
Tetrabiblos
, trans. F.E. Robbins (Cambridge and
London: Harvard University Press, 1940)
Ptolemy, Claudius,
Quadripartitum
 [Tetrabiblos], trans. Plato of
Tivoli (1138) (Basel: Johannes Hervagius, 1533)
Sahl ibn Bishr,
Introductorium
 and
Praecipua Iudicia
 [The Fifty
Judgments]
De Interrogationibus
 and
De Electionibus
, in
Tetrabiblos
,
ed. Girolamo Salio (Venice: Bonetus Locatellus, 1493)
Sahl ibn Bishr,
De Electionibus
 (Venice: Peter of Liechtenstein,
1509)
Selby, Talbot R., “Filippo Villani and his Vita of Guido Bonatti,”
Renaissance News
, v. 11/4 (1958), pp. 243-48.
Seneca,
The Stoic Philosophy of Seneca
, ed. and trans. Moses Hadas
(New York: The Norton Library, 1968)
Stegemann, Viktor,
Dorotheos von Sidon und das Sogenannte
Introductorium
des Sahl ibn Biŝr
 (Prague: Orientalisches Institut in
Prag, 1942)
Thomson, S. Harrison, “The Text of Grosseteste’s
De Cometis
,”
Isis
v. 19/1 (1933), pp. 19-25.
264

=== Page 265 ===
Thorndike, Lynn,
A History of Magic and Experimental Science
(New York: The Macmillan Company, 1929)
Thorndike, Lynn,
The
Sphere
 of Sacrobosco and Its Commentators
(Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1949)
Thorndike, Lynn, “A Third Translation by Salio,”
Speculum
, v. 32/1
(1957), pp. 116-117.
Thorndike, Lynn, “John of Seville,”
Speculum
, v. 34/1 (1959), pp. 20-
38.
Utley, Francis Lee (review), “
The Legend of the Wandering Jew
 by
George K. Anderson,”
Modern Philology
, v. 66/2 (1968), pp. 188-
193.
Valens, Vettius,
The Anthology
, vols. I-VII, ed. Robert Hand, trans.
Robert Schmidt (Berkeley Springs, WV: The Golden Hind Press,
1993-2001)
Van Cleve, Thomas Curtis,
The Emperor Frederick II of
Hohenstaufen: Immutator Mundi
 (London: Oxford University Press,
1972)
Weinstock, Stefan, “Lunar Mansions and Early Calendars,”
The
Journal of Hellenic Studies
, v. 69 (1949), pp. 48-69.
Zoller, Robert,
The Arabic Parts in Astrology: A Lost Key to
Prediction
 (Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions International, 1989)
Zoller, Robert,
Bonatti on War
 (2
nd
 ed., 2000)
[1]
 They are: (1) the climacteric conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter in Aries every 960 years; (2) the mutation conjunctions
of Saturn and Jupiter in a new triplicity every 240 years; (3) the conjunctions of Saturn and Mars in Cancer, which takes
place every 30 years; (4) the conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter with a given triplicity every 20 years; (5) the conjunctions of
the Sun with other planets; (6) the conjunctions of the Sun and Moon.
[2]

Saphar
 or
Safar
 is the second month of the Islamic calendar. Bonatti is counting by lunar months, so that in his
proposed example, the New Moon that begins the lunar year coincides with the beginning of the seasonal year, when the Sun
265

=== Page 266 ===
enters Aries. Thus the second lunar month (Saphar) would begin before the first seasonal (solar) month had completed.
[3]
 Reading
insensibiliter
for
insensibilibus
 (in order to parallel
sensibiliter
 above).
[4]
 Reading
de Creatore suo
 for
creatorem suum
.
[5]
 This philosopher could be Aristotle, but it might also be Abū Ma’shar or Māshā’allāh.
[6]
 Reading
secundus
 for
primus
.
[7]

Per relationem.
[8]

Indumentorum ordinantium corpora
. According to Zoller (private communication), clothing was (as it still is) a way of
distinguishing social class and rank, which has a kind of stability not unlike Saturn.
[9]

Prolixitas.
[10]
 Reading
Luna
 for
Mercurius.
[11]
 See also Tr. 8, Part 1, Chs. 18, 52, 57, 76.
[12]
 Reading
eorum
 for
eius
.
[13]
 Bonatti’s inclusion of this in the agricultural/weather portion of the sentence suggests this could also refer to breeding
and crops.
[14]
 I.e., 27º - 29º 59’ Leo.
[15]
 I.e., intercepted.
[16]
 It is unclear whether south and north are meant in terrestrial terms, or in terms of ecliptical latitude.
[17]
 I.e., in mundane ingresses.
[18]
 From Ar.
al-bust
 (see al-Qabīsī, IV.23), a term of art Burnett believes derives from Sanskrit. But note the similarity
between the Ar.
bust
 and the Latin
combustus
 (combust). There is confusion on Bonatti’s part about the various ways of
dividing up the hours of the lunar month. In the
Book of Astronomy
 this is discussed in several places (comprising three
different divisions). First, (a) he divides the month into sections of 12 and 72 hours, of which the 12 hour sections are
subdivided into four-hour periods which get less and less severe. This is one version of
al-bust
 (and it is repeated in Tr. 7,
Part 2, 7
th
 House, Ch. 4, as well as in Tr. 9, Part 3, 12
th
 House Ch. 6). Then (b) he speaks of the
duodena
 of the Moon, in
which the month is divided up into 12-hour sections, each section being ruled by the triplicity rulers of fire, earth, air, and
water. Finally (c) in Tr. 9, Part 3, 12
th
 House, Ch. 6, he mentions another version of (b), but calls it another form of
al-bust
instead of the
duodena
 of the Moon. In this case, the month is divided up as with (b), except that instead of using the natural
order of the triplicities, we begin with the Sun and move in descending Chaldean order. Thus the first 12 hours are assigned
to the triplicity rulers of the Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, and so on (presumably using the sign in which
these planets are when their hours are in effect).
[19]
 These are not the same as the
duodecimae
 (Tr. 5, the 89
th
 Consideration; Tr. 9, Part 3, 12
th
 House, Ch. 11), which are
spatial divisions of the signs.
[20]
 As he clarifies below, each individual
duodena
 is 12 unequal hours long; therefore a given triplicity ruler will rule
one-third of a
duodena
.
[21]
 Bonatti repeats this claim in Tr. 9, Part 3, 12
th
 House, Ch. 6. He seems to mean that standard planetary hours should
be assigned to the period between the Full Moons, so that each day, the actual daylight and nighttime hours are divided
equally, which would make the hours of a given season unequal to equinoctial hours: daytime “hours” in the summer would
be longer than those in the winter, for example.
[22]
 I am not sure where Bonatti is getting this quotation from; he could be extrapolating from pseudo-Ptolemy’s
Cent.
(e.g., Aph. 60, on critical days).
[23]
 This is an awkwardly constructed paragraph, and Bonatti is trying to put too much into every sentence. The point is
that unless you can absolutely avoid it, you should not undertake certain actions outside of the four-hour periods during
which the Moon is in a good portion of her
duodena
.
[24]

Contingent.
[25]
 This method is based on Ptolemy (
Tet.
 III.3). See Tr. 9 for a fuller description.
[26]
 This shows that this method of rectification is meant to give only an initial plausible time which must then be refined
further.
[27]
 In other words, the general definition of a revolution pertains particularly to nativities and elections, since the Sun
may be at any degree of the zodiac when their events take place. But a mundane revolution is something more specific.
266

=== Page 267 ===
[28]

Sicut & ad ipsius certitudinem inveniendam, fortis atque implicita
. This is an awkward sentence. I think that Bonatti
is saying the difficulty of delineating a revolution, and the broad and deep information gotten from one, befits its status as a
chart whose significations cover an entire nation or region.
[29]
 Bonatti probably means the secular religious.
[30]

Ritus
, “rites, customs.” Revolutions therefore cover all religions, cultures, and types.
[31]
 See Part 2 of this Treatise, Ch. 18.
[32]
 The world’s year goes from equinox to equinox; a native’s year begins at the moment of the Sun’s return to the
location it had at the nativity.
[33]

Industria
.
[34]

Derogat
. In other words, the presence of individual judgments tailored to a specific case does not invalidate the
general rules–we must restrict and distinguish general rules when applying them to individual cases.
[35]
 This paragraph emphasizes the prior point. For example, Saturn in a given sign might mean one thing for weather;
but what if he is both northern and retrograde–and those delineations are contrary to each other or to the testimony given by
the sign? I am not sure Bonatti really has a clear answer to the problem, but he does believe the contrariety is only apparent,
not real.
[36]
 In other words, which planets are north and south relative to each other, and which are north and south of the ecliptic
absolutely.
[37]

Super eum
.
[38]
 Omitting the repetitive phrase
dicit[ur?] ire super eum.
[39]

Super.
[40]
 If “places” were the same as “whole signs,” then there’d be little need to be so exact about the timing–so “place”
must mean “exact location” here.
[41]
 This could also mean, “if he were in the ascending sign,” which I think is the more likely interpretation. In that case,
he would have to be in the rising sign
and
 conjoined to the cusp within the stated number of degrees.
[42]
 I believe that by “ahead of,” Bonatti means “in an earlier degree than the cusp’s”; by “after,” he means “in a later
degree than the cusp’s.” See my Introduction.
[43]
 I believe that by “ahead of,” Bonatti means “in an earlier degree than the cusp’s”; by “behind,” he means “in a later
degree than the cusp’s.” See my Introduction.
[44]

Any
 dignity at all, or only if it is
also
 in the Ascendant? The context suggests it must also be in the Ascendant, but
note that below, Bonatti drops the degree requirements for the luminary.
[45]
 I believe that by “ahead of,” Bonatti means “in an earlier degree than the cusp’s”; by “behind,” he means “in a later
degree than the cusp’s.” See my Introduction and the instances below.
[46]
 Now the numbers of the houses/signs switch to Arabic numerals, but resume their spelled-out form with the third
sign; therefore I treat all of these as being whole sign houses.
[47]
 Bonatti agrees with this rule, as the next paragraph will show.
[48]
 Lit., “after the falling [away]…from the rulership of the year.”
[49]
 I am not sure whether Bonatti or his source means an equal-point or weighted-point
al-mubtazz
.
[50]
 This is similar to the horary principle that certain planets can be favored if they change their sign more quickly (see
Tr. 6, Part 2, 6
th
 House, Ch. 4), but here it is important that the planet actually be in the proper sign.
[51]
 This suggests the use of aspects to house cusps, which is rare in Bonatti. I believe that by “ahead of,” Bonatti means
“in an earlier degree than the cusp’s”; by “after,” he means “in a later degree than the cusp’s.” See my Introduction.
[52]
 I.e., the domicile or exalted Lord of the Ascendant, whichever one is aspected by the powerful luminary.
[53]
 Bonatti’s point may be this: “Certain others,
instead of
 going through the houses to look for
al-mubtazz
es when
all
else fails
, simply revert to the sect ruler and look no further.”
[54]
 I believe that by “ahead of,” Bonatti means “in an earlier degree than the cusp’s”; by “behind,” he means “in a later
degree than the cusp’s.” See my Introduction.
[55]
 I am not aware of any other time when the Lord of the bound is given the same numerical weight as is the Lord of the
domicile: usually the Lord of the bound is given two strengths in medieval texts.
267

=== Page 268 ===
[56]

Mitte ipsum in numero.
[57]
 Note below Bonatti that includes the Lords of the bounds, triplicity, and the hour in his list of considerations–so I am
not sure what is gained by distinguishing their natural and accidental significance.
[58]
 I do not understand this statement.
[59]
 This is an somewhat awkward paraphrase of Māshā’allāh,
De Rev. Ann.
, Ch. 6: “If the Lord of the Ascendant were in
the horoscope, namely by three degrees before or behind its cusp, not cadent nor removed from the angle of the Ascendant, it
will not be necessary in this case to look at another planet. Likewise the Lord of the exaltation of the sign of the Ascendant,
if it were in the degrees of its own exaltation. Indeed, if the Lord of the triplicity were in the Ascendant, it will have one-third
of the strength of the Lord of the Ascendant; and the Lord of the bound has one-fifth of the strength (and this according to
the quantity of their strength in the signs); and the Lord of the hour has one-seventh. And know that this happens if they were
in the Ascendant or the Midheaven–if however they were in the west or in the angle of the earth, their strength would be
decreased; likewise it would be decreased more if they were in the eleventh, ninth, and fifth.”
[60]
 I believe this refers to the Lord of the Ascendant or the 10
th
.
[61]
 I believe this refers to the Lord of the bound or triplicity or hour.
[62]
 My understanding of Māshā’allāh is that
if
 any of the lesser Lords is in the Ascendant or 10
th
,
and
 either the domicile
or exaltation Lord is the Lord of the Year, then that lesser Lord will participate in the rulership, albeit more weakly. But
Bonatti believes the lesser Lord will be the Lord of the Year if the domicile and exaltation Lords
cannot
 be Lord of the
Year–and that the lesser Lord’s ability will be weaker than if it had been the domicile or exaltation Lord.
[63]
 See below.
[64]
 That is, if none of them could be the Lord of the Year by the conventional method.
[65]
 I believe that by “ahead of,” Bonatti means “in an earlier degree than the cusp’s”; by “after,” he means “in a later
degree than the cusp’s.” See my Introduction.
[66]
 This sentence is based on Māshā’allāh,
De Rev. Ann.
, Ch. 8. Māshā’allāh says, “And if the Lord of the Year appeared
to you, see if perhaps he would commit his own disposition to another–that is, like if he is in the domicile of another planet,
and that planet appears in an optimal place from the Ascendant, and the Lord of the Year also is conjoined to him. Because if
it were so, he is made Lord of the Year who is the Lord of his sign (in which you were to find the governor of the
Ascendant).” (The instructions seems to assume a best-case scenario, in which the domicile Lord or “governor” of the
Ascendant is the presumptive Lord of the Year.) In other words, if the presumptive Lord of the Year is received by another,
well-situated planet, that receiver will take up his disposition and be the true Lord of the Year.
[67]
 Based on Bonatti’s earlier statements, the aspect must be to the actual degree of the Ascendant.
[68]
 In other words, look at the (a) Lord of the (b) Lord of the (c) sign of the sect ruler. For example, suppose the
revolution were in the day. Let the Sun be in (c) Gemini. The Lord of Gemini is (b) Mercury. Let Mercury be in Libra.
Libra’s Lord is (a) Venus. In this case we would look at Venus.
[69]
 This awkward phrasing is based on an earlier paragraph, but stands in parallel to the third consideration above. It
evidently means, “see if the luminary whose authority it is, is
in
 the 10
th
 house.” This same consideration will apply to other
houses below. (It is also possible that Bonatti or his source is employing a rare instance of the locative case, which again
would simply mean “in.”)
[70]
 See previous footnote.
[71]
 See previous footnote.
[72]
 See previous footnote.
[73]
 See previous footnote.
[74]
 See previous footnote.
[75]
 See previous footnote.
[76]
 Above this meant that if there were several planets in one of the above places, we must look at the
al-mubtazz
 by the
multitude of strengths in that place.
[77]
 This means, “if there were more than one planet
equally close
 to the Sun.”
[78]
 Above this meant that a relevant Lord could still be the Lord of the Year if it aspected the cusp of the relevant house
within a few degrees (obviously after all other options were exhausted).
[79]

Secunda
. Above the text put the luminary in the second (
secundo
). Perhaps here
secunda
means “second domicile.”
[80]
 Per the instructions above, this is the Lord of the Lord of the sign in which the sect ruler is.
268

=== Page 269 ===
[81]
 In Ch. 37, Bonatti defines “changing figure” as a planet moving from the sign it is in, into the next one. See Tr. 6.
[82]
 Here and below I believe that by “ahead of,” Bonatti means “in an earlier degree than the cusp’s”; by “after,” he
means “in a later degree than the cusp’s.” See my Introduction.
[83]
 Again, I do not know whether this is an
al-mubtazz
 by weighted or equal points.
[84]
 This probably refers to the second Part of the 10
th
 House (Ch. 13 of Part 2, below). It is extracted by taking the
distance from Mars to the Moon by day, or the Moon to Mars by night, and projecting from the degree of the Ascendant.
[85]
 The Latin reads:
si evenerit casus eius in medio coeli
. This could be read as: “If his
fall
 [Cancer] were to be on the
Midheaven, but that does not make sense, because Mars would not operate well as a significator of the king and the 10
th
house if Cancer were there. So
casus
 must simply refer to his location.
[86]
 Omitting
dominus
.
[87]
 I believe Bonatti means that the planet must be either combust or firmly under the beams; but if it were separating
from the Sun between approximately 12º and 15º, then it would be appearing from under the rays, and the rule would not
apply.
[88]
 Here and throughout Tr. 8, I often do not know the source of these statements by Abū Ma’shar.
[89]
 See previous note about Mars’s “placement” (lit. “fall”).
[90]

Si ceciderint…ab aspectibus.
 As we will see later in the sentence, this means that they do not aspect the 10
th
–
probably by whole sign.
[91]
 Again, a reference to Māshā’allāh. See Tr. 6. Bonatti is trying to say that this planet should be transferring the light
between two of the other significators.
[92]
 This is a fancy way of saying that if another planet transfers the light of one of the significators to the Midheaven,
that significator will be the significator of the king.
[93]
 This is version (b) of being in one’s “own light,” from al-Qabīsī III.10.
[94]
 This seems to be Abū Ma’shar’s “pushing power” (
daf’ al-quwwah
), when a planet is in one of its own dignities and
applies to another planet. See Tr. 3, Part II, Ch. 13.
[95]
 This is evidently an astronomical comment, but I do not see its relevance or what exactly Abū Ma’shar means by the
“aggregate” (
universalitas
) or what role the concept of truth plays.
[96]
 In this Treatise, most of the citations of Abū Ma’shar seem to come from BN
lat.
 16204, which I have not yet been
able to examine in great detail.
[97]
 So the order of priority is: significator of the king, Saturn, Sun, Lord of the 10
th
. This seems to pertain both to the
order of their effectiveness, and the quality and quantity of the very things signified.
[98]

Legistis
.
[99]
 I believe this refers to those we now call “war profiteers” or those with munitions contracts.
[100]
 Reading
accipies
 for
aspicies
.
[101]
 Sometimes called in English the “regular religious” (
religiosi regulares
), i.e. those who live in monasteries and
convents.
[102]
 Reading the old people, the decrepit, and low-class people in the nominative, not the ablative/dative.
[103]

Merzarioribus.
[104]
 In this paragraph and the next, Bonatti’s “if” suggests he will later say “then,” followed by instructions–which he
does not provide. But his point seems to be that we ought to see if (a) a domicile belonging to the superiors or Mercury is on
the Ascendant or the 10
th
. If so, then the things signified by that planet will be prominent. Or if (b) a domicile belonging to
Venus, the Moon, or Mars is on the 7
th
 or 4
th
, what they signify will be prominent.
[105]
 In this paragraph Bonatti means that the eastern hemisphere is masculine, so one looks for the signification of the
masculine planets from it (
viz.
, the Ascendant and the MC); the western hemisphere is feminine, so one looks for the
signification of the feminine planets from it (
viz.
, the 4
th
 and 7
th
).
[106]
 Mars is a masculine, nocturnal planet.
[107]

Devenire
, which has more of a connotation of coming down into reality.
[108]
 I.e., agriculture.
269

=== Page 270 ===
[109]
 The climes were areas of terrestrial latitude (see below).
[110]
 The regions seem to be construed more in terms of terrestrial longitude, and are related to measurements in right
ascension.
[111]
 Presumably he means a sign like Aries or Capricorn (rams and goats), and not Pisces (fish).
[112]
 Remember that, according to the rules, candidates for the Lord of the Year must be rejected if retrograde. Bonatti is
saying that if all of the candidates are in such bad shape that the best candidate is retrograde, then one will need its light to be
transferred back to the Ascendant (through either one or several other planets) in order for the signification to be good. This
last point about allowing multiple planets to transfer light comes from Māshā’allāh and is confirmed by Bonatti in several
places (as we have already seen in Tr. 6).
[113]
 In other words, when judging the condition of the king separately (through the significator of the king), the light of
a retrograde significator of the king must ultimately be transferred to the 10
th
.
[114]

Dare intellegere.
[115]

Messala Indus
. This does not appear to be Māshā’allāh himself, since he does not make a statement like this in
De
Rev. Ann.
[116]
 It is unclear whether this approximation by cubits is meant to be a
miliarium
, or a measurement on top of a
miliarium
; I note that this measurement is never named or mentioned again, so it must be roughly equivalent to a
miliarium
.
[117]

Exitus
 can mean “going out/forth” or “end, conclusion” or “event, result.” I believe Bonatti is saying we ought to
be aware not just of the distances involved, but of the actual geography of a land, so that we do not make predictions about
regions which cannot support the relevant activity.
[118]
 In other words, the area above the horizon, from the Ascendant to the Midheaven to the 7
th
.
[119]
 In other words, the area below the horizon, from the 7
th
 to the
Imum Coeli
 to the Ascendant.
[120]
 This paragraph recalls the statements in Tr. 4 on the planetary regions, namely that the regions are divided into the
superiors, the middle (the Sun) and the inferiors, and that the inferiors are lesser versions of the superiors, with lesser powers
and shorter effects.
[121]

Ipsarum terrestrium et grossarum
.
[122]
 The entire last half of this sentence is bizarre. Again we see Bonatti believes Abū Ma’shar was a Latin European
who studied in Athens. Also, I do not know the significance of the title “Tricas” (cf. the name Abū Ma’shar Trax in Tr. 10),
but Bonatti’s point may be that just as people in the Arctic might act against type by pursuing the sciences, that Abū Ma’shar
(allegedly a Latin) also acted against type. The name of the Treatise
Agiget
 is another form of the book called
Axiget
 in
Gr.
Intr.
 I.5.1671, which is described by Abū Ma’shar (or John of Seville) as a “book of courses,” and which the Latins call the
Canons–it is the Latinized form of
Zij.
[123]
 I.e., Albert the Great. See Introduction.
[124]
 Bonatti is referring to the skin color variation of the inhabitants–which is presumably related to the colors attributed
to the planets.
[125]

Avicenna
. See Introduction.
[126]
 I am unclear what this sentence refers to, although is probably described in the
Canon
 (see next footnote).
[127]
 This must refer to ibn Sina’s
Canon
, one of the most influential medical textbooks of the medieval period.
[128]
 If the lands ruled by the Persians and Arabs fall in this division, I think we can see why Bonatti is forced to
conclude Abū Ma’shar had to be a Latin and not a Persian.
[129]
 The attributions here are not the standard Stoic or Aristotelian ones–they derive from a combination of wind and
elemental considerations (see below).
[130]
 Bonatti considers Venus to be primarily cold and moist, but with a certain “hidden heat” (Tr. 7, Part 1, Ch. 11).
[131]
 Bonatti follows his own (erroneous) version of Ptolemy’s bounds, which I will leave standing as they are.
[132]
 Reading
dominus
 for
domus
.
[133]
 Bonatti is multiplying the number of degrees in each planet’s bound by 53
miliaria
 (see above).
[134]
 Bonatti seems to be imagining that along each strip of latitude defining the clime, sections of longitude will be
ruled by each bound ruler in succession. But he clearly thinks that there are well-defined boundaries to where the inhabitable
parts of the clime begin and end (i.e., due to ocean boundaries). Since the discovery of the Americas, where might these
boundaries begin and end?
270

=== Page 271 ===
[135]
 Reading
terminis
 for
termino
 (although the sentence is more truncated than its parallel ones in other paragraphs,
and may have been garbled in transcription).
[136]
 The text omits Venus, who fits here.
[137]
 Remember, the luminaries do not rule any bounds.
[138]
 Reading
Juppiter
 for
Saturnus.
[139]

Gentis
. Bonatti means this both ethnically (like Arabs for Venus) and in terms of character or profession (like
women for Venus). See below.
[140]
 There are two problems with this doctrine. (a) Suppose the chart of the revolution were cast for Italy, but the rising
sign were Libra (which he says rules Arabia). Why should the rising sign, which ought to pertain to Italy, say anything about
Arabia? Moreover, (b) charts for nations close to one another might have the same rising sign, but the ruler in a different
condition. For instance, Libra might be rising in the charts of two nations; but she might be cadent in one and angular in the
other. This would give contradictory reports about the affairs of nations ruled by Libra.
[141]
 Now Bonatti switches to guidelines for delineating the rulers of all of the houses in the revolutionary figure.
Section heading mine.
[142]
 I do not know if Bonatti means this universally, or only as part of delineating a nocturnal revolution.
[143]

Pulsationem
. Usually Bonatti (or his sources) only use this term when speaking of planets “pushing” their nature or
power onto one another, but “influence” seems better her. Of course, it could mean that because of the Moon’s good
condition, the nature or power she does “push” will be something powerful indeed.
[144]
 Wives and girlfriends are attributed to the 7
th
 house, but what other women could he mean? One is tempted to say
“prostitutes,” or women as givers of sexual pleasure, but why not simply say it? Perhaps it means women generally, since
Venus (who is a general significator of women) has a joy in the 5
th
.
[145]
 Reading
octavi
for Bonatti’s
octavae
, to match the use of places/signs in the rest of the list.
[146]

Praeses
.
[147]
 Reading
aut
 for
et
.
[148]
 Reading
fuerit
 for
fuerint
.
[149]
 In this passage, “beyond” means “in an earlier degree than the cusp’s,” i.e., so that it has already passed beyond the
cusp by primary motion; “after” means “in a later degree than the cusp’s,” i.e., so that it has not yet passed beyond the cusp
by primary motion.
[150]
 I am not sure what Bonatti means by this sense of proportion.
[151]
 Bonatti probably means “in the Ascendant but not combust, or in aspect.” See following sentences.
[152]

Extra illud.
 This use of the neuter is another reason why the quadrant/whole sign distinction is often unclear in
Bonatti. Here Bonatti seems to mean “outside the ascending sign.”
[153]

Adhuc deterius
. I believe Bonatti means that this situation by itself will make things worse, regardless of how it
may be worsened by other bad conditions.
[154]

Mutatio regni
, lit. “a change/mutation of the kingdom.”
[155]
 This word (
intensa
) forms one half of a pair with
remissiora
 (“more remitted”) in the previous paragraph. They
come from Hellenistic astrology, which standardly speaks of the “intensification and remission” of planetary effects
especially over time. But Bonatti does not seem to give them any special technical role here. It is possible that his textual
sources use these terms.
[156]

De Rev. Ann.
, Ch. 39.
[157]
 Heading mine.
[158]
 In other words, we must cast a chart for the time of the eclipse itself. If the eclipse will be in Taurus, we must look
at Venus (the Lady of Taurus) and her relationship–in the revolution–to the planet that will be the Lord of the Ascendant at
the time of the eclipse.
[159]
 The Lord of the sign in which the eclipse will occur.
[160]
 Heading mine.
[161]
 Māshā’allāh,
De Rev. Ann.
, Ch. 41.
[162]
 I.e., of Taurus, which would be the tenth sign and in most cases on the cusp of the Midheaven.
271

=== Page 272 ===
[163]
 Reading
dominus
 for
domus
, as with the third sentence.
[164]
 Reading “domicile” instead of “house,” to go along with “sign” in the first sentence.
[165]
 Reading
minatur
 for
minuitur
.
[166]
 Māshā’allāh,
ibid.
 Māshā’allāh also puts this after a (short) digression, as opposed to directly after the statement
above about Venus and the Sun. It is unclear to me why Māshā’allāh does this, since the material in the digression is
perfectly general, and does not seem to pertain only to cases where Taurus is on the Midheaven.
[167]
 Māshā’allāh simply says “if she were in the Midheaven,” which obviously includes Taurus if the prior scenario
regarding her and the Sun is meant. Bonatti seems to add Libra in order to generalize Māshā’allāh’s meaning.
[168]
 I do not understand why this latter condition is so important as to merit notice, especially since nothing more is
done with it in the paragraph.
[169]
 This connotes physical health, not religious salvation.
[170]
 The punctuation of this sentence is unclear.
[171]
 Reading
eius
 for
eorum
.
[172]
 The “first” (leading) aspect is the sinister aspect cast forward in the order of signs; the “second” (“following”)
aspect is the dexter aspect cast backward against the order of signs.
[173]
 This would be the fourth sign from the location of the Lord of the 9
th
, i.e., the outcome of the journey–hence the
interest in seeing if malefics occupy it.
[174]
 Literally, “he will put down some unpunished sources,” which must refer to unpunished troublemakers.
[175]
 Māshā’allāh,
De Rev. Ann.
, Ch. 42.
[176]
 I believe there should be a “not” (
non
) here.
[177]
 Reading
fuerunt…aspicientes
 for
fuerit…aspicientes
.
[178]
 I am not sure where Bonatti has gotten this quote. It does not seem to be a misread for Māshā’allāh.
[179]
 This paragraph is a combination of statements largely based on
De Rev. Ann.
, Chs. 42 and 44–although the
statement below about Leo being the 10
th
 house seems to be Bonatti’s own clarification or refinement. Māshā’allāh simply
speaks of the Sun as the general significator of kings, but Bonatti seems to want to restrict this to cases where the Sun is
actually the significator of the king according to the rules he has laid out (or, more likely, he thinks this is Māshā’allāh’s own
meaning, and he is simply clarifying it).
[180]
 By “in front,” Bonatti means “in a later zodiacal degree”; by “after” he means “in an earlier zodiacal degree.”
[181]
 Māshā’allāh,
De Rev. Ann.
, Ch. 44. Māshā’allāh does not say the “Lord of the Year,” but rather the “Lord of the
Ascendant of the year.” Perhaps Bonatti reads Māshā’allāh as
meaning
 the Lord of the Year, since in an idealized case the
Lord of the Ascendant of the year would also be the Lord of the Year.
[182]

Loca
, here meaning “signs,” instead of the usual
locos
. See the next sentence.
[183]

Locis
, again meaning “signs” and the earthly regions subject to them.
[184]
 Māshā’allāh,
De Rev. Ann.
, Ch. 44.
[185]
 Māshā’allāh,
ibid.
[186]
 Reading
aerio
 (with Māshā’allāh) for Bonatti’s
igneo
 (“fiery”).
[187]
 Adding
non
 with Māshā’allāh.
[188]
 I.e., including the sign he is in.
[189]
 Adding
non
 with Māshā’allāh.
[190]
 This is based on
De Rev. Ann.
, Ch. 42.
[191]
 I.e., if the Lord were in Sagittarius at the hour of the revolution, and were joined by aspect to Jupiter. Then see
when the Lord will come by its own motion to the degree Jupiter had been in.
[192]
 Earlier, this term suggested the king was able to have “space” to relax; but here it seems to mean he will travel far
and wide.
[193]
 A more awkward paraphrase of Māshā’allāh,
ibid
.
272

=== Page 273 ===
[194]
 This probably means “in its own first station.”
[195]
 I.e., in its own second station.
[196]
 In other words, if he were the Lord of the Lord of the 9
th
. So if the Lord of the 9
th
 were in Aries, and Mars (the
Lord of Aries) were in Gemini (ruled by Mercury), Bonatti is asking whether the significator of the king is Mercury.
[197]

Accidet ei quod timebat…ex aegritudine de qua consuevit infirmari.
 Māshā’allāh does not specify whether the king
is accustomed or unaccustomed to having the illness.
[198]
 I believe Bonatti is talking about the malefic having dignity in the sign which the significator of the king is,
into
which
the malefic casts his ray. Otherwise, there would be no reason to say that he has a dignity in the
king’s
land (sign)–he
would only have a dignity in his
own
 land (sign). See Bonatti’s examples.
[199]
 See below for hints about judging their station by aspect.
[200]
 The dexter square, cast backwards against the order of signs.
[201]
 The sinister square, cast forwards in the order of signs.
[202]
 Reading
inimicum
 for
initium
.
[203]
 See also Ch. 52 on the same topic. For more on the conjoinings of the malefics, see Chs. 57, 76; and Tr. 4, Ch. 3.
[204]
 As the rest of the chapter shows, Bonatti is not asking whether
both
 Saturn and Mars are joined to a planet
at the
same time
, but whether either of them individually is so joined.
[205]
 I am unsure what peoples are involved. Bonatti’s Abū Ma’shar is definitely saying that the destruction will come
over the people ruled by the transferring planet, but I do not know what exactly is denoted by the “in peoples” (
in gentibus
)
clause.
[206]

Locus
.
[207]
 Like many of Bonatti’s quotations from (or paraphrases of) Abū Ma’shar, this is unclear. I think Bonatti’s Abū
Ma’shar is saying that we should look to the signs Mars aspects by opposition, because (a) the domicile and exalted Lords,
and (b) the planet whose descension or fall is in that sign, will be especially affected.
[208]
 I.e., in a later zodiacal degree than the Sun’s.
[209]
 The 5
th
 is the 8
th
 from the 10
th
: the king’s death.
[210]
 The 6
th
 signifies illness generally; the 3
rd
 is the 6
th
 from the 10
th
, therefore the king’s illness.
[211]
 The rest of the numbers are given as Roman numerals, but I have treated them as though they continue to refer to
signs or places.
[212]
 This must mean, “to the degree that was occupied by the significator of the king at the hour of the revolution,” but
“place” might also mean its
sign
.
[213]
 This is probably from al-Qabīsī below (Part 2, Ch. 19).
[214]
 Reading
fuerit
 for
fuerat
.
[215]
 Adding
non
.
[216]

Significatorum
. This could mean “of the things signified” or “of the significators.” Either way there is a difficulty:
if it means (a) “things signified,” what are the things signified? If it means (b) of the significators, then which significators?
[217]
 This could refer to the
al-mubtazz
 of the Part, but its gender (
eo
) is wrong.
[218]
 In these statements about Mercury we see a conflation of planetary gender with planetary sect which tends to occur
in medieval astrology: being nocturnal is not the same as being feminine.
[219]
 Bonatti actually uses a traditional Latin term from Aristotelian logic, saying that it is not “converted.” A judgment
is convertible if we can reverse the terms, e.g., “Some cats are grey” and “Some grey things are cats.”
[220]
 Perhaps Māshā’allāh or Abū Ma’shar?
[221]
 In conclusion, only if a fixed sign is ascending will the Lord of the [sole] Revolution be a Lord of the Year.
[222]
 These last three sentences (identical in 1491 and 1550) do not make sense, and it is suspicious that there are
needless repetitions of “you were to find them impeded” and “you were to find them well disposed.” My hypothesis is that
the typesetter for the 1491 edition (or an earlier edition) made an error. The sentences should read: “If however you were to
find them impeded, they will
increase
 their impediment [and]
decrease
 their good. If however you were to find them well
disposed, you will
add to
 their goodness.”
273

=== Page 274 ===
[223]

Fige rariora minora substantiorum eorum.
[224]

Casus
.
[225]

Substantias
.
[226]
 Separation and application?
[227]
 This paragraph is very puzzling, apart from its odd combination of concepts. First, most of Bonatti’s quotations or
paraphrases of Abū Ma’shar are much more straightforward. Second, it must be a quotation (rather than a paraphrase)
because it does not match Bonatti’s style at all. Third, it seems to be filled with strained or odd metaphors and terms, which
sound much like early, pre-technical Latin translations of Arab astrologers’ works. The term
casus
 usually denotes the
weakness called “fall,” and can also refer to sudden occurrences or misfortunes, but it seems to be used here in a quasi-
technical sense I cannot make exact sense of (hence my translation of it as “situation”). Likewise, an astrologer like Bonatti
would not refer to the returning or rendering of light without adding “of light.” It is possible that Bonatti is quoting an early
Latin translation of Abū Ma’shar, and either Abū Ma’shar himself uses these kinds of terms (which in turn may derive from
Greek equivalents), or the Latin translator used them as equivalents of Abū Ma’shar’s words. The source may be the
manuscript recently identified by me in the National Library at Paris (see Introduction), but unless we can discover the
sources of this and Bonatti’s other attributions to Abū Ma’shar, it will remain unclear. The paragraph reads:
Et dixit
Albumasar, scito coniunctionem Planetarum cum domino anni, atque cum significatore regis, &separationem atque
adventum eorum adinvicem, in domibus & aspectibus, & fige rariora minora substantiarum eorum (intellegite opera eorum
per casus aliorum) & commisse his substantias signorum, & quod vincat super receptione ex natura, & cognosce esse
significatorum: & scito casum eorum abinvicem, per diversitatem et alligationem, & cum receptione & redditione.
 Note that
the command to “understand their works” (
intellegite opera eorum
) is a plural command, not a singular command like
elsewhere in the paragraph.
[228]
 My punctuation makes it seem that Bonatti is speaking of mutual reception, but it is not exactly clear whether he
means mutual or only one-way reception.
[229]
 Bonatti also discusses this in the Treatise on elections (Tr. 7, Part 1, Ch. 7).
[230]
 Reading
fuerit
 for
fuerint.
[231]
 That is, if Venus were the impeded planet. She rules both domiciles, but Taurus is closer to the rising sign.
[232]
 I believe that by “in front,” Bonatti means “in a later zodiacal degree” for then the planet would probably be
moving towards that malefic; “behind” must mean “in an earlier zodiacal degree.” Since Saturn’s signification is more like
prison and Mars’s is more like death, then if Saturn were “in front” and the significator were moving towards him, it would
signify capture and imprisonment; likewise if Mars were in front, it would show killing.
[233]
 I.e., voluntary emigration (according to Bonatti, Tr. 6).
[234]
 I believe that by “ahead of,” Bonatti means “in an earlier degree than the cusp’s”; by “after,” he means “in a later
degree than the cusp’s.” See my Introduction.
[235]
 But then wouldn’t the significator probably be combust or under the sunbeams?
[236]
 I.e., if the malefics were in the signs opposite or square relationship to the signs the significators are in.
[237]
 Literally, from “what is left behind” by the dead (inheritances).
[238]
 I am unsure what Lords he means.
[239]

Ceciderit
. Normally he would say
cadens fuerit
, but below in Ch. 34 he uses
ceciderit
 again, explicitly in contrast
to being angular.
[240]
 Normally this would mean “from their own domiciles” or “dignities,” but in this instance it simply means the
places in which they happen to be. Below he explicitly addresses the dignities.
[241]
 Recall that a
comes
 was originally a fighting companion (or a member of a group of them) to a chief or ruler on
military expeditions (see footnote, Tr. 2, Part 3, Ch. 6, “On the 4
th
 House and its Lord”). Vassals later came to perform
administrative functions, and his comparison with marquesses suggests he means someone who has received an
administrative honor.
[242]
 Per 1491.
[243]
 It is unclear what Bonatti means by “being in charge” (
praeesse
) in this context.
[244]
 Serious damage has been done to this last sentence. I do not know what it is trying to convey.
[245]
 See Ch. 44, which is dedicated to this and explains this.
[246]
 On the basis of the sentence construction, it is impossible to say whether Bonatti means (a) the Lord of the
exaltation is unimpeded
and
 the Moon is in the aforesaid places, or (b) the Lord of the exaltation and the Moon are not
274

=== Page 275 ===
impeded
and are both
 in the aforesaid places.
[247]
 Adding
infra
 to match the rest of the paragraph.
[248]
 This heading appears in both 1491 and 1550, and seems to be an editorial remark. It might be that the electional
chapters on war (Tr. 7, Part 2, 7
th
 House, Chs. 3-7) originally pertained to revolutions. But note that the next chapters do
indeed pertain to war.
[249]

Discensiones
.
[250]
 According to this doctrine, a war could only be incited by Jupiterian or Saturnian men, since only those planets are
slower than Mars. This implies that all or most wars are started by the counsels of old men, monied interests, and because of
people with status interests to protect.
[251]
 This paragraph seems to pertain to the Lords of the 1
st
 and the 7
th
. But there is an ambiguity here, in part because of
the reference to Jupiter and Saturn. The word I have translated as “side” is
pars
, the word which can also mean an [Arabic]
Part. In
OGC
 II.5.18, Abū Ma’shar speaks of certain Parts (which he uses for different purposes), and says that “the
astrologers” think the first Part is Saturn and the second one is Jupiter–which Bonatti seems here to echo, and attributes this
opinion to Abū Ma’shar himself. So it seems there may be some confusion in Bonatti’s use of the text. But most of the
paragraph makes sense in the context of the Lords of the 1
st
 and 7
th
. See also Ch. 116, the subsection “Likewise concerning
the two Parts in a revolution of the years of the world.”
[252]
 Bonatti’s Latin reads, “if you were to see the side received by his first enemies.” Textually and astrologically,
Bonatti’s line does not really make sense, so I have read
primae
 for
primorum
.
[253]
 In the passage from
OGC
 mentioned above, Abū Ma’shar does not speak of the “secret of kings,” but Bonatti could
be drawing on a copy of BN
lat.
 16204 (see Introduction). Al-Rijāl (pp. 408-09) describes a number of Parts, in which
he
mentions a “secret.” In one set of the “two Parts,” the first is taken from Saturn to Jupiter, and projected from the degree of
their conjunction in a mutation conjunction (i.e., a mutation from one triplicity to another); the second is taken from Jupiter
to Saturn, and projected from the degree of their conjunction in the 20-year conjunction in which one is at the time. We are
to measure distance from the Parts to their Lords, and from the Part to Mars (one year per degree), and that is a timing
mechanism. Then al-Rijāl cites another source (who allegedly drew on Māshā’allāh) for two Parts involving Saturn and
Jupiter, which is too complicated to describe here (see
OGC
, Appendix V), but involves the calculation of a distance called
“the secret.” Finally, he mentions a third set of two Parts: (1) cast the Aries ingress chart for the year in which a king ascends
the throne, and measure from Saturn or Jupiter (“whichever is eastern”), to the Sun; add to this amount the minor years of the
planet that signifies the type of religion (as Venus for Islam). (2) Take the distance from the Sun to Saturn or Jupiter
(“whichever is western”), and add to it the distance measured in (1) (not counting the minor planetary years); project this
sum from the Ascendant.
[254]
 The last clause of the sentence does not really follow from the first, so I am unsure why Bonatti (or Abū Ma’shar)
says “therefore” (
ob hoc
). Perhaps it made sense in the context of Abū Ma’shar’s original work.
[255]
 This could be the Part of Warfare and Boldness (see below, Part 2, Ch. 16).
[256]
 I am not sure what Bonatti is referring to here–whether the planet is moving through the
zodiac
 to a bad or weak
place? If so, that would be like if the significator of the king were in the 5
th
 sign or house, and were moving toward the 6
th
sign or house.
[257]
 Bonatti has not explained how to find the Lord of the Month.
[258]
 Is this based on the dignities of the degree in which the significator is, or the dignities the aspecting planets have in
their own
 places?
[259]
 Compare with the instructions for war elections in Tr. 7. The instructions here are simpler because the rising sign
and location of the planets is determined at the ingress, so only their subsequent movements can be used. But presumably, if
the revolution signifies war, one could also elect to go out to war in the usual way.
[260]

Mutare figuram
. See the fifty-fourth consideration for selecting the Lord of the Year (above), and the use of
changing signs in horary (Tr. 6).
[261]
 The upshot of these instructions seems to be that war is disruptive and the opposite of peace; therefore if there is
currently peace and one wants to go out to war, one should wait until the planetary conditions turn into their opposites.
[262]
 In al-Rijāl this is called being “in the
haiz
 of the Ascendant [or the 7
th
].”
[263]
 By “honest” (
probos
), Bonatti doesn’t mean they are necessarily in the right; but their personal honor leads them to
be brave and open (rather than being sneaky and working through subterfuge).
[264]

Super humeris aliorum
. Exact meaning of idiom unclear, but it evidently pertains to cowardice–perhaps it means
that while they retreat, they look over their shoulders at those they leave behind?
[265]
 I am not sure what this notion of following him by succession means, but it could refer to the concept of succession
laid out in Ch. 26.
275

=== Page 276 ===
[266]

Horarum
. Bonatti often speaks of the hour in which one might depart to war, but I do not understand his use of
hora
 here.
[267]
 Lat.
carochium.
 A
carroccio
 is a standard mounted on a car or wagon, pulled by animals: note especially the
Carocium
 of Milan, which was a kind of iron tree with a cross on top. Bonatti must be thinking of emblems representing
armies and cities that are paraded into battle, especially the one used by the Florentines present at the battle of Montaperti,
when Bonatti’s election aided the Sienese against them. This
carroccio
 was red, bearing the flag of the Florentines, and
drawn by oxen draped in red.
[268]
 Note that Bonatti says to look at the “places” (i.e, the houses or signs), but speaks only of the planets themselves.
Perhaps there is an older or implicit doctrine referring to the domicile rulers of the signs these planets are in.
[269]
 Does he mean, “the Lord of the month, by monthly profections using the chart of the year?”
[270]
 I think this paragraph is instructing us to look at the degrees of either the significator of the war or the Lord of the
Year, and use the degrees of the sign they are in, treating the whole sign by longitude as representing one year.
[271]
 Reading
determinabitur
 for
terminabitur
.
[272]
 Based on the material in earlier chapters, I believe the side is determined by what side of the chart Mars is in.
[273]
 I believe that by “ahead of,” Bonatti means “in an earlier degree than the cusp’s.” See my Introduction.
[274]
 In other words, judge a middling result.
[275]
 Bonatti is making Abū Ma’shar say two distinct things (though they are presented as one): (a) the “complexion of
the substance of the sign,” which is probably the same as the “substance of the sign,” referring to whether the sign signifies
humans or animals (and of what kind,
etc.
); (b) the people or matters signified by its house location.
[276]
 In Ch. 32, Bonatti said that a revolution will be in the setting of the Sun if it is a little bit before or after. But here
he says
toward
 its setting (
ad occasum
), which suggests being a little bit before the full setting. This is supported by the fact
that the disposition will now pass to the Moon, whereas if the Sun had already set, the Moon would already have taken over.
[277]
 My use of “his” and “her” in the latter sentences (regarding the Moon and Saturn) are educated guesses, but they
follow the logic of the paragraph and Bonatti’s way of thinking.
[278]
 This must mean the degree of the Moon at the eclipse.
[279]
 Or perhaps
al-mubtazz
es.
[280]
 It is unclear whether this means an
al-mubtazz
 by weighted or equal points.
[281]

Amfractibus
[=
anfractibus
]. I am not sure why Bonatti (or Abū Ma’shar) says this.
[282]
 I am not sure why Bonatti puts this in the plural.
[283]

Esse.
[284]

Quoniam est eis opus & fortitudo super caetera signa quae habent significare res regum.
[285]
 Reading
ipsi iungantur
 for
ipse iungatur
.
[286]
 It is unclear to me what is meant by the raising up (
sublimationem
) of their strength, or what chapter Bonatti is
referring to. The chapter on conjunctions must refer to the aforementioned book of conjunctions (or perhaps
OGC
?).
[287]
 This reads like a chapter heading, just as in many places in Bonatti’s own text (as in Tr. 6).
[288]
 My tentative suggestion is that this means the people or king belonging to the second sign and its domicile Lord
will be second-best; those belonging to the third will be third-best; and so on.
[289]
 The Moon or Mercury.
[290]
 Bonatti must mean the Part of Fortune and its Lord, since by hypothesis the Moon or Mercury is already impeded
by the malefics.
[291]
 I believe Bonatti is saying that the king will get his money, even though–because he has not taken steps to get it–he
thinks he will not get it.
[292]
 Literally, “with his good mind/spirit” (
cum bono animo suo
).
[293]
 Reading
eorum
 for
eius
.
[294]
 Bonatti probably means these sentences to apply to all signs, instead of only to the fiery, earthy, and airy signs.
Why would the watery signs be exempted?
[295]
 See also Ch. 18 on the same topic. For more on the conjoinings of the malefics, see Chs. 57, 76, and Tr. 4, Ch. 3.
276

=== Page 277 ===
[296]
 Reading
revolutione
 for
commissione
.
[297]

Etiam in suis propriis.
[298]

Domesticabitur
. This term is related to the Greek
oikēios
, referring both to the household and what belongs to or is
proper to oneself. The basic idea is that such people will have greater influence upon, and be more intimate with, the king;
but it may also literally mean that they will be in the king’s house.
[299]
 This chapter and many of those following are based on the
Flowers
, or the texts on which the
Flowers
 is based. I
will not always indicate the source of the paraphrases of the
Flowers
 or
OGC
, in part because there are often so many
differences between the known texts of Abū Ma’shar and Bonatti, that it would be tedious and confusing to enumerate them.
Readers interested in the
Flowers
 may refer to the second edition of my own translation of it (2007).
[300]

Per homines…occultantes sua, & similia, & silentes illa.
 I am not sure what exactly this is supposed to signify.
[301]

Hypocrisis
, lit. “false sanctity,” but perhaps “surface appearances.”
[302]
 I believe this means that such men will enjoy greater authority, not that they will be oppressed (
dominatio
 can also
mean tyranny).
[303]
 Perhaps this is because Jupiter, being faster than Saturn will be applying his light and significations to Saturn (and
not the other way around).
[304]
 See also Chs. 18, 52, 76; and Tr. 4, Ch. 3.
[305]

Butyrum
. Why butter would be multiplied is unclear to me.
[306]
 I.e., chronic illness.
[307]

Et hoc etiam in parte declinante ad latus honestatis & placabilitatis altissimi.
 I am unsure of what this signifies,
especially the business about the “part turning” (
parte declinante
).
Pars
 can mean “side” or “direction,” but I am not sure
how that improves the sentence’s clarity. Perhaps this is one of Bonatti’s many snide remarks about powerful people–that
they will not only be pursuing their usual selfish ends, but even the ones that are honest and good?
[308]
 Abū Ma’shar (
Flowers
) says donations and service will come upon the wealthy who are in the division of
Saturn
,
from the wealthy who are in the division of the sign of the
Sun
.
[309]
 The rest of the sentence suggests this should be
goods
, i.e., things for market or possessions.
[310]
 Bonatti undoubtedly means sexual pleasure.
[311]

Domesticitas
.
[312]

Simulationes
, which can also mean “deceits.”
[313]
 I take this to mean they will sell their goods successfully–otherwise their money would not be multiplied, as the
next clause states.
[314]
 I.e., through business transactions (see above). Bonatti is talking about trade wars and embargoes.
[315]
 In the
Flowers
, it refers at the end of this paragraph to a “greater book of natures” (
in libro naturarum maiori
),
probably Abū Ma’shar’s
Great Book of Natures
 (
Kitab al-taba’i’ al-kabir
). The placement of this sentence suggests that
Bonatti is cribbing from the
Flowers
 rather than from another text for his material in this section.
[316]
 It is unclear whether Bonatti means, “but chiefly in the areas
ruled by Aries
,” or “but [the effects will be] in the
eastern parts
 chiefly when Saturn is in Aries.” Bonatti seems to have added this last clause himself, since the
Flowers
does
not say this.
[317]
 Unknown.
[318]
 This may be Slavs or Russians (from
ar-Rus
, reading
Aiaroc
 as
alaroc
 with a soft
c
). See
OGC
 p. 515 n.1, which
also attributes the “Slavs” to Aries.
[319]

De Rev. Ann.
, Ch. 46.
[320]
 Bonatti does not explain this point. Perhaps he means the number of degrees Saturn has transited in the sign in
which he is? How does this get translated into time?
[321]
 Bonatti omits Saturn in Sagittarius with southern latitude.
[322]

Proximitatem divitum de regionibus suis.
 An awkward phrase, but it seems to mean that the wealthy will be close
to home.
[323]
 See my previous footnote on Aries and its triplicity.
277

=== Page 278 ===
[324]

Bovum et vaccarum
.
[325]
 It is unclear to me whether this refers back to Saturn being in a fixed sign, or to Saturn in Taurus. This sentence is
somewhat similar to a statement in Mash’allah pertaining to Saturn in the fiery triplicity, but there are enough differences
that I am not sure what Bonatti’s source is.
[326]
 Bonatti undoubtedly means either northern or southern in particular, but does not say which.
[327]

Mutationes
, i.e., regime change from one king to another.
[328]
 I.e., in the areas
over which
 the part of the sign (in which the conjunction
is
), is deputed.
[329]
 I am not sure what planet Bonatti is referring to, but it must be either Saturn or Mars.
[330]
 I do not know what this means.
[331]

De Rev. Ann.
, Ch. 46, but Bonatti begins his own elaboration after the second sentence.
[332]
 In this chapter I believe Bonatti is still talking about the condition of Saturn in Taurus in a revolution; but it is
unclear whether this chapter refers to revolutions wherein the eclipse takes place at the same hour as the revolution, or one in
which the Moon
will
 be eclipsed.
[333]
 The Latin is stated a little more forcefully, but more awkwardly: “The fear…that they will come into something
contrary to him,” emphasizing their action by “coming,” rather than simply having contrary feelings.
[334]
 I do not understand how the cold and dry are related to the hot and wet in this sentence.
[335]

Astilibus
, from
astile
. I do not know exactly what is meant by “spear shafts,” but Bonatti could be speaking about
meteor showers. Perhaps the spear-shafts are long streaks of light from shooting stars or meteors?
[336]

Respiciens
, i.e., “aspecting.”
[337]
 I am not quite sure what this means.
[338]

Ad latus nigredinis
, literally “to the side of blackness” or “to the surface of blackness.”
[339]

Consumptionem
.
[340]

Significat confractionem census super regem
. I am not sure what this means.
[341]
 Reading
et eorum significationem eius
 for
et eorum significatio eius.
 Meaning unclear.
[342]

Occupationem.
[343]

De Rev. Ann.
, Ch. 46.
[344]
 This is obviously an idiom for showing disrespect.
[345]

Debiti
.
[346]

Palam
.
[347]
 Reading
potestatis
 for
potestates
.
[348]
 Although this and the next house are designated by Arabic numerals (
11.
,
12.
), I will treat them as though they read
as signs or places.
[349]
 See also Chs. 18, 52, 57; and Tr. 4, Ch. 3.
[350]
 Bonatti does not specify whether this refers to (a) when Saturn and Mars are conjoined
in the hour
 of the
revolution, or (b) the house in which the degree of their
future
 conjunction in that year.
[351]
 Remember that the wealthy often got much of their income through the labor of the common people and by
receiving a share of legal penalties paid in court; so an affliction to their incomes would be caused by the common people’s
refusal to pay.
[352]

Exterminatas.
 I believe this means that the cold and rains will not end soon–literally, the winds will not be
“destroyed” or “driven out.”
[353]
 The following paragraph seems to be inserted as an afterthought; a similar paragraph on Mars in Gemini appears
below.
[354]
 I believe this means the other planets follow him by being in earlier degrees–unlike the Sun, for whom other
planets follow him by being a later degree and rising after him.
[355]
 I believe this is a general passage on Gemini in the houses, and that the discussion of Mars in Gemini is now ended.
278

=== Page 279 ===
[356]
 Or perhaps, “unreasonably,” suggesting excess–since Bonatti proceeds to tell us the reason in the next clause.
[357]
 Again,
expoliationem
, “polishing.”
[358]
 This passage is from the
Flowers
. Bonatti (and Abū Ma’shar) undoubtedly mean the Byzantine Emperor in
Constantinople (who was traditionally called the Emperor of the Romans), not the Holy Roman Emperor in the West.
[359]
 Bonatti may be referring particularly to distinct cities or locations which acted as crossroads for trade, called fairs–
like Scarborough Fair in England. But he probably means financial and business districts generally.
[360]

Ramorum
. A
ramus
 generally means anything with a branch-like form (e.g., in rivers or mountain spurs), but
keeping with his agricultural emphasis I have translated it as “boughs.”
[361]
 Lit., “the destruction of the houses of the substances of the wealthy.”
[362]

Taffani
 (Ital.
tafano
).
[363]
 Perhaps this should read “Mars”?
[364]
 Reading
bubalorum
 as
bubalinorum
.
[365]
 This must mean we can do monthly ingresses, or else the Sun could never be in Taurus in an typical revolution.
[366]

Existens
. Usually Bonatti uses this term to designate the house location of a planet. But perhaps he means the Sun’s
location by sign–perhaps in Libra, where he is in his own fall.
[367]
 I believe this means, “from every matter in which the querent is a partner/participator,” or perhaps “from every
quaested matter, because of [someone’s] participation.”
[368]
 Undoubtedly this means “the Byzantines.”
[369]

Ex parte.
[370]
 Again, Bonatti may be speaking of regions of Europe in which the market “fairs” were held–regions to which
people would travel from far away for extensive trading. For instance, Scarborough Fair was a 45-day trading event.
[371]
 I believe this refers to lands in the southern parts (see earlier in the sentence).
[372]
 I would normally have translated this sentence as, “But if he were the Lord of the Year, and the Lord of the
Ascendant were free from impediments,” indicating two different planets. Each version is equally faithful to the text. But the
previous chapters that parallel this one show that Bonatti is interested to see when a planet is
both
 Lord of the Year
and
 the
Lord of the Ascendant. Therefore I have changed the emphasis of the sentence in order to align it with the previous chapters.
[373]

Subiectum
, lit. “field” or “subject.”
[374]
 Omitting
non
, which would make it read “if he were
not
 joined.”
[375]

Indumentum
. Although this word means “clothing,” the passage from the
Flowers
 on which this seems to be based,
refers to Mercury being “clothed” or
influenced
 by the malefics and benefics.
[376]

Aequalitate
, lit. “with equality.” But the passage from the
Flowers
 refers to another book of Abū Ma’shar’s.
[377]
 Reading
fuerit
 for
fuerint
.
[378]

Curasen.
[379]
 Unknown.
[380]
 Unknown, but perhaps Azerbaijan?
[381]
 Reading
Animarot
 for
Animaror
.
[382]

Reumatica
.
[383]
 In modern medicine, “opthalmia” includes all sorts of eye infections causing redness (like “pinkeye” or
conjunctivitis), but since the earlier phrases already speak of inflammation, I am not sure if
opthalmiae
 here has some other
technical meaning for Bonatti.
[384]
 Bonatti is pointing out that that because ingress charts may be cast for any of the Sun’s four ingresses into the
cardinal signs, we can have delineations for Mercury (who is never farther from the Sun than 27º) in many different signs.
But this is not quite satisfactory, since in an Aries ingress, Mercury could not be in Taurus (since that is farther than 27º from
the beginning of Aries). But Bonatti also occasionally suggests that we can do monthly ingresses, so perhaps there is no
problem here.
[385]
 Bonatti’s use of
ex
 instead of
a
 is unusual and suggests that a subset of siblings or friends will benefit. But the point
is not emphasized enough to make much of it; it could simply be a stylistic variation.
279

=== Page 280 ===
[386]
 Reading
nati
 (sing.) instead of
natorum
 (pl.).
[387]
 I take this to mean that he will learn about large animals and livestock instead of more intellectual disciplines.
[388]
 Unknown word. Possibly a paronym of the many
lect-
 words pertaining to reading. But it is more likely from
lectum
 (or
lectus
), “couch, bed.” This would make sense in light of terms for gluttony that follow, making the word mean
something like “those who lay around in bed.”
[389]

Guliardorum
. I read this tentatively as “gourmands” from
gulo
, to be a gourmand or glutton (and to match the
following “or gluttons”); but it could also be read (as Zoller does) as
goliardorum
 or “goliards,” i.e., wandering minstrels or
bon vivants.
 Both the eating and the wandering are fitting for the Moon.
[390]

Diurnalem quietudinem
. This must mean they rest all the time–i.e., for the whole day and night, and not just during
daytime hours (which would be
diurnam quietudinem
).
[391]
When the Sun is at approximately 20
 Gemini.
[392]
When the Sun is at approximately 12
 Libra.
[393]
 I am not sure what distinction Bonatti is drawing here.
[394]
 See Tr. 10 on astrometeorology.
[395]
 Reading
minuentur
 for
minuetur.
[396]

Eius
. It is impossible to say whether this means Mercury’s Lord, the Lord of the seventh, or the Moon’s Lord.
According to Bonatti’s style, one would expect Mercury’s Lord. But Mercury’s Lord has not been mentioned, only the Lord
of the seventh.
[397]

Veris
.
[398]
 Bonatti is probably speaking of something more substantial than travel. His use of
mutatio
 is typically used in
reference to a planet changing signs or a political regime change. But he does not say there will be another king. Perhaps it
means the king will change residence?
[399]

Cantilena
. The word literally means “gossip,” but Bonatti uses it in relation to singing.
[400]
 Reading
fortuna
 for
fortunate
 (“if she were made fortunate”).
[401]
 Reading
sequetur
 for
sequentur
.
[402]
 Bonatti usually uses
dubito
 to mean fear, so he could mean, “you should not have fear in this, if God wills.” But
why should we not fear something “horrible and evil”?
[403]
 The word for “comet” in Latin (deriving from the Greek) is
stella cometa
, literally a “star with hair.” They are so
called because their streaky tails sometimes look like hair.
[404]
 This must mean “if it appeared in Aries in the eastern part
of the chart for the revolution
.”
[405]

In directo eius
, probably referring to the direction of Taurus–i.e., if it is in Taurus.
[406]
 Reading
apparuerit
 for
apparuerint
.
[407]
 Why Mercury, if the Tail is in Cancer?
[408]

In.
[409]

Rehabitio.
[410]
 I believe this means there will be shifting loyalties among the soldiers, between the rebels and the king.
[411]

Qui a quibusdam caudae appellantur
. A
cauda
 is not only a tail (as with the southern node of the Moon), but is
also used in the context of mockery (“having a tail” or
caudam trahere
 being equivalent to looking like a fool).
[412]
 I have substituted Abū Ma’shar’s version of this sentence as found in the
Flowers
, since Bonatti’s version is both
incomplete and confusing (and seems to have an incorrect verb). The meaning seems to be that people will advance socially
beyond what their natural standing would dictate, and banks will be filled with tax revenues.
[413]

Quam plurimorum.
[414]
 Following the
Flowers
 by adding “of the king.”
[415]
 The
Flowers
 adds, “and they will be killed by others who are elevated above them.”
[416]
 Reading
ab obedentia
 with the
Flowers
, instead of
ad obedentiam
 (“toward obedience”). Likewise,
OGC
 (vol. I, p.
322-23)

reads: the “opposition of the
qai’ids
 and knights towards the king, their removal from obedience in serving [him].” I
280

=== Page 281 ===
believe this reference to “hands” comes from the early feudal ceremony involving the placing of the hands into those of one
to whom one makes fealty or homage. Moreover, by the 11th Century, contracts of homage or fealty used
miles
 (soldier)
interchangeably with
vassus
 or
vassalus
(vassal). Thus I believe this sentence means that vassals of all sorts will break their
promises to support their king.
[417]
 I have used mainly the
Flowers
 for this sentence, since it is marginally more clear than Bonatti’s own; but I have
added “the Sun” in brackets because that is what Bonatti himself writes. Bonatti’s sentence runs: “Indeed in the remaining
works (which were said), Abū Ma’shar said the hour will be when the Sun will have come to the sign which is of their
substance (which I told you), or the planet whose nature is in the work, just like the nature of what is to come, which were to
appear to you to be going to happen in that year.” My sense is that Bonatti must have made a bad paraphrase of this sentence
from the compiler of the
Flowers
, and not the other way around.
[418]
 The
Flowers
 says, “This is of the secrets of astronomy which is worth the trouble to be hidden.” I believe that
Bonatti mistakenly read the manuscript abbreviation
precium
 (“worth, price”) as that of
praeceptum
 (“precept”).
[419]
 According to Thorndike (1949, p. 29), a pseudo-Ptolemy has written a list of the nine types, and they are obviously
the basis of Bonatti’s text. I have not yet seen this text. Below I will list pseudo-Ptolemy’s versions where appropriate.
[420]
 Following pseudo-Ptolemy for Bonatti’s
coenaculum
 (“dining room”). A
tenaculum
 is an instrument for holding
something (from
teneo
, to hold). By the description below, perhaps it is a kind of tray.
[421]
 Reading
pertica
 with pseudo-Ptolemy for Bonatti’s
partica
. A
pertica
is a measuring rod used to measure grants of
land (and it is said below to pertain to agricultural predictions); so perhaps it looks like two long rods.
[422]

Miles.
 This word usually means “soldier,” but can also mean a woman who is giving birth for the first time. Below,
it is said to be of the nature of Venus and is related to people trying to bring new things into being. Since there is no English
equivalent of
miles
, I will retain the Latin.
[423]
 1491 reads:
astonae
, and Thorndike’s pseudo-Ptolemy reads
ascone
. Could this be a misread for
acontiae
?
Acontiae
 (
Gr.

akontiai
) are meteors or shooting stars with dartlike trains–but Bonatti has already used a synonym (
veru
) for
his first comet called a javelin. And his description below, describing rays like wings, does not seem like
acontiae
–and why
the “lord” of
asconae
?
[424]
 Pope Alexander IV died in May 1261, but the comet was also said to herald the death of Urban IV (which
happened on September 9, 1264). King Manfred of Sicily was killed in battle against Charles I of Anjou on February 26 or
27, 1266. Charles I of Anjou executed the teenage Conradin (then the popular King of Sicily and Jerusalem, and the last of
the legitimate Hohenstaufens) in on October 29, 1268. In the East as well, there were many changes and upheavals in the
Crusades.
[425]

Non est in eo virtus capiti seu caudae boni vel mali
.
[426]

Occupationem in malis
. This might also mean that he is engaged in evil things, but that does not seem to be the
sense of the whole paragraph.
[427]
 This undoubtedly means, “from their detriment and burdens.”
[428]
 Reading
decimantes
 for
demacantes.
[429]
 There seems to be a strain here between (a) the power of the Tail to decrease things, and (b) its malefic influence
on what it touches–if infirmities are so decreased, why will they decimate and exterminate the bodies of the sick?
[430]

Diminutionem.
[431]
 Unfortunately, he does not tell us which ones he knows by his own experience.
[432]

Diabolus.
[433]

Caput diaboli vel gorgonis.
 Caput Algol.
[434]

Humerus Canis.
[435]

Malefica.
[436]

Camelus
.
[437]

Occidens Camelum
. Perhaps “The One Killing the Camel.” But this star might belong in Capricorn, and mean the
star that “Sets the Camel,” i.e., it sets when the Camel rises.
[438]

Pes Canis.
 Probably Mirzam (β Canis Major), in the paw.
[439]

Mala
. If singular, it refers to a feminine evil thing or person. But it could also be “Evils.” Note that it is opposite a
star in Cancer called “The Good One” (see below).
[440]
 Note that he says below there is a benefic fixed star exactly opposite this one (in Leo), of the nature of the benefics.
281

=== Page 282 ===
[441]
 Both 1491 and 1550 use
domus
 for these houses.
[442]
 Reading
volet
 for
valeat.
[443]

Malum alienum.
[444]

Et si nisus fuerit peregrinari peregrinationibus praedictis.
[445]
 Adding
non
.
[446]

Domesticitates
. This does not make sense when compared with the
Flowers.
 The
Flowers
 says only that there will
be impediment between people who are loved, and that those who give money will not be paid back–skipping
domesticitas
altogether and not linking it with “donations.”
[447]

In partibus prohibentibus cultum venereum.
 The
Flowers
 is rather clearer, saying that the infirmities themselves (in
body parts like the stomach) will prevent sexual intercourse.
[448]

Scilicet alienum indigentia cogente.
[449]
 The impression here is that such a native will be alienated, confused, and not even know what his own value is. But
the
Flowers
 says differently: “nor will good be seen in him for his own labor and pilgrimage”–in other words,
others
 will not
see value in
him.
[450]

Cultura
.
[451]

Et paucus erit eorum conquestus.
[452]
 Reading
supplantare
 for
suppeditare
 (“to supply in abundance”)
[453]

Alienum malum.
[454]

Deprehensionem.
[455]
 The rest of this chapter is derived from the
Flowers
, §6. Bonatti’s paraphrase is loose, so I have provided
supporting words in brackets.
[456]
 Bonatti’s Abū Ma’shar does not explain what image (i.e., sign) he is talking about. It may be from either whatever
sign Jupiter (or Venus) happens to be in, or (more probably) a sign in which he has dignity.
[457]

Flowers
: “[Venus and Jupiter] will not work anything of their own operations which would have force.”
[458]
 This may mean “from the sign of its own detriment,” but then it speaks of being “weak” in its own place (which
would seem redundant).
[459]
 Reading
ex loco deiectionis
 (with the
Flowers
) for Bonatti’s
in loco directionis
 (“instead of a direction”).
[460]

Flowers
: “all that I said regarding the event will be from the beginning [of the year] up to its end.”
[461]
 Reading
opponere
 for
apponere
.
[462]
 This is an addition by Bonatti. The
Flowers
 does not mention the Moon at all, and treats what Bonatti says about
the Moon as a property of Mercury’s aspect. But Bonatti may actually be right, or perhaps he had access to a better
manuscript of the
Flowers
 than was used for the printed edition.
[463]
 In this section Bonatti spells out the ordinal numbers, so there is no question in which degrees and minutes the stars
fall.
[464]
 Recall that in Capricorn there is a star called The Evil One directly opposite this star (see above).
[465]

Benevola
. This seems to be Bonatti’s name for the star; if he had simply meant “benevolent,” he would have used
benevolens.
[466]

Pacifica
. I am going to assume this is a name and not merely an adjective (though
pacificus
 is an adjective meaning
the same thing).
[467]

Bos.
[468]
 Presumably, the latter two of the three listed.
[469]

Malum alienum.
 This stands in parallel with the section above on malefic stars in the 11
th
. There, someone rejoices
when seeing another person suffering.
[470]

Domesticitates
.
[471]
 Whom?
282

=== Page 283 ===
[472]
 Usually Bonatti means that if the sign is feminine, women will benefit more; if masculine, men.
[473]
 This word (
consuetudo
) means “habit, custom, use.” I believe the message of this chapter is that, while the general
methods of delineation are similar no matter the branch of astrology or the object of concern (cities, people, questions), we
must tailor the details of our delineations to the situation at hand. I have translated this word as “way of life, manner, use” as
has seemed fit in this chapter.
[474]
 I believe he is speaking of the circle of the houses, but see below: he will speak of different branches of astrology,
too.
[475]

In mulieribus iuvenculis
. This sounds like “teenagers.”
[476]
 I think Bonatti is trying to walk a fine line between believing in the inevitability of the predicted events, and
trusting that the king has the free will to deal with the problem. For if the predicted event were wholly inevitable, then no
advice to the king would matter. But Bonatti is hoping that his advice could at least stimulate the king to hunt down
wrongdoers before they get too far in their plans.
[477]
 In other words, the common people will hire killers to assassinate the king.
[478]
 I am unsure of what this means.
[479]
 Reading
eam
 for
eum
. But reading
eum
 would probably make the phrase, “It will destroy
him
,” i.e., the king.
[480]
 Note the earlier chapter on significations of Mars, which concentrate primarily on Gemini.
[481]
 I think this means, if they are (a) in northern declination (Aries through Virgo), and (b) in northern ecliptical
latitude, and (c) above the earth in the chart.
[482]
 This is an astronomical consideration that I do not understand.
[483]
 In traditional thought, living beings are characterized by activity–so this is akin to saying that living things will
cease to live.
[484]
 The only way reception could occur in this situation is if Mars were to receive Saturn while Saturn is between 21°–
27° 59’ Virgo, since Saturn would then be in the triplicity and term of Mars. However, this could merely be one of the
typical mitigating or aggravating conditions that the medievals (in this case, Abū Ma’shar) tended to pile onto one of their
best- and worst-case scenarios.
[485]
 This probably means the Lord of the sign in which she is at the time of the perfected aspect or conjunction.
[486]
 Again, this would be the Lord of the sign the Sun is in, when his aspect or conjunction with the malefic is
perfected.
[487]
 This paragraph is one of several garbled quotations or paraphrases from a Latin translation of Abū Ma’shar.
Bonatti’s style and paraphrases are not generally like this.
[488]

Et face eis participem partem fortunae ac dominum eius; & auxiliare per dignitates septem planetarum qui
auxiliantur & significant tempus.
 I am not sure what Bonatti’s Abū Ma’shar means by this.
[489]
 Does this mean, “and the mixture of the natures of the Moon and the Lord of the Ascendant is good”?
[490]
 This must refer to one of Abū Ma’shar’s senses of “pushing,” either “pushing power” or “pushing nature.”, but in
this context I am not sure what it means.
[491]

Fueritque eius testimonium directe.
 Unclear meaning.
[492]

Zamini
.
[493]

Perdet eum et finiet
. Meaning uncertain.
[494]
 This probably means the Byzantine Empire, and not the empire of the German Holy Roman Emperor.
[495]
 Reading
eam
 (“her”) for
eum
 (“him”).
[496]
 See above footnote.
[497]
 I think the “he” means “Jupiter,” i.e., not being able to produce what he would normally promise by nature.
[498]
 In this paragraph I believe Bonatti is speaking of a planet who is in
Mercury’s
 exaltation, which would then make it
“similar” to Mercury and a participant in his significations. The reason it is unclear is because Bonatti usually uses
suus
 to
mean a planet’s
own
 domicile, etc.
[499]
 Again, this paragraph’s strange vocabulary and awkward construction is either a result of an early Latin translation
of Abū Ma’shar, or a good translation of Abū Ma’shar’s own style. At this time it is difficult to say which.
283

=== Page 284 ===
[500]
 Another of the strange paragraphs from a Latin translation of Abū Ma’shar.
[501]

Parti
. I take this to mean that we are to measure the distance between these.
[502]

Partibus
. Again, we have the ambiguous word
pars
. Since Bonatti’s Abū Ma’shar is speaking about aspects to the
planets and their signs, I take this to mean the “portion” of the zodiac they occupy.
Pars
 here could also simply be a
synonym for “sign.”
[503]
 Yet again, another garbled paragraph from the unknown source of Abū Ma’shar.
[504]
 I am not sure what Bonatti’s Abū Ma’shar means by an upper or lower journey. It could pertain to (a) whether they
are above or below the horizon, or (b) their place in their epicycles, or (c) their place in their deferent, or (d) their declination.
But in the case of (a), I cannot see why he would group the planets like this; in the case of (b), the Moon and the Sun do not
have epicycles (else they would go retrograde); option (c) makes more sense, in which case the “upper” journey might mean
going to or from their apogee (and the “lower” journey to and from their perigee), but what would being northern or southern
have to do with that (and the categorization still is opaque to me). Perhaps (d) is meant, but then again the categorization still
does not make sense to me.
[505]

Mansionis
, usually “mansion.” But in older astrological literature the planets are said to “stay” in signs, so I do not
think Abū Ma’shar means the lunar mansions. This should probably be understood as “the sign and its place in the chart.”
[506]
 This paragraph describes (in confusing terms) how to predict the timing of the events heralded by an eclipse. Abū
Ma’shar wants us to follow standard procedure and cast a chart for the moment of the middle of the eclipse, and measure the
distance between the degree of the Ascendant and the degree of the middle of the eclipse (he seems to allow both the longer
and shorter distances). But the timing is the problem, since he does not seem to follow Ptolemy’s procedure. I take it that
Abū Ma’shar thinks the event will occur when certain planets enter the sign of the Ascendant or of the eclipse by transit. So
for instance, in cases where the events are supposed to happen soon (“in days,” left undefined as to how to tell this), the
events will happen at the entrance of the transiting Moon into the sign ascending at the time of the eclipse.
[507]
 I am not sure if this means that the Sun is the Lord of the 1
st
, or the Lord of the Year. Later in the sentence he
makes it seem that the Sun (in his hypothetical example) is the significator of the king, as well.
[508]
 I can state with certainty that this entire delination by Abū Ma’shar is taken from BN
lat.
 16204 (see Introduction),
although I have not verified every word in it against the manuscript.
[509]
 Omitting
si
 (“if”).
[510]
 Saphar is one of the months in the Islamic calendar, but I do not find a Benesaphar, unless perhaps it is someone’s
name–in which case it would read “the revolution was (according to Benesaphar) according to one equal hour…” But this
seems rather awkward. The word could be
bāna Saphar
 or “[the month of] Saphar becomes manifest,” i.e., it was right after
the beginning of the month, on the Sabbath night. This seems most likely. The construction of the sentence is also unusual
because it begins with an antecedent “if” (omitted here) but no consequent.
[511]
 By my calculation this must have been the Aries ingress of March 656, AD, JC. Many of the planetary positions are
roughly correct, but as I see it the Moon should be in Libra, not Scorpio. Perhaps a difference in calendrics is responsible for
the difference.
[512]
 Again, omitting
si.
[513]
 Note that no degree of the Midheaven is given.
[514]
 I.e., in opposition by whole sign, and “receding” by being cadent from the angle by degree.
[515]
 By whole sign the Moon is still configured with Jupiter; but Abū Ma’shar must mean that by degree she is
separating from Mars and will soon be joined to Saturn.
[516]
 This means either that Abū Ma’shar allows reception by sign only (since Mars is in the Sun’s domicile), or that he
allows it so long as there is an applying aspect (even if it is outside of the orbs). See the comments on Jupiter’s cutting off the
light, and Venus, below.
[517]
 That is, because the Sun must perfect a square with Jupiter before he can be joined to Mars.
[518]
 This means that Mars will be key to the revolution, since he disposes both luminaries and the Lady of the
Ascendant.
[519]

Plus testimonio.
 Usually
plus
 takes the genitive, but can mean “greater in number” without the genitive. I have
translated it so here.
[520]
 But is she not received by Mars by whole sign, just as Mars is received by the Sun by whole sign? Or is he saying
that Venus is not in an applying aspect to her dispositor Mars (whereas the Sun is, even though Jupiter cuts off the light)?
[521]
 But why would Mars signify the king’s rustics, who would be better signified by the Ascendant (the common
people)?
284

=== Page 285 ===
[522]

Propter…eius depositionem a suo ordine
. In other words, she is in detriment. This phrase must reflect an early and
more literal translation of Abū Ma’shar.
[523]
 The wording (both here and in BN
lat.
 16204) makes it seem as though the Sun is receiving Jupiter (and thereby
committing disposition to Jupiter); but the chart shows that Jupiter is receiving the Sun from his own triplicity and term in
Aries, so that
Jupiter
 is committing the disposition to the
Sun
.
[524]

In tempore suo
. It is unclear what this refers to; it could mean “in their own time,” or simply, “during his reign.”
[525]
 Again, the “first” aspect of a planet is the sinister aspect cast forward in the order of signs. The “second” aspect is
the dexter aspect cast backwards against the order of signs.
[526]
 Note that Abū Ma’shar tends to use whole-sign aspects.
[527]
 Unknown.
[528]

Lat.
 Sagesten.
[529]
 Unknown.
[530]
 I am not sure what Abū Ma’shar means by this–perhaps that she will be in Sagittarius, which Saturn aspects by a
whole-sign square?
[531]
 Unknown.
[532]
 Unknown.
[533]
 Lat.
Alcuphus
.
[534]
 Lat.
Urgen
.
[535]
 Reading
sextum
 with the rest, instead of
sexta
.
[536]
 Lat.
Tabaribem.
[537]
 Lit., “his weakness,” but in this context it sounds unusual in English.
[538]
 Reading
noni
 for
nonae
. The punctuation in the original is unclear, but I have ended this sentence here because
Mercury is mentioned in connection with the other planets in the seventh sign, whereas the mention of Jupiter seems to
indicate a new point. Bonatti’s text is one long run-on sentence.
[539]
 Lat.
Arabigem
.
[540]
 Unknown.
[541]
 Unknown.
[542]
 Unknown.
[543]
 Lat.
Segestan
.
[544]
 Lat.
Cabrus
, reading as a variant on
Cubrasten
, also attributed with Sigistan to Libra.
[545]
 This should probably be read as meaning “they will be safe from the king”
[546]
 Again, the punctuation is somewhat ambiguous.
[547]
 Reading
noni
 for
nonae
.
[548]
 Unknown, but perhaps Daylaman, a region on the southern shore of the Caspian Sea.
[549]
 Unknown.
[550]
 Unknown.
[551]
 Is this because Gemini is ruled by Mercury, or because Mercury’s light is also commingled with that of Mars and
Saturn? The punctuation makes this ambiguous.
[552]
 Lat.
Iurgen
.
[553]
 Unknown.
[554]
 Unknown.
[555]
 Unknown.
[556]
 Lat.
Alirat
.
285

=== Page 286 ===
[557]

Commiscebitur.
 I am not sure what Bonatti’s Abū Ma’shar is getting at.
[558]
 Unknown.
[559]
 Unknown.
[560]
 Unknown, but perhaps Oman?
[561]
 Unknown.
[562]
 This does not seem right, since Saturn is in Virgo and cannot cast any sort of aspect into an adjacent sign.
[563]
 Unknown.
[564]
 Unknown, but perhaps Herat?
[565]
 Reading
hoc
 for
hunc
.
[566]
 Unknown.
[567]

Et non erit calori aestatis eorum fortitudo.
 I believe this simply means that they will not have much strength in the
heat of summer.
[568]
 Here the disposition seems to be committed from the Moon to a degree in which Mercury’s light falls; so far we
have only seen disposition go directly to the planet itself.
[569]
 Reading
8.
 for
18
., since the relationship between the degree of longitude and the day is 59’ 8”.
[570]
 As we will see, Abū Ma’shar is letting the planets cast their rays into the sign he is interested in (the tenth), and
taking the longitudes of the aspects in order.
[571]
 Reading
ea
 (indicating the Moon) for
eo
. Below we will see Bonatti point out that Saturn rules the 8
th
 domicile
from the 10
th
 (“from the place of disposition”). Both the Moon and the 10
th
 signify the king, the subject of this section.
[572]
 Perhaps because Saturn is in the third sign from the tenth?
[573]
 Perhaps because the Moon is in the fifth sign from the tenth?
[574]
 Reading
medii coeli
 for
ascendentis
. The link between money and women seems to be because he rules the second
sign from the tenth (wealth), and is located in the seventh sign (women, marriages).
[575]
 I do not understand the logic of the rest of this paragraph; there must be errors involved in the transmission.
[576]

Ex parte mulierum
. Obviously the marriage would be with women. Bonatti’s Abū Ma’shar might be emphasizing
that proposals come from women or from their families, since we are talking about the influences coming from the seventh
house.
[577]

Ad sextam diei
. Meaning unclear. One would expect it to read:
ad sextam partem diei
. This 73-day period,
multiplied by 59’ 8”, yields an arc of 71º 56’ 44”. I am not sure what arc is being referred to.
[578]
 This must refer to one of Abū Ma’shar’s senses of “pushing,” either “pushing power” or “pushing nature.” See Tr.
3.
[579]
 Despite the odd wording (which I think might be based on Arabic), I believe these last sentences are simply
standardized instructions for judging malefics and benefics making good and bad aspects
.
[580]
 Just as in Ch. 34, there is some ambiguity about the word
pars
–whether it means a Part or “side,” or what. I have
translated
pars
 as “Part,” because the description of the method sounds much like the relationship between a Part and its
dispositor. It seems we are to see whether the Lord of the 1
st
 or the 7
th
 (I am assuming a war context here) aspects the Part
relevant to its side, but what Parts are meant? Abū Ma’shar speaks about a book he as written, called the
Book of the Two
Lots
 (see
OGC
 II.V, 15-18), and there seems to have been a number of versions of “two lots” or “two Parts” in medieval
mundane astrology. But this book of Abū Ma’shar’s has not been identified, and accounts differ on what the Parts are. See
Ch. 34. Of course, this passage could also be based on BN
lat.
 16204.
[581]

Conveniet.
 This notion of “summoning” (or even “summoning before a tribunal”) recalls the Hellenistic language
in aspect doctrine, whereby one planet is “called to witness” for another.
[582]
 This may refer to the planet’s falling on an individual degree, or it might mean that the planet is both “cadent, [and]
in the opposition of Mars.”
[583]
 Here “removal” implies cadence.
[584]
 Adding
non
.
[585]
 Lat.
Alirat
.
286

=== Page 287 ===
[586]
 Reading
ex auctore
 for
ex actore
. The text might also be read
ex actore
 (“because of a disputant”) or
exactore
 (“by
means of an extorter/accuser/tax collector”), but none of these readings seems to fit well with the syntax given.
[587]
 See above.
[588]
 Again, is this a statement about Venus (who rules Arabs), or Abū Ma’shar’s application of a general rule to his
chart above?
[589]
 “Place” (
loco
) here must mean “sign.”
[590]
 I.e., the planet’s place at the time of the revolution.
[591]
 Here
pars
 definitely means “side”–in this case, the Lords of the 1
st
 and the 7
th
 would be in their own 10
th
, and
opposed to one another.
[592]
 In this instance, the Midheaven is being equated with the tenth whole sign.
[593]
 I.e., in a nocturnal chart.
[594]

Sed non fuerit testimonium in esse rusticorum Veneris atque Lunae & fuerit Saturnus in undecimo domino decimi
.
An awkward sentence and I am not completely sure of its meaning.
[595]
 This might mean, “Saturn will signify what the Sun signifies
instead of
 signifying what the Moon does.” That is,
since the Moon in the nocturnal chart is weakened, her authority reverts to the Sun–and therefore Saturn, who often signifies
kings along with the luminary in charge, will participate with the Sun. Latin would normally have used slightly different
wording to say “instead of,” but saying “from the place” might have been an early, standard astrological way to phrase this
idea. The phrasing might also be a slight play on words, since “instead of” in Latin is literally “in the place of” (
in loco
+
genitive), and
locus
 (“place”) is a standard astrological term for a sign or house.
[596]
 This statement seems to refer to a particular chart–but it cannot be the chart above, since none of the planets
besides Mars and Mercury have six degrees between them by aspect.
[597]
 “Descend” here could simply mean “
be in
 the Ascendant.”
[598]
 I.e., the third signifies short journeys. So the king will make many trips through the lands he rules.
[599]
 This Treatise is drawn from Jafar (often almost verbatim), whose Latin text is choppy and almost in a faux-classical
style, often leaving words out and using a minority terminology for “conjunction,” “aspect,”
etc.
 The style does not reflect
Bonatti’s own.
[600]
 The long portion “[according to] those things…from their opinions” reads,
et ea quae insuper videri poterunt quae
videantur utilia fore veritatem eius prout certius poterit discurrere nec ab eorum sententiis deviare
. The translation is
somewhat uncertain, and it seems that in the interest of appearing more classical the original author or Bonatti has either let
certain words simply be understood (and perhaps he has omitted some verbs). This sort of monstrously long sentence is not
typical for Bonatti, nor is the construction of the individual clauses.
[601]
 Jafar Indus. See my Introduction.
[602]

Sub breviloquio igitur cum quo citius potest ad excogitatorum proposita perveniri
[sic?]
 nec magnum accessum ad
principium huius, nec te multiloquio gravem facere intendo, sed ad ea quae ad rem optatam citius te perducunt, et circa illa
mentem atque intentionem fideliter adhibere.
[603]
 Based on Jafar, §§2-3.
[604]

Tunc ad eorum aliorum aspectus
. Usually Bonatti does not say “aspect
of
 another,” but so the text reads. Moreover,
this clause is missing a verb.
[605]
 Omitting
considera
 dangling at the end, as it is not needed.
[606]
 See Jafar, §3.
[607]

Austrum
.
[608]
 Reading
potentia
 (with Jafar) for
patientia
.
[609]
 Reading
discernuntur
 (with Jafar) for
differrentur.
[610]
 See Jafar, §4.
[611]
 I.e., they are “common” (having two different effects), but for different reasons. The Sun’s action depends on
whether he is burning or not (which is usually said to pertain to his squares, the conjunction, and opposition).
[612]
 See Jafar, §5.
[613]

Extiterit
. In this context, it means “is joined with.”
287

=== Page 288 ===
[614]
 See Jafar, §5.
[615]
 The author frequently uses
declino
 (“decline, come down”) to describe on which side of a choice (between colors,
benefic and malefic affects,
etc.
). It does not seem to be used for astronomical purposes (like declination, or setting).
[616]

Situs.
 This word appears a number of times in this Treatise. It carries connotations both of local position or a site,
as well as how something is “situated.” Its technical meaning is unclear to me (as well as how it relates to “places” (
loca
),
which in a planetary context would seem to be the signs (in this sentence it seems to refer to geographical place).
[617]
 In this section, “common” and “temperate” should be understood in their traditional senses of being “mixed”–just
as the common signs are said to partake of both movable and fixed characteristics.
[618]
 See Jafar, §6.
[619]
 I note that there can only be 27 mansions if each is really supposed to be 13º 20’. But the traditional number of
mansions is 28.
[620]
 Below Bonatti attributes this to a “Johannes,” who is probably John of Seville. The names differ slightly from
Jafar’s in §§15-18, but for the most part only with trivial spelling differences. The reader should consult the Appendix with
mansion names found in Burnett (2000). Until more is known about the use of these mansions and whence Bonatti is getting
his names, it is difficult to say more.
[621]
 Or
Anate
 (1491).
[622]
 Or
Alsugamfaboel.
[623]
 Or
Alararem
.
[624]
 I.e., in order: the first secondary mansion is subordinate to the first primary mansion, and so on.
[625]
 Was: Albarain.
[626]
 Was: Albachia.
[627]
 Was: Alialciz. 1491 has Alialciz for both, but this may be a misunderstanding for the abbreviation for
m
.
[628]
 1491 spells this: Racaviavide (but the
vi
 are shaped similarly to
m
 in the gothic print).
[629]
 Was: Alzebene.
[630]
 Was: Altabaran. The above is probably a misprint, since this mansion is undoubtedly named after the star
Aldebaran.
[631]
 This pairing appears in the wrong order in 1491 and 1550.
[632]
 This indicates a problem that plagues the doctrine of mansions–are there 27 or 28? Jafar (and this text) says the
mansion occupied by the luminaries at the conjunction counts as the 28
th
, and is ignored (§12). But the problem is not
whether or not to pay attention to the mansion, but how we can even speak of one to begin with, since each of the 28 is
supposed to be 13º 20’ in longitude, which is impossible.
[633]
 See Jafar, §12. Jafar puts it more starkly: “after the Moon recedes from the Sun, applying or conjoined to another
star, the whole of the signification, even the efficacy and power, is relinquished right over to the Sun, the Moon and mansion
being cast away.”
[634]
 Reading
Altarfin
 for
Alcarfin.
[635]
 Reading
Achafre
 for
Azafre
.
[636]
 Reading
Alzebene
 for
Alzubene
.
[637]
 Reading
Zacazad
 for
Zazacad
.
[638]
 Reading
Almaiehe
 for
Almaie.
[639]
 Reading
Altarfin
 for
Altharfin
.
[640]
 Reading
Alaracen
 for
Alacaren.
[641]
 Reading
Alvata
 for
Alnatha
, else the list would not make sense.
[642]
 Reading
Achafre
 for
Azafre
, as above.
[643]
 Reading
Almaiehe
 for
Almaie
, as above.
[644]
 See Jafar, §21.
288

=== Page 289 ===
[645]
 See, e.g., Jafar, §24.
[646]
 Jafar, §6.
[647]
 Reading
habitudine
 (with Jafar) for Bonatti’s
beatitudine
.
[648]
 Both Bonatti’s rendering and my Jafar are confusingly (and I think ungrammatically) constructed, though Bonatti’s
is smoother. Bonatti reads:
Nihilominus quoque loca ex quibus stellarum fit applicatio fortius utrunque loca stellae
configurate, undeque videlicet applicent de loco, inquam, masculino vel foeminino, ex natura videlicet locorum ad elementa
quatuor relatorum, inde etiam si de certa longitudine et latitudine se applicent.
 Jafar reads:
Et nihilominus quoque loca ex
quibus stellarum fit applicatio fortis utriusque loco stellae configurata; unde terminorum videlicet applicetur; de loco
inquam masculino sive feminino ex natura videlicet qui ad elementa quattuor referuntur.
 I cannot be sure what exactly it
means.
[649]
 Adding
monstrat
 with Jafar. Note that he does not say anything about what “reception” means here–it could simply
mean residing in one of the mansions.
[650]
 See Jafar, §7.
[651]
 Reading
discernere
 for
discernente
.
[652]
 See Jafar, §8.
[653]
 See Jafar, §10-11.
[654]
 See Jafar, §11.
[655]
 Reading
centra
 (with Jafar) for
cera
. The word literally means “centers,” but I do not believe this is what is meant.
In Hellenistic astrology,
kentra
 (sing.
kentron
) were the angular degrees, meaning “goads”–i.e., degrees which “goad”
planets to more vigorous action when they are near them (just as planets are said to be quantitatively stronger in their action
when they are angular). In Indian astrology, this term was transliterated and assimilated directly as
kendra
 (I note that in
Jafar’s text, the translator also speaks of Jafar and “the Indians” in the third person, which Bonatti omits here). Now, since
Jafar has been speaking about the key points at which we determine the Moon’s applications, this leads me to believe that
these key points themselves are the
kentra/kendra
 which stimulate weather. The problem with Jafar’s text (and Bonatti’s
appropriation of it) is that he mentions only eight key points–but then immediately seems to identify the
centra
 with the
standard 12º on either side of the Sun’s conjunction or opposition, saying there are “twelve”
centra
. But it is not normal in
medieval astrology to individually isolate these degrees. Therefore I believe there must be some distortion or error in Jafar’s
text. He must be making a general point about eight
centra/kentra/kendra
 (i.e., stimulating degrees), and making the
additional point that with the conjunction and opposition there is a broader span of degrees to be taken into account.
[656]
 Unknown, but in the sentence corresponding to Mecra below, Jafar reads “Mercurius.” Could this be a reference to
Hermes?
[657]
 This must refer to the mansion which includes the claws of Scorpio. See Jafar, §13, who reads “axa bene.” But note
that
Biabene
 is very similar to the Latinized
Belbeny
, derived ultimately from the Persian (Pahlavi)
wiyābān
, “desert stars.”
See Pingree, 1989, p. 233.
[658]
 This may not be right–perhaps the author is referring to the claws of Scorpio in
Libra
, which seems to be the focus
of his interest.
[659]
 Again, I believe the author is speaking of the claws of the constellation Scorpio, which became the pans of Libra.
[660]
 The sentence ends with the unknown word
cilcivius
 (Jafar reads
tillemus
). The medieval
tilo
 comes from Gr.
tillō
(“to pluck”), but I am unsure of its role here or what Bonatt thought it meant (if he did not simply copy it from his source
text). Note the similarity between
cilcivius
 and Tilcinius (below).
[661]
 See Jafar, §15. Here and below Jafar spells the mansions differently.
[662]
 Reading
Aldebaran
 for
Aldebaram.
[663]
 Reading
Aldebaran
 for
Aldebaram.
[664]
 Reading
Albachia
 as in the first list, but note the confusion of
ch
 and
th.
[665]
 Reading
Abuaarca
 as in the first list.
[666]
 Reading
Almuhadez
 as in the first list.
[667]
 In 1491:
Alfarz
.
[668]
 Jafar, §16.
[669]
 Referring perhaps to Jafar §17.
289

=== Page 290 ===
[670]
 It is impossible to say (based on the text) which mansions (whether primary or secondary) these names apply to–
except perhaps “Alanatha” (which was called Anathe in the primary list and Alnatha in the secondary list).
[671]
 See Jafar, §§18-19.
[672]
 Reading
Altarfin
 for Atarfin.
[673]
 Unknown mansion.
[674]
 Perhaps Alvata?
[675]
 Unknown mansion.
[676]
 Does this refer to a mansion?
[677]
 What effect?
[678]
 See Jafar, §§19-20.
[679]
 Jafar, §19.
[680]
 Reading
a peritissimis
for
apertissimis.
[681]

Situs
. Perhaps this means how the zodiac is “situated” relative to the horizon, i.e., in terms of whole sign houses?
[682]

Situalem…dispositionem
. Again, this probably means in what whole sign (or perhaps quadrant) houses the planets
are in.
[683]
 See Jafar, §20.
[684]

Viam perustam
, a variant on the more familiar
via combusta.
[685]
 Reading
Indi rectificatis
for
in directificatis.
 The following is a paraphrase of Jafar Indus, §§20-21.
[686]

Conventus
, the original author’s standard term for a corporal conjunction. Clearly he is only concerned with the
conjunction of their bodies (as in an eclipse), and not with their conjunction by orbs.
[687]
 Aries and Libra. Jafar is interested in the Sun’s entrance into Aries, as well (Bonatti only mentions Libra above).
[688]
 Reading
summo
 (with Jafar) for Bonatti’s
uno
.
[689]
 Reading
consideravisti
 for
considerasti
.
[690]

Extiterit
.
[691]
 See Jafar, §21.
[692]

Situs
. Again, it is unclear how “sites” differ from “places.”
[693]

Ipsarumque
.
[694]
 See Jafar, §22.
[695]
 I.e., the heavy rains.
[696]
 Bonatti has rarely spoken of houses–perhaps the references to “places” and “sites” are relevant here?
[697]
 See Jafar, §23.
[698]

Complementum
. In this context, this word probably means “the degree of the exact conjunction/aspect.”
[699]
 I do not know what is meant by her increase of light being “missing,” and what is supposed to be “present”
(
defuerit, affuerit
).
[700]
 See Jafar, §24. But most of this sentence is Bonatti’s own elaboration (or based on his edition of Jafar or another
source). The meaning simply seems to be that if the Moon is in the square or opposition of Saturn, it will definitely bring
rains without delay, and especially if the inferiors are involved.
[701]

Aliquas aliorum
. This phrase does not make grammatical sense, as
aliquas
 is feminine (referring perhaps to rains),
and
aliorum
 is masculine. It probably should be read as
aliquos aliorum
 (same English translation).
[702]

Partes
. Perhaps, “roles”?
[703]

Se convenient
.
[704]
 See Jafar, §26.
[705]
 See Jafar, §27.
290

=== Page 291 ===
[706]
 See Jafar, §28.
[707]

Alicuius planetae masculini testimonio.
 Jafar says
feminarum
 [sic] (“of feminine ones”).
[708]
 Jafar, §29.
[709]

Respectu
.
[710]
 But Mars cannot apply to the Moon; Jafar must mean that the Moon applying to Mars will help in generating rain.
[711]

Illa enim eadem & proprie & principaliter iam est dilatio.
[712]
 See Jafar, §§29-30.
[713]
 Punctuation and clauses unclear, as well as the translation:
idem corrumpit, nubes autem quas martialis producit
natura, croceum candorem desuper non sine candore habentes.
[714]
 See Jafar, §30-32.
[715]
 Reading
uno
 for
uni
.
[716]

Res ita se habeat.
 Meaning unclear.
[717]
 See Jafar §34.
[718]
 Jafar, §34.
[719]
 Here we see yet another meaning of “optimal place.” In this case we are probably dealing with her position in one
of the four dichotomies.
[720]
 Uncertain of this last clause:
dum iam fortunatis aliqua configuratione respondit
, translating
respondit
 as “agreed”
(with a dative object).
[721]
 Reading
hae
 for
haec.
[722]
 This seems to be based on Jafar, §43
ff.
[723]
 I do not know if this means the Sun or the third planet involved.
[724]
 Or “dissolved away”?
[725]
 I think the aspect the author means is the opposition.
[726]
 Jafar §31.
[727]
 This simply means that the conjoining of the luminaries at the New and Full Moon is not an “application.”
[728]
 See Jafar, §§33-34.
[729]

Ipsa
. This probably refers to the Moon.
[730]
 Recall that “knot” is a synonym for “mansion.”
[731]
 I do not know if this refers to a particular planet, or to “it” in the impersonal sense of the situation as a whole.
[732]

Exstiterit
.
[733]
 It is unclear to me whether all of the conditions between the parentheses should be read with a “nor,” so that none
of them is supposed to apply.
[734]
 See Jafar, §35-42.
[735]

Conversum
. This could mean “retrograde,” or simply that Mercury is aspecting another planet in addition.
[736]
 Based on Jafar, §35-42.
[737]
 This seems to be based at least on Jafar, §§32.
[738]
 Reading
recipitur
 for
recipiens.
[739]
 Somewhat uncertain about this sentence.
Incitationes siquidem ventorum diversorum & aliquando coruscationum
& fulgorum causa fiet.
[740]
 Very uncertain of this sentence.
Observatione
 (“observation”) sounds like it might be an alternative word for
“aspect”; but then the second half of the sentence seems to contradict the first and then turns to the notion of wearying or
vexing.
At si fuerit ipsa infortuna & mali esse, & mala disposita, in observatione malorum fortis promissionis atque fortior
invenietur, nec a praedictorum observatione alium fatigabit.
291

=== Page 292 ===
[741]

Extiterit
.
[742]
 See Jafar §45.
[743]

Ducatus
.
[744]
 Jafar reads
Alestima
. I do not know if this is a book, or mansion, or what.
[745]

Conventum.
 This is Jafar’s standard word for the corporal conjunction–now he will turn to oppositions and squares.
[746]
 Jafar, §46-47.
[747]
 I believe that by “in front,” Bonatti means the leading or “first aspect” ahead in the order of signs. By “behind,” he
means the following or “second aspect” backwards against the order of signs.
[748]
 Bonatti uses “dichotomy” principally to indicate the degrees marking the ends of the lunar quarters, which are not
90° from each other (since the Sun’s motion affects the lunar phases). The best I can make out is that we are looking at a
configuration composed on two zodiacal shapes: one tetragon marking points based on the degree of the New Moon (all
spaced out by 90° intervals), and a skewed rhomboid marking the points where the beginnings of each lunar quarter
actually
takes place. The two shapes coincide on only one point–the degree of the New Moon–so there are seven points to look at.
[749]
 This refers to a precise (or roughly precise) time, i.e., exactly three days before,
etc.
 See also Ptolemy,
Tet.
II.13).
[750]
 Here we see that these positions could count as the
centra
 mentioned above.
[751]
 In this case,
declino
 seems to refer to the Moon’s movement, and not something qualitative. But I am unsure what
exactly the author means. Perhaps
declino
 is a synonym for “be,” so if she is in the south, winds will come from the south,
etc.
[752]
 This could only happen in different situations, i.e. before or after the Full Moon, not after the New Moon (which is
what was just discussed). Moreover, this could only happen in winter (in the northern hemisphere).
[753]

Convenientiam
. Not a corporal conjunction like when the author uses
conventus
, so it must refer to other types of
aspects.
[754]
 See
Tet
. II.12.
[755]

Societatum
.
[756]
By “angle,” Ptolemy must have in mind the degrees that are square and in opposition to the degree of the
conjunction of the luminaries (see below), as they are viewed in the chart erected at the New Moon.
[757]
 But by “ascendant” does he mean we ought to cast a new chart? Or does he simply mean that that the
al-mubtazz
 of
that sign will be treated as though he were like the Lord of the Ascendant for that quarter?
[758]
 But, again, the beginning of the third lunar quarter (which is the degree of the prevention) does not coincide with
the degree opposite the degree of the Full Moon or conjunction. For, since the Sun also moves, the Full Moon will be
approximately 210º away from the degree of the conjunction.
[759]
 Bonatti probably means ‘Ali ibn Ridwān’s commentary on
Tet
. II.
[760]
 See Jafar, §52.
[761]

Situs
.
[762]

Conventibus
. Here,
conventus
 seems to refer to any aspect between the luminaries–or at least, the tetragons. So it
seems that the testimony of the Sun when he enters Libra will be dominant, and the lunar phases for the semester will be
subordinate?
[763]
 Jafar, §46.
[764]
 I.e., “temperate” or “common,” i.e., a balance of both moisture and dryness.
[765]
 See Jafar, §§53-54.
[766]

Tet.
 II.13.
[767]

Tet.
 II.13.
[768]

Tet.
 II.13.
[769]
 Ptolemy is refreshingly clear: “And the halos that gather about the stars, both the planets and the brilliant fixed
stars, signify what is appropriated to their colours and to the natures of the luminaries which they surround.”
[770]

Tet.
 II.13.
292

=== Page 293 ===
[771]
 Perhaps an allusion to
Tet.
 II.11?
[772]
 The gist of this sentence seems to be that we should apply similar rules to anything else he hasn’t already
mentioned.
[773]

Tet.
 II.13.
[774]
 I am not sure if the author means how long they remain visible, or how long their tails are.
[775]
 This section derives from
Tet.
 II.13, on “rushing and shooting stars.”
[776]

Leveflochis
. Compare with
Tet.
II.13, “flocks of wool.”
Flochus
 definitely is related to
floccus
, “wool,” and the
leve-
 prefix must be a variant on
levis
, whose paronyms all signify things that are light or trivial.
[777]

Tet.
 II.13.
[778]
 Ptolemy says “to which the aforesaid signs point,” indicating that “signs” here refers to “atmospheric signs,” not
zodiacal signs. The chapter in which this and previous sections appear in Ptolemy, is about atmospheric signs.
[779]
 This means “setting,” per Ptolemy (
Tet.
 II.13).
[780]
 I.e., “parheliac clouds.” These are vertical bars of colored light (formed by sunlight shining through water crystals
in the atmosphere) which appear on either side of the Sun. They are also called “sun dogs,” and my own guess is that this
phenomenon was behind the “apparition of three Suns” in 1644 to which Lilly devoted his
The Starry Messenger
 (1645).
[781]
 Reading
hyemalem
as “stormy,” with Ptolemy.
[782]

Tet.
 II.13.
[783]
 Ptolemy simply says that a rainbow in clear weather signifies coming storms, and after storms it signifies clear
weather (
Tet.
 II. 13).
[784]
 This sentence comes right from the penultimate paragraph of
Tet.
 II.13.
[785]
 See Jafar, §52.
[786]
 Reading
beneficio decorat
 (with Jafar) for
beneficio declarat
.
[787]
 I am not sure what “middle” refers to–this does not appear in Jafar.
[788]
 This may be a synonym for “temperate.”
[789]
 Jafar, §52.
[790]

Exstiterit.
[791]
 I believe this simply means that there will be no rain at least until the aspect is perfected.
[792]
 This is also Jafar, §53.
[793]
 Jafar, §57.
[794]

Proprios.
Jafar reads
prospicios
.
[795]

Ducatus
.
[796]
 Jafar, §§54-57.
[797]
 Reading
necnon
 for
nec
.
[798]

Partibus
. I am not sure why Bonatti (or his editor) chose this word.
[799]
 The author of this passage must live in the sixth clime.
[800]

Mappa
. This word can mean a napkin, or cloth, or a signal flag waved at the beginning of a race. I am not sure
exactly what sort of shape the author means.
[801]

Lictura
. Perhaps: “couch?”
[802]
 Unknown word.
[803]
 Here is another indicator of the oddness of this Treatise.
Subat
 is the second month in Turkish, not Arabic (it seems
to be equivalent to Safar). In Tr. 4, Bonatti clearly refers to Safar, but nowhere else draws on Turkish. Either “Christianus” or
the author, or both, must have studied or lived in and around Turkey.
[804]
 Undoubtedly Gerard of Cremona.
[805]

De levi.
293

=== Page 294 ===
[806]
 I am unsure of the source of this quote.
[807]
 I am not sure what is meant by this. Moreover, the constellation of the river Eridanus is near Taurus, not
Sagittarius.
[808]
 I am unsure of the source of this quote.
[809]
 Mansions?
[810]
 But neither Venus nor Mercury can ever be opposite the Sun.
[811]

Obiicitur
. This probably refers to the Moon moving out of the Sun’s light after the New Moon, so it simply means
that the Moon applies to Venus from a New Moon in Leo.
[812]

Generativa
.
[813]
 Unknown–I have never heard of anyone else with the name “Abū Ma’shar,” and I do not know what “Trax” means.
[814]

Remissius
, i.e., “remitted” as opposed to “intensified.”
[815]
 It seems as though this means the Moon is joined to the Sun by trine or square (in which case,
conventus
 here
means “aspect” instead of the usual “conjunction”).
[816]
 I.e., the domiciles of the luminaries and their opposites.
[817]
 Perhaps this means, “if it had been completed with one degree or less, just before the chart were cast.”
[818]
 In other words, since Mercury’s effects depend on his aspects, look to another planet he aspects in order to
determine the effects.
[819]
 Reading
pronosticare
 for
pronosticari
.
[820]
 I am not sure if this means in the southern
direction
 (say, in the 10
th
 house), or in a southern ecliptical
latitude
, or
even in a southern
declination
.
[821]
 This clause is ungrammatical, and is perhaps a combination of an error and a redundant repetition:
fueritque
inferior aliquis a superioribus & aliquis ex inferioribus applicetur illis
. It is also possible that the author is speaking of
planets in southern latitudes, and their mutual application by latitude there–but it still would not make the sentence
grammatical.
[822]

Rediens
. This might mean “separating from,” as the author uses
recedens
 below. Or perhaps this should be read as
recedens
, too.
[823]
 Meaning unclear:
nomina autem attendere curaverunt, quarum haec est discretio, quotiens Luna a Venere rediens
pluviarum significatio profecto reducitur.
[824]
 Again, practically incomprehensible because it is out of context–I do not even know what the topic of the sentence
is.
Et dixit, haec autem sunt singulariter et notoria, et quaedam quae planetarum apertiones satis congruae nuncupantur.
[825]
 Omitting
deprehensa
; perhaps it pertains to an earlier clause in Bonatti’s source text, but he has uncritically copied
it here.
[826]
 I am not sure where Bonatti is getting this quote, nor do I understand it.
[827]

Conventum
. This seems to be in the wrong case, and at any rate I do not understand its role here.
[828]

Respectu
.
294

=== Page 295 ===
Table of Contents
PUBLISHER’S NOTE:
Table of Figures
Treatise 4: Conjunctions
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Treatise 8: Revolutions & Parts
[PART 1:] On the Revolutions of the Years of the World
Preface
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 9
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Chapter 15
Chapter 16
Chapter 17
Chapter 18
Chapter 19
Chapter 20
Chapter 21
Chapter 22
Chapter 23
295

=== Page 296 ===
Chapter 24
Chapter 25
Chapter 26
Chapter 27
Chapter 28
Chapter 29
Chapter 30
Chapter 31
Chapter 32
Chapter 33
Chapter 34
Chapter 35
Chapter 36
Chapter 37
Chapter 38
Chapter 39
Chapter 40
Chapter 41
Chapter 42
Chapter 43
Chapter 44
Chapter 45
Chapter 46
Chapter 47
Chapter 48
Chapter 49
Chapter 50
Chapter 51
Chapter 52
Chapter 53
Chapter 54
Chapter 55
Chapter 56
Chapter 57
Chapter 58
Chapter 59
Chapter 60
Chapter 61
Chapter 62
Chapter 63
296

=== Page 297 ===
Chapter 64
Chapter 65
Chapter 66
Chapter 67
Chapter 68
Chapter 69
Chapter 70
Chapter 71
Chapter 72
Chapter 73
Chapter 74
Chapter 75
Chapter 76
Chapter 77
Chapter 78
Chapter 79
Chapter 80
Chapter 81
Chapter 82
Chapter 83
Chapter 84
Chapter 85
Chapter 86
Chapter 87
Chapter 88
Chapter 89
Chapter 90
Chapter 91
Chapter 92
Chapter 93
Chapter 94
Chapter 95
Chapter 96
Chapter 97
Chapter 98
Chapter 99
Chapter 100
Chapter 101
Chapter 102
Chapter 103
297

=== Page 298 ===
Chapter 104
Chapter 105
Chapter 106
Chapter 107
Chapter 108
Chapter 109
Chapter 110
Chapter 111
Chapter 112
Chapter 113:
Chapter 114:
Chapter 115:
Chapter 116:
Treatise 10: Heavy Rains
298

=== Page 299 ===
目录
PUBLISHER’S NOTE:
2
Table of Figures
15
Treatise 4: Conjunctions
15
Chapter 1
16
Chapter 2
17
Chapter 3
20
Chapter 4
23
Chapter 5
23
Chapter 6
24
Chapter 7
24
Chapter 8
26
Treatise 8: Revolutions & Parts
29
[PART 1:] On the Revolutions of the Years of the World
29
Preface
29
Chapter 1
31
Chapter 2
40
Chapter 3
43
Chapter 4
46
Chapter 5
48
Chapter 6
49
Chapter 7
49
Chapter 8
51
Chapter 9
57
Chapter 10
58
Chapter 11
62
Chapter 12
65
Chapter 13
66
299

=== Page 300 ===
Chapter 14
71
Chapter 15
72
Chapter 16
76
Chapter 17
77
Chapter 18
79
Chapter 19
80
Chapter 20
83
Chapter 21
83
Chapter 22
84
Chapter 23
84
Chapter 24
85
Chapter 25
87
Chapter 26
87
Chapter 27
90
Chapter 28
91
Chapter 29
93
Chapter 30
95
Chapter 31
95
Chapter 32
96
Chapter 33
97
Chapter 34
99
Chapter 35
100
Chapter 36
101
Chapter 37
102
Chapter 38
103
Chapter 39
103
Chapter 40
104
Chapter 41
105
Chapter 42
106
300

=== Page 301 ===
Chapter 43
106
Chapter 44
107
Chapter 45
109
Chapter 46
110
Chapter 47
111
Chapter 48
112
Chapter 49
113
Chapter 50
113
Chapter 51
114
Chapter 52
115
Chapter 53
116
Chapter 54
116
Chapter 55
118
Chapter 56
119
Chapter 57
120
Chapter 58
121
Chapter 59
122
Chapter 60
123
Chapter 61
124
Chapter 62
125
Chapter 63
126
Chapter 64
126
Chapter 65
127
Chapter 66
128
Chapter 67
129
Chapter 68
129
Chapter 69
130
Chapter 70
131
Chapter 71
132
301

=== Page 302 ===
Chapter 72
132
Chapter 73
133
Chapter 74
134
Chapter 75
134
Chapter 76
137
Chapter 77
139
Chapter 78
140
Chapter 79
140
Chapter 80
140
Chapter 81
143
Chapter 82
144
Chapter 83
144
Chapter 84
145
Chapter 85
148
Chapter 86
149
Chapter 87
150
Chapter 88
150
Chapter 89
151
Chapter 90
151
Chapter 91
152
Chapter 92
153
Chapter 93
153
Chapter 94
154
Chapter 95
156
Chapter 96
158
Chapter 97
158
Chapter 98
160
Chapter 99
163
Chapter 100
168
302

=== Page 303 ===
Chapter 101
170
Chapter 102
171
Chapter 103
174
Chapter 104
178
Chapter 105
181
Chapter 106
182
Chapter 107
184
Chapter 108
186
Chapter 109
195
Chapter 110
197
Chapter 111
203
Chapter 112
204
Chapter 113:
205
Chapter 114:
207
Chapter 115:
211
Chapter 116:
213
Treatise 10: Heavy Rains
225
303
