=== Page 1 ===
Predicting Weather Events with
Astrology
Kris Brandt Riske

=== Page 2 ===
About the Author
Kris Brandt Riske (Arizona) is the executive director and a professional member of the Amer-
ican Federation of Astrologers (AFA), the oldest US astrological organization, founded in 1938.
She is also a member of the National Council for Geocosmic Research (NCGR). She has a mas-
ter's degree in journalism and a certificate of achievement in weather forecasting from Penn
State.
Kris has been a speaker at various astrological conferences and has written for several astro-
logical publications. She currently writes the annual weather forecast for Llewellyn's Mom Sign
Book and is the author of Llewellyn's Complete Book of Astrology and Llewellyn's Complete Book of
Predictive Astrology. In addition to astrometeorology, she specializes in predictive astrology.
Kris is an avid NASCAR fan and enjoys gardening and reading.

=== Page 3 ===
Contents
Charts
Introduction
Chapter i: Weather Charts
Chapter 2: Planets, Aspects, and Signs
Chapter j. National and Local Forecasting
Chapter 4: Wind
Chapter 5: Drought
Chapter 6: Floods
Chapter j. Temperature
Chapter H: Hurricanes
Chapter o: Snow, Sleet, and Freezing Rain
Chapter jo: Thunderstorms, Hail, and Tornadoes
Chapter ir. Example Forecasts
Chapter 12: Climate Change
Conclusion
Glossary
Resources

=== Page 4 ===
Charts
Introduction r. Winter Ingress, December 21, 1992, Chattanooga, TN
Introduction 2: Winter Ingress, December 21, 1992, San Diego, CA
Weather Charts 1: Winter Ingress, December 22, 1902, Bismarck, ND
Weather Charts 2: Lunar Phase, January 6, 1903, Bismarck, ND
Weather Charts r. Latitude and Longitude Example
National and Local Forecasting 1: Solar Map for Winter Ingress, December 21, 2010
National and Local Forecastinfr 2: Winter Ingress, December 21, 2010, 40N 95W
National and Local Forecasting r. January 2011 Ephemeris Page
National and Local Forecasting 4: Summer Ingress, June 21, 2011; Lunar Phase, August 6, 2011;
and Rain, August 7, 2011, Long Pond, PA
Wind 1: Autumn Ingress, September 22, 2002; Lunar Phase, December 11, 2002; and Wind,
December 14, 2002, Reno, NV
Wind 2: Spring Ingress, March 20, 1964; Lunar Phase, March 27, 1964; and Wind, April 3,
1964, Salt Lake City, UT
Wind 3: Autumn Ingress, September 23, 2011; Lunar Phase, November 24, 2011; and Santa
Ana Wind, November 30, 2011, San Bernardino, CA
Drought 1: Winter Ingress, December 21, 2001, Denver, CO
Drought 2: Spring Ingress, March 20, 2002, Denver, CO
Drought r. Summer Ingress, June 21, 2002, Denver, CO
Drought 4: Autumn Ingress, September 23, 1930, Great Plains
Drought 5: Autumn Ingress, September 23, 1933, Great Plains
Drought 6: Lunar Phase, November 10, 1933, Great Plains
Drought 7: Summer Ingress, June 21, 1965, New York, NY
Floods 1: Spring Ingress, March 20, 2011, Dyersburg, TN
Floods 2: Lunar Phase, April n, 2011, Dyersburg, TN
Floods i. Lunar Phase, April 17, 2011, Dyersburg, TN
Floods 4: Lunar Phase, April 24, 2011, Dyersburg, TN
Floods 5: Lunar Phase, May 3, 2011, Dyersburg, TN
Floods 6: Spring Ingress, March 21, 1903: Lunar Phase, June 9, 1903: and Flood, June 14, 1903,
Heppner, OR
Floods 7: Autumn Ingress, September 22, T964, and Lunar Phase, December it, 1964, Salem,
OR
Floods 8: Autumn Ingress, September 22, 1964, and Lunar Phase, December 18, 1964, Salem,
OR
Floods ci: Spring Ingress, March 20, 1972, and Lunar Phase, June 4, 1972, Rapid City, SD

=== Page 5 ===
Floods 10: Spring Ingress, March 20, 1993, Des Moines, IA
Floods 11: Summer Ingress, June 21, 1993, Des Moines, IA
Temperature 1: Summer Ingress, June 21, 1990, and Lunar Phase, June 22, 1990, Phoenix, AZ
Temperature 2: Summer Ingress, June 20, 2013; Lunar Phase, June 23, 2013; and Lunar Phase,
June 29, 2013, Phoenix, AZ
Temperature 3: Summer Ingress, June 21, 2011; Lunar Phase, July 23, 2011; and High Heat, July
27, 2011, Salina, KS
Temperature 4: Summer Ingress, June 21, 2011; Lunar Phase, July 15, 2011; and High Heat, July
22, 2011, Hartford, CT
Temperature 5: Spring Ingress, March 20, 1954; Lunar Phase, March 27, 1954; and High Heat,
March 31, 1954, Rio Grande City, TX
Temperature 6: Summer Ingress, June 21, 1901, and Lunar Phase, July 23, 1901, Lawrence, KS
Temperature 7: Winter Ingress, December 21, 1898, and Lunar Phase, February 10, 1899, Mil-
ligan, OH
Temperature S: Winter Ingress, December 21, 1898, and Lunar Phase, February 10, 1899, Min-
den, LA 1
Temperature o; Winter Ingress, December 21, 1898, and Lunar Phase, February 10, 1899, Talla-
hassee, FL
Temperature 10: Winter Ingress, December 22, 1935, and Lunar Phase, January 16, 1936,
Omaha, NE
Hurricanes 11: Winter Ingress, December 21, 1981, and Lunar Phase, January 9, 1982, Chicago,
IL
Hurricanes 1: Autumn Ingress, September 22, 2012, Atlantic City, NJ
Hurricanes 2: Lunar Phase, October 21, 2012, Caribbean Sea
Hurricanes 3: Lunar Phase, October 21, 2012, Atlantic City, NJ
Hurricanes 4: Lunar Phase, October 29, 2012, Atlantic City, NJ
Hurricanes y. Summer Ingress, June 20, 2004; Lunar Phase, August 7, 2004; and Hurricane
Charley, August 13, 2004, Port Charlotte, FL
Hurricanes G: Summer Ingress, June 20, 2004; Lunar Phase, August 29, 2004; and Hurricane
Frances, September 6, 2004, Stuart, FL
Hurricanes 7: Autumn Ingress, September 22, 2004; Lunar Phase, September 21, 2004; and
Hurricane Jeanne, September 25, 2004, Stuart, FL
Hurricanes ft: Summer Ingress, June 21, 1900, and Lunar Phase, September 2, 1900, Galve-
ston, TX
Hurricanes o: Summer Ingress, June 21, 1900, and Lunar Phase, September 8, 1900, Galve-
ston, TX

=== Page 6 ===
Hurricanes to: Summer Ingress, June 21, 1979, and Lunar Phase, September 6, 1979, Mobile,
AL
Hurricanes it: Summer Ingress, June 21, 1979, Cape Verde Islands
Snow 1: Winter Ingress, December 21, 1977; Lunar Phase, January 24, 1978; and Snow Begins,
January 25, 1978, Indianapolis, IN
Snow 2: Winter Ingress, December 21, 1887, and Lunar Phase, March 4, 1888, New York, NY
Swoiv j: Winter Ingress, December 21, 1887, and Lunar Phase, March 12, 1888, New York, NY
Snow 4: Winter Ingress, December 21, 1966, and Lunar Phase, January 26, 1967, Chicago, IL
Snow 5: Winter Ingress, December 21, 2008, and Lunar Phase, January 26, 2009, Louisville,
KY
Snow 6: Winter Ingress, December 21, 1989, and Lunar Phase, February 9, 1990, Chicago, IL
Thunderstorms r. Spring Ingress, March 20, 2013; Lunar Phase, June 16, 2013; and Thunder-
storms, June 17, 2003, Lubbock, TX
Thunderstorms 2: Spring Ingress, March 20, 2009, and Lunar Phase, May 1, 2009, 38N 92W
Thunderstorms 3: Spring Ingress, June 21, 1898; Lunar Phase, August 31, 1898; and Hail, Sep-
tember 5, 1898, Nodaway County, MO
Thunderstorms 4: Spring Ingress, March 20, 2013; Lunar Phase, May 17, 2013; and Tornado,
May 20, 2013, Moore, OK
Thunderstorms 5; Spring Ingress, March 20, 2009; Lunar Phase, May 1, 2009; and Tornado,
May 6, 2009, Madison, AL
Thunderstorms 6: Winter Ingress, December 22, 2007; Lunar Phase, January 29, 2008; and
Tornado, February 5, 2008, Castalian Springs, TN
Thunderstorms 7: Winter Ingress, December 21, 1924, and Lunar Phase, March 17, 1925, An-
napolis, MD; Tornado Forms, March 18, 1925, Redford, MO
Thunderstorms 8: Spring Ingress, March 20, 1974; Lunar Phase, March 30, 1974; and Tornado,
April 3, 1974, Xenia, OH
Example Forecasts 1: Summer Ingress, June 21, 2019, and Lunar Phase, July 9, 2019, Phoenix,
AZ
Example Forecasts 2: Autumn Ingress, September 22, 2018, and Lunar Phase, October 8, 2018,
Mobile, AL
Example Forecasts 3: Solar Map for the 2018 Autumn Ingress
Example Forecasts 4: Winter Ingress, December 21, 2077, and Lunar Phase, February 23, 2018,
Chicago, IL

=== Page 7 ===
Introduction
Nothing can be as pleasant or as devastating, as serene or as severe, as predictable or as ex-
treme, as the weather. To a great extent, weather dominates and controls our everyday lives,
whether it be a blizzard, a flood, or a simple rain shower that interferes with outdoor activities.
Weather conditions affect transportation and communication and are critical to farming.
Research in atmospheric science and the development and refinement of tools such as radar
and computer modeling have increased the ability of meteorologists to accurately forecast
weather. Radar can now pinpoint the development of a tornado within about twenty minutes,
warning people who might be in its path. And tornado prediction begins even before that, with
the highly skilled meteorologists at the Storm Prediction Center in Norman, Oklahoma, who
use satellite imagery and computer modeling to help forecast the potential for severe weather
as many as several days in advance.
However, even with knowledge, skills, and available tools, the outside limit of an accurate
meteorology forecast is only about five days, and usually less than that. Seasonal forecasts are
becoming more dependable but do not approach the accuracy of mesoscale forecasting (short-
term events such as thunderstorms, squall lines, fronts, and tornadoes that range in size from
about a mile to 600 miles in size). The same is true of hurricane forecasting, which has not
reached the accuracy level of mesoscale forecasting, particularly in tracking the path of a hurri-
cane in order to determine where it will make landfall. The reason for this might be that be-
cause mesoscale events are more frequent, more funding has been invested in research and
development of forecasting tools.
Enter astrometeorology, the art of weather prediction using astrology.
Astrometeorology has no time restrictions. Weather can be forecast for tomorrow, next week,
next month, next year, or a date far in the future. Like meteorology, however, astrometeorology
has its limitations. It is at its best when used to forecast weekly and seasonal weather trends
and major weather events. It can be used to forecast a high-risk tornado day, week, or season,
for example, but generally not the exact minute and location where a tornado will occur. Not
that it can't be done; rather, few people have the time required to pinpoint the exact time and
location. And why would we? Radar delivers a high level of accuracy. When the best of meteo-
rology and astrometeorology are combined, the forecasting possibilities are limitless.
In addition to the potential to save lives, long-range weather forecasting can help cities,
states, and even countries plan ahead for major weather events. Farmers can manage crops ac-
cording to seasonal weather trends, and utility companies can do the same with energy de-
mand. Investors, particularly those involved in the commodities market, can see increased
gains, and retailers can determine whether to stock more umbrellas or snow shovels.

=== Page 8 ===
Astrometeorology can be used months and years in advance to identify the areas—regions,
states, and locations within states—that will be prone to severe weather. For example, astrome-
teorology can be used to forecast the specific areas most prone to hurricane activity during a
given year, such as the Florida Panhandle rather than just the East Coast, or coastal Louisiana
and Mississippi rather than just the Gulf Coast. Specific areas especially prone to tornadic
activity can also be forecast, as can a hot summer or a cold winter, a drought or a flood, or a
high number of cyclonic storms in the Midwest or New England.
HOW ASTROMETEOROLOGY WORKS
It's easy to identify and explain the planetary factors associated with various weather events.
For example, Neptune indicates warmth, precipitation, and flood potential: Saturn is active in
major storm systems; Uranus identifies high-pressure systems; and Mars relates to heat.
However, there is a critical concept to understand before delving into the "how" of astrome-
teorology. Planets do not cause the weather; they rejlect weather conditions. In this way, as-
trometeorology is much like meteorology. Both are used to identify the cause and effect of spe-
cific atmospheric conditions that result in specific weather, and both are used to forecast the
weather. The difference is that one is an art and one is a science. But that isn't quite true.
Years of experience enable meteorologists to add the "art" component to forecasts. Astrologers
forecasting the weather need to do the same—in reverse—by adding some science to the art.
It's possible to forecast the weather without any knowledge of meteorology, just as it's pos-
sible to forecast the weather without any knowledge of astrometeorology. Used in tandem,
however, the two can result in a higher level of accuracy, especially in medium- and long-range
weather forecasting. You'll thus learn some very basic meteorology in this book in order to bet-
ter understand how the planetary influences relate to the weather.
Using astrology to create a weather forecast is fairly straightforward, but it can also be com-
plex. A brief introductory explanation will suffice here, with greater detail to come in other
chapters.
Forecasting is all about longitude and latitude (location); the seasonal solar ingresses that
mark the start of spring, summer, autumn, and winter; and the monthly lunar phases (new
Moon, full Moon, and two quarter Moons). When these three are considered in unison, a
weather forecast can be generated for a specific day or week; the solar ingress indicates the sea-
sonal trends. Each lunar phase is in effect for about a week, and each ingress for about three
months.
A seasonal forecast for two locations for the winter of 1993 is a good way to illustrate how
weather differs in different locations, depending on which planets are highlighted at a specific
longitude and latitude. The planetary positions are identical by degree and sign, but their

=== Page 9 ===
placement in the charts is different.
Look at the winter ingress chart for December 21, 1992, for Chattanooga, Tennessee (Intro-
duction 1). The vertical axis, or meridian (Midheaven/IC), with 18 Scorpio/Taums on the
cusps, is the longitude of Chattanooga. The horizontal axis, or horizon (Ascendant/
Descendant), with 28 Capricorn/Cancer on the cusps, is the latitude of Chattanooga.
In this chart, there is one planetary alignment that indicates a winter featuring major low-
pressure, cyclonic storms with abundant precipitation: a Venus-Saturn conjunction at 14-15
Aquarius. What made this significant to Chattanooga's weather was that the conjunction
formed a square with that city's longitude (Midheaven/IC) at the time of the ingress. Chat-
tanooga received twenty inches of snow during the Superstorm of March 12-14, I993' which
brought stormy conditions to much of the eastern third of the United States.

=== Page 10 ===
18 22
19 52
» 09
24 01 nb
12 12 16 06 10 48
flF 14 28
o V5
00 55* 03
00
¥ 17 "03
S|/ 17° vt 58' 28
02 ZD V? SO* $24° ^ 38'
38' 56'
\9
14 18'
15
48 10
vjD
03 55'
52 19 n T 11 09
18' « 22*
Introduction i: Winter Ingress / Natal Chart / December 21, 1992, Mon / 9:43.'14 om EST +5:00
Chattanooga, TN / jj°No2'44" o8j0Wi8'j^" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node

=== Page 11 ===
Introduction 2: Winter Ingress / Natal Chart / December 21,1992, Mow / 6:43:14 am PST
+5;oo
San Diego, CA /}2CN42'^" iiy°Wog'2j" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Now look at the same winter ingress chart for San Diego, California (Introduction 2), and
notice that the planets are the same but the meridian (Midheaven/IC) and horizon (Ascen-
dant/De-scendant) are different by sign and degree. This is because San Diego is at a different
longitude and latitude than Chattanooga.
This chart indicates a trend for cold, damp weather and abundant precipitation with flooding
potential because the Uranus-Neptune conjunction at 17 Capricorn is square the ingress
meridian (longitude) at San Diego. A series of storms in Southern California from January 5 to
I9' I993' resulted in 18.27 inches of rain in Campo, east of San Diego. The average January

=== Page 12 ===
rainfall for San Diego is about two inches; in January 1993, the city received about nine inches
of rain.
Obviously Chattanooga wasn't in a permanent storm condition throughout the entire winter,
nor did San Diego see buckets of rain every day for three months. Nevertheless, the ingress
charts reflected that winter's seasonal trends, which were indeed the norm and not the excep-
tion. An ingress chart shows the seasonal trend but not the timing, which is revealed in the
lunar phase chart in effect at the time of a weather event. This is why San Diego experienced
heavy precipitation in January, while Chattanooga saw its biggest storm in March.
This brief introduction to astrometeorology shows how planetary influences aligning with
different longitudes and latitudes reflect varied weather conditions in each location. In later
chapters we'll look more closely at a variety of weather events, along with the pertinent lunar
phase charts for each.
There is, however, one other factor that is always wise to keep in mind when forecasting
weather: local conditions. Rain is rare in southern Arizona in June, and temperatures in the
80s are unlikely in North Dakota in January. Familiarize yourself with the climatology of the
forecast location, just as meteorologists do. With that knowledge and some practice, you can
learn to forecast the weather for any location on any date.
[contents]

=== Page 13 ===
CHAPTER 1
Weather Charts
A weather forecast requires two charts: one for the solar ingress and a second for the lunar
phase. Both are calculated for the longitude, latitude, and time zone of the specific location for
which you want to develop a weather forecast,
SolarlngressChart
Each year has four solar ingresses, each of which marks the beginning of a new season. Spring
begins when the Sun reaches o degrees Aries, summer with the Cancer ingress in June, au-
tumn with the September Libra ingress, and winter with the Capricorn ingress in December.
The ingresses occur around the 21st of the month. An ingress chart is in effect for the three
months that follow, until the next ingress occurs, and is used to forecast the general weather
conditions for the season at a specific location. For example, a Cancer ingress chart might indi-
cate a cooler, wetter, warmer, or drier than normal summer.
In the 1902 winter ingress chart for Bismarck, North Dakota (Weather Charts 1), Neptune is
prominently placed conjunct the IC (longitude). This planet of heavy precipitation and flooding
opposes the Sun, Venus, and Mercury in the tenth house (longitude). The forecast would thus
be for a wetter than normal winter for the area, with an increased number of storms with high
winds, because Mars conjunct the Descendant (latitude) is square the Sun and Neptune.

=== Page 14 ===
28° 36'
21 08°
o w ¥ 9 18 35'
00 =05 21 05 W
% w
42" 00 59' 48 26 12 31 n
rru 44 /W
4 to
25'
11.-11° ]) 26 26
09'^01° Q fTF
54' 54'
T
12 31
a
26 13 28 22'
18 02
08 21
I CP CO 35 18
28° n 36
Weather Charts i: Winter Ingress / Natal Chart / December 22,1902, Man / i2.'35.'32 pm CST
+6:00 Bismarck, ND / 46^48'30" 100° W47' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Mode
An ingress chart calculated for the beginning of a specific season is used to forecast that sea-
son's weather trends. It also indicates any tendency for certain weather events. Although rain
will usually occur at a location where dryness is indicated at the ingress, it will be below aver-
age and less frequent. A location that shows a winter tendency for major storms won't expe-
rience one every week during the three-month season, but overall the season is likely to be no-
table for snowfall totals.
The seasonal trends indicated in the ingress chart are important when forecasting weather
for a specific day or week through the use of the lunar phase chart. For example, if an ingress
chart forecasts temperatures well below normal, the weather indicated by a lunar phase chart

=== Page 15 ===
that promises high heat will be warmer, but not excessively so. Rather, it might be experienced
as a pleasant day in an otherwise cool summer.
The lunar phase chart is invaluable in forecasting the timing of major weather phenomena
indicated in the ingress chart. For example, when planets in a lunar phase chart aspect several
planets in that season's ingress chart, the lunar phase planets act as a trigger to activate the sea-
sonal trend.
Lunar Phase Chart
The lunar phase chart is used to identify weather conditions during a more narrowly defined
time period of about a week. There are four or five lunar phases each month, spaced approx-
imately seven days apart. They occur at the new Moon, full Moon, and two quarter Moons. The
new and full Moons are separated by approximately two weeks, with the quarter Moons occur-
ring in between. Each phase is in effect until the next lunar phase, about one week later.
When forecasting, the new Moon has no more influence than the full Moon, and the same is
true of the quarter Moons. All lunar phases are of equal strength and indicate the weather only
during that phase. A lunar phase chart forecasts general conditions for the succeeding week in
much the same way the ingress chart does for the season.
An example of a lunar phase chart is one for January 6, 1903, for Bismarck, North Dakota
(Weather Charts 2), a location that had a seasonal trend for abundant precipitation that year.
This chart forecasts precipitation because Neptune is conjunct the Ascendant (latitude). In the
lunar phase chart, the Venus-Saturn conjunction (heavy precipitation) aspects the meridian
(longitude) and the horizon (latitude) of the winter ingress chart. On January 6 and 7, a bliz-
zard with 58 mph winds buried Bismarck in snow.

=== Page 16 ===
or 3t 41
08 45'
T
\ 07 04
19
D
15° 36 00 \ 19 16'
9 28 I > Yi 2G « 09 24 27 ,o. W 19° 44
^ / o 15
E 26
+ l8"! -ir 01 01
to ^ orssru 52 ^22 ¥ 06' 06
19° 16'
18 19 10
07
08 45
<Q 04 07'
orfip 41-
Weather Charts 2: Lunar Phase / Natal Chart / January 6, igoj, Tue /3:56:44 pm CST +6:00
Bismarck, ND / 46^48^0" 100° W47' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus /Mean Node
Ingress-Lunar Phase Comparison
Both the ingress and lunar phase charts must be used when forecasting. Of the two, the lunar
phase chart is generally more powerful in the sense of immediacy, while the ingress chart sets
the fundamental conditions of the season. However, the ingress chart is nearly always activated
when a weather event occurs, even a minor one such as rain showers.
If a summer ingress chart indicates blazingly hot weather for the season, a lunar phase chart
with Mercury conjunct the IC is unlikely to indicate much of a drop in temperature. However,
if the same lunar phase chart was partnered with an ingress chart that also had Mercury con-
junct the IC, it would mean temperatures well below the seasonable norm during that week,
most likely from a strong cold front moving through the area.

=== Page 17 ===
In the Bismarck, North Dakota, example, the forecast for the week of January 6 indicated
heavy precipitation because Neptune, already strongly placed in the ingress chart, was also
strong in the lunar phase chart. Venus in the ingress chart was activated by a semisquare from
Jupiter in the lunar phase chart; Jupiter, the planet of expansion, also indicated heavy downfall.
The Venus-Saturn conjunction in the lunar phase chart was sextile the ingress chart's Ascen-
dant and semisextile the Midheaven. When you see multiple interchart aspects such as these,
it indicates the potential for a major weather event.
Transiting Aspects
The ingress and lunar phase charts are the foundation of weather forecasting, and a third
component, the transiting planets, is used to narrow the timing of weather events. Often the
transiting Moon is the trigger that times the beginning or ending of a weather event. Other
fast-moving planets can indicate timing regarding the length of a major storm such as a bliz-
zard or hurricane.
Transiting planets are considered on two levels: their aspects to each other, and their aspects
to the ingress and lunar phase charts.
Transiting planets and their aspects to both charts and to each other have a significant influ-
ence both in terms of weather and the timing of a weather event. The inner planets—Sun,
Moon, Venus, Mercury, and Mars—are usually the ones that trigger ingress and lunar phase
chart aspects, marking the onset of weather.
The Moon in Aries was a key player in the Bismarck example, activating the lunar phase
Venus-Saturn conjunction through a square. It was also square ingress Saturn. On January 7,
transiting Venus formed a conjunction with ingress Saturn and transiting Mercury was trine
ingress Mars, activating the ingress Mars-Neptune square, another aspect of heavy precip-
itation. Again, multiple aspects can alert you to a major weather event.
LocalConditions
Local conditions must always be considered when forecasting weather. Seasonal norms are
readily available online from the National Weather Service (www.weather.gov) and at Weather
Underground (www.wunderground.com), by far the best site for weather information, includ-
ing local radar, satellite images, information regarding tropical storms, and educational mate-
rial. The Weather Channel (www.weather.com) airs forecasts and covers major weather events.
(See the resources section at the end of the book for more information.)
Longitude andLatitude
When forecasting weather events, the twelve astrological houses are not considered in the
traditional manner, such as the third house giving indications for communication and the

=== Page 18 ===
tenth house for career. Rather, the houses indicate direction—north, south, east, and west—
from the longitude and latitude of the point of observation (location for the forecast).
Longitude is the meridian, the north/south axis traditionally referred to as the Midheaven/
IC. Latitude is the horizon, the east/west axis known as the Ascendant/
Descendant. Viewed from the center of the chart, the Midheaven (top of the chart) is south,
and the IC (bottom of the chart) is north. This is the opposite of the way locations are viewed
on a map, where the top represents north and the left represents west. The astrological chart is
"flipped" because the Ascendant, which is the sign rising over the horizon, rises toward the
Midheaven, just as the sun at dawn (represented by the Ascendant) rises to its high point at
noon (represented by the Midheaven). A note on the Southern Hemisphere: the directions are
reversed. The Midheaven is north, the IC is south, the Ascendant is west, and the Descendant
is east.
Longitude begins at o degrees at Greenwich, England, and moves around the globe to 180
degrees east longitude before it begins to descend from 180 to o degrees west longitude, re-
turning to its starting point at Greenwich. This means that locations from the North Pole to the
South Pole, whether north or south of the equator, have the same longitude. Thus, if a weather
chart for Chicago has a 15 Scorpio Midheaven, so does New Orleans, which is directly south,
and Green Bay, Wisconsin, which is directly north. The Midheaven degrees are the same for
all locations at that longitude, whether they are north or south of the equator. Longitude is
measured in degrees east or west of Greenwich; the International Date Line is 180 degrees
longitude.
However, the degrees on the east/west axis change as the latitude moves north or south of a
point of observation. Viewed from the center of the chart, the Ascendant is the eastern horizon
and the Descendant is the western horizon. Latitude is measured in degrees north or south of
the equator, with the equator being o degrees and the North and South Poles being 180 de-
grees. Locations that are the same number of degrees south of the equator have the same signs
on the Ascendant/Descendant axis, but in reverse; thus, if Virgo is on the Ascendant in the
Northern Hemisphere, Pisces is on the Ascendant in the Southern Hemisphere at the same
number of degrees south of the equator.
Using the same Chicago example, suppose the Ascendant (latitude) is 15 degrees Aquarius.
But New Orleans, farther to the south, has an 18 degree Aquarius Ascendant, while Green
Bay's Ascendant is 13 degrees Aquarius. The degrees increase to the south, because when the
Ascendant reaches 30 degrees Aquarius, it will move to the next or higher sign in the natural
order of the zodiac, which is Pisces, starting over at o degrees.
AnglesandDirections

=== Page 19 ===
The Midheaven, IC, Ascendant, and Descendant are the chart angles. It is these points that are
of utmost importance in astrometeorology because they are true only for a specific location ei-
ther north or south of the equator and either east or west of Greenwich.
The two points of the Midheaven/IC, or north/south (vertical) axis, are two of the angles in a
weather chart. Points to the east are represented by the Ascendant, while those to the west are
found at the Descendant. The houses in between represent these directions: southwest is the
eighth house, northeast is the second house, southeast is the eleventh house, etc. However, it
is most often the horizon and/or meridian that most accurately reflects the weather at the point
of observation.
A weather chart with an active meridian (many planets in the fourth or tenth house or con-
junct the IC from the third house or conjunct the Midheaven from the ninth house) is more
likely to indicate active weather conditions at the designated location. This is even more true
when those planets form opposition aspects to planets in the ninth and tenth houses or when
planets in the first and seventh houses are square the meridian.
Picture a chart for Philadelphia (75 degrees west of Greenwich) that has 15 Taurus on the IC,
with Saturn located in the third house at 15 Aries. The third house indicates an area west of
Philadelphia, so when the point of observation is moved 30 degrees west (the chart is turned
counterclockwise) to Denver, both Saturn and the IC are at 15 degrees Aries. With this simple
calculation, you would know that Denver will experience cloudy skies and temperatures below
normal (Saturn influence).
While this example may appear to be contradictory, it is not. From direction alone, it seems
that the weather would occur to the east of Philadelphia because the third house is in the east-
ern half of the chart. However, when the chart wheel is rotated counter-clockwise, the sign on
the IC moves to the right, toward the Descendant.
Since this is true, when planets are in the third house (the eastern half) of the chart, the
weather represented by those planets is west of the point of observation but moving east to-
ward the location's longitude. And if the planets are located in the ninth house (on the western
side of the chart), they are also moving to the east. In other words, when the chart is turned
counterclockwise, planets in the third house move east (toward the Descendant, the eastern
point of the chart) until they reach the IC. And that is exactly how the majority of weather sys-
tems move in the Northern Hemisphere: west to east.
The following chart illustrates this principle (Weather Charts 3). When the wheel is rotated 15
degrees (counterclockwise), the meridian axis changes from o Pisces to 15 Aquarius. Therefore,
at longitude 90W (St. Louis, Missouri), Uranus will conjunct the IC, with the Sun conjunct the
Midheaven opposing it. It is along this axis that the effects of Sun opposition Uranus (cooler,
cloudy, precipitation) will have maximum impact. Rotating the wheel farther west to 120

=== Page 20 ===
degrees (West Coast) puts Mars on the axis, the point at which its effects will be observed. It
will be cool in St. Louis, but hot in California.
The third/ninth-house opposition of the Sun and Uranus also indicates weather that is ap-
proaching the 75 degree axis (East Coast) from the west. The weather pattern is currently to the
west of the point of observation and moving toward it. Similarly, where the Midheaven/IC is o
degrees Leo/Aquarius (105W), hot weather (Mars) is approaching from the west.
This is how you can determine where the maximum effects of weather indicators will occur.
It is also why, for example, it can be snowing in Kansas City, Missouri, while mild conditions
prevail in Boston, Massachusetts. This concept will be further explored in other chapters, par-
ticularly chapter 3 on national and local weather forecasting.

=== Page 21 ===
Weather Charts y. Latitude and Longitude Example
\ contents]

=== Page 22 ===
CHAPTER 2
Planets, Aspects, and Signs
Weather is identified primarily by the planets, their aspects to each other, and their placement
in the chart. Planets that are within about 4 degrees of the chart angles at a specific location or
those that are square the meridian or horizon at a specific location are the most powerful. The
tighter the orb, the stronger the aspect. Each planet has a particular function in weather fore-
casting, but they all take on additional characteristics when in contact with other planets.
In addition, you should look at the planets to the left of the IC and the right of the Mid-
heaven because they often offer additional information that can be pertinent to a forecast.
Planets to the left of the IC and the right of the Midheaven indicate weather that is approach-
ing from the west, while planets to the right of the IC and to the left of the Midheaven reflect
weather to the east of a location. So if you see Mercury about 7 degrees to the left of the IC in a
lunar phase chart, you could forecast windy conditions later in the week when Mercury crosses
the IC.
Signs
The signs of the zodiac play a less important role in astrometeorology than they do in other
branches of astrology. However, there are some exceptions to that generality, such as the influ-
ence of the water signs (Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces) and their relationship to precipitation, the bar-
ren signs (Aries, Gemini, Aquarius, Libra, Virgo, Sagittarius) as they relate to lower levels of
precipitation, and the inclination of Aries and Leo to higher temperatures. Although the signs
generally have only a secondary effect, at times they can have a compounding one, such as
Neptune (precipitation) in a water sign or Mars (heat) in a fire sign. In addition, a planet in the
sign it rules tends to amplify the meaning of that sign and planet; for example, Mars in Aries
emphasizes the heat factor, while Saturn in Capricorn indicates temperatures that can be far
below normal.
• Aries, ruled by Mars: dry, warm/hot, wind
• Taurus, ruled by Venus: precipitation, moderate temperatures
• Gemini, ruled by Mercury: dry, cool, wind
• Cancer, ruled by the Moon: cold, wet
• Leo, ruled by the Sun: dry, hot
• Virgo, ruled by Mercury: cold, dry, blustery
• Libra, ruled by Venus: dry, cool, breezy, sunny, fair
• Scorpio, ruled by Pluto: cloudy, cool/cold, wet

=== Page 23 ===
• Sagittarius, ruled by Jupiter: dry, fair, warm
• Capricorn, ruled by Saturn: cold, stormy, wet
• Aquarius, ruled by Uranus: cold, dry, high pressure (high or low temperatures)
• Pisces, ruled by Neptune: wet, cool, low pressure
You can draw some correlations by considering the signs from an elemental perspective:
The fire signs—Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius—tend toward warmer, drier weather.
The earth signs—Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn—tend toward cooler weather with precip-
itation.
The air signs—Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius—tend toward windy weather that can be warm
or cool.
The water signs—Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces—tend toward cooler, wetter weather.
In addition to looking at the sign of a pertinent planet in an ingress or lunar phase chart, the
signs on the Midheaven/IC and Ascendant/Descendant axes can provide information about
general weather conditions in a specific location. This is particularly true of the ingress chart,
which is used in part to forecast seasonal trends regarding temperature and precipitation lev-
els.
Planets
Sun
The Sun governs the constitution of the weather and basically has no qualities of its own. In a
way, it functions as a trigger, because when it aspects planets other than the Moon, it generally
indicates the kind of weather associated with the other planet. For example, the Sun with Sat-
urn indicates stormy conditions. There is an exception to this, however. The Sun can indicate
higher temperatures when it's conjunct the IC or Midheaven and does not contact a planet of
cool or wet weather.
Moon
Because the Moon moves so quickly, it functions as a trigger, setting off other aspects. If, for
example, Venus in Cancer is square the meridian in a lunar phase chart, precipitation will
often begin when the transiting Moon aspects Venus. The Moon has no inherent qualities of
its own, but if it's conjunct the lunar phase IC in a sign associated with precipitation, then rain
or snow is more likely to occur during that week.
Mercury
Mercury can also serve as a trigger, activating planetary aspects, because of the speed with
which it moves. Primarily concerned with wind direction and velocity, Mercury is often active

=== Page 24 ===
where weather fronts occur. This is particularly true of the locations where Mercury aspects the
horizon at the ingress; many storm fronts will travel along that horizon line (generally west to
east) during the season. Mercury's effect is modified by the planets it aspects, and the planets
it forms aspects with determine direction and velocity.
When conjunct the IC in an ingress or lunar phase chart, Mercury indicates unseasonably
cool weather and strong winds of varying frequency. This planet is also generally active where
strong thunderstorms, tornadoes, hurricanes, and cyclones occur. (Note; wind direction is al-
ways identified as the direction from which the wind is blowing; for example, a northerly wind
is one that blows from the north to the south.)
Venus
Venus's general tendency is for moisture and, to some extent, clouds. It's also a planet of
humidity, warmer temperatures, and pleasant, sunny weather. If Venus is conjunct the Mid-
heaven in an ingress or lunar phase chart, storms will be centered to the south (Midheaven is
south). When Venus is conjunct the IC, precipitation will be centered to the north, and the
south will experience rising temperatures. This is especially true in winter months, when it can
indicate heavy snow or freezing rain.
Nevertheless, a planet conjunct the IC or Midheaven can indicate weather at the forecast
location, so it's wise to strongly consider its influence when it's placed at either of the longi-
tudinal angles, Venus conjunct the IC can thus indicate precipitation to the north or south,
just as it can when conjunct the Midheaven.
Venus is quite cold when in Aquarius and is drier in the other barren signs (Aries, Libra,
Virgo, Gemini, Sagittarius). When placed in any of the water signs (Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces) or
in Taurus, precipitation can be excessive. Venus (or Neptune) aspecting the longitude or lati-
tude in the center of Tornado Alley at the spring ingress indicates a season with a strong north-
ward flow of warm, moist air from the Gulf, a necessary thunderstorm component.
Mars
Rising temperatures, westerly winds, and evaporation are characteristic of Mars. This planet is
nearly always active during intense heat waves and drought, especially when in Leo. When
Mars is at maximum perigee (its closest approach to the Earth) every fifteen years, summers
are abnormally hot in areas where it aspects the meridian (1971, 1986, 2001, 2016, etc.). When
configured with colder planets (Mercury and Uranus), Mars reflects the heat and energy neces-
sary to generate a storm.
Mars's action is intensified to the north when it occupies the lower meridian in an ingress or
lunar phase chart and to the south when it is conjunct the IC, but as with other planets, this is
not always true. Mars conjunct the Midheaven can just as easily indicate hot, windy weather to

=== Page 25 ===
the north, depending on other aspects. So, again, carefully study aspects and contacts with the
ingress or lunar phase chart. Humidity sometimes rises when Mars is in one of the water
signs or aspects Venus or Neptune. Mars is also associated with windy conditions and is often
active where thunderstorms, hurricanes, and tornadoes occur.
Jupiter
Jupiter indicates air descending from the upper atmosphere and high-pressure systems, mak-
ing it generally a fair weather planet. When in northern declination (see the following section,
"Aspects and Orbs") in Aries or Leo, Jupiter is associated with higher temperatures. In other
configurations, it produces cold weather and high winds. This is because Jupiter amplifies and
expands the influence of the planet it aspects. On its own. and conjunct or square the meridian
or horizon, it indicates elevated temperatures. When configured with Mars or Pluto, Jupiter
can be associated with drier conditions or drought, but also with powerful storms. Jupiter is
often active in thunderstorms because it's associated with descending, cooler air, which thun-
derstorms require.
Saturn
Unlike the quick action of Mars, Saturn is associated with slow-moving weather events and
systems, concentrating its effects in a wider area or region. It is thus indicative of more pro-
longed and widespread storms. Saturn is a low-pressure planet, and its cold, cloudy, wet nature
is centered where it is conjunct or square the meridian. When Saturn is conjunct the IC,
storms tend to shift northward while temperatures rise in the south and southeast. When it is
conjunct the Midheaven, storms are centered to the south as cold air from the north, north-
west, or west moves into southern areas.
Saturn skies vary from partly cloudy to overcast, and this planet is associated with the charac-
teristic counterclockwise air flow of low-pressure systems. When Saturn is in aspect with Mer-
cury or Venus in Capricorn or Aquarius, much colder weather can be expected. Saturn is often
active in cyclones and hurricanes.
Uranus
Uranus indicates high pressure and descending cold air from the Arctic and the upper levels of
the atmosphere. Always indicative of colder temperatures and cold waves in cold months,
Uranus is often active in storms, cyclones, hurricanes, strong thunderstorms, and tornadoes,
and can indicate cold, gusty winds. Uranus conjunct the IC in an ingress or lunar phase chart
indicates unseasonably cold temperatures as well as below-
normal precipitation and isolated droughts (some areas experience above-normal precipitation
because of cold fronts).

=== Page 26 ===
When Uranus is conjunct the Midheaven, the cold, dry air will extend far south, and low-
pressure systems will be to the north. If Uranus is square the meridian, high- and low-
pressure systems converge, developing storms and wind. In warmer seasons, particularly sum-
mer, Uranus is prominent—aspecting the angles—during periods of dry, hot weather, with
cooler, wetter weather occurring to the east or west. Sometimes this is referred to as a "block-
ing high," because the high-pressure system is "parked" in a large region, preventing moist
and cooler air from entering the area. Generally, Uranus represents colder temperatures in
colder seasons and warmer temperatures in warmer seasons.
Neptune
Neptune indicates counterclockwise, ascending air currents and southerly air flow, humidity,
and milder temperatures. Also a planet of low pressure, it is often active in f oggy conditions
and usually has a presence in hurricanes and tornadoes. Depending on the configuration,
Neptune, the ultimate planet of moisture, can indicate squalls, thunderstorms, hurricanes,
tornadoes, and excessive precipitation. Severe flooding and overcast skies often occur where
Neptune strongly aspects the meridian of an ingress or lunar phase chart. Neptune is also
associated with winter and spring thaws. At times, Neptune is nebulous, with some areas re-
ceiving heavy precipitation and other areas very little. Years when Saturn and Neptune are in a
major hard aspect (see the following section, "Aspects and Orbs") often produce precipitation
well above normal and extreme flooding.
Pluto
Pluto increases the intensity of any configuration in which it is involved, and years with a
strong Pluto aspect at an ingress are often characterized as extreme from a weather perspective.
Pluto's effect regarding wind direction and velocity is quite prevalent in tornadoes, hurricanes,
and cyclones. This planet is also indicative of both higher and lower temperatures, intense heat
and cold. When Pluto is in strong aspect with Jupiter, for example, temperatures can be blis-
tering, well outside the norm, and drought is often a major concern.
AspectsandOrbs
In the context of astrometeorology, aspects can be divided into three basic categories—easy,
hard, and neutral—although there are some exceptions. All aspects in each category operate
similarly, the primary difference being their strength.
Aspects vary in strength, so a sextile is similar to but stronger than a trine, and a square is
similar to but stronger than a semisquare. Strength in a weather chart can be defined as the
weather indicated by the aspect a planet makes to the meridian or horizon: a brief shower ver-
sus a downpour, a 5 mph wind versus 330 mph wind, or even a tropical disturbance versus a

=== Page 27 ===
hurricane. So when you see Saturn square the meridian, you can forecast a stronger storm
than when Saturn is semisquare/sesquisquare the meridian.
In order of strength, with the strongest first, the easy aspects in astro meteorology are the sex-
tile, trine, semisextile, and inconjunct. Hard aspects are the opposition, square, semisquare,
and sesquisquare. Neutral aspects are the conjunction and the parallel and contraparallel of
declination. These aspects are classified as neutral because the effect depends on the planets in
aspect. When planets are in both longitudinal and declination aspect, their strength multiplies.
If you see, for example, Venus conjunct and parallel Saturn, storm precipitation levels are likely
to be higher than if the planets were only conjunct.
When viewing easy aspects, you'll need to shift your thinking somewhat, as they don't oper-
ate exactly like easy aspects in a natal chart. In general, easy aspects indicate fair weather, hard
aspects indicate the reverse, and neutral aspects can be either. With weather, though, skies can
be fair under a dominant sextile or trine aspect, but also very cold. Some of the coldest winter
weather is associated with the sextile and sometimes with the trine. Temperatures are low, yet
skies are fair, a combination that many people would not classify as "good weather."
The same can apply to hard aspects. A Sun-Mars sesquisquare in summer can indicate
warmer temperatures and dryness rather than stormy conditions. That's good weather if you
like heat and are planning a trip to the lake, but it's bad weather if your garden plants are
shriveling.
Important point: Generally, if the planets involved in an aspect do not aspect the horizon or
meridian at the forecast location, the weather phenomenon they represent will not occur at that
location; the weather will occur elsewhere, which could be anywhere in the world.
The use of the parallel and contraparallel of declination are valuable in astrometeorology.
You can do a weather forecast without them, but if they aren't used, the intensity of weather
phenomena can be easily missed. Declination can be especially useful in weather forecasting
when planets are on the celestial equator (o degrees of declination) or in maximum declination
(20 degrees or more north or south of the celestial equator). In addition, the parallel or contra-
parallel intensifies longitudinal aspects more than twofold, especially when the planets are also
in conjunction or opposition. Most astrological calculation software can generate an aspec-
tarian that includes the declinations. Ephemerides produced by Astro America and the Rosi-
crucian Fellowship are the only ones that include planetary declination.
A 4-degree orb is allowed for longitudinal aspects to the meridian and horizon and between
planets in the ingress and lunar phase charts. A i-degree orb is used for declinations.
Planets near the horizon or meridian but not necessarily within orb can reveal entire regions
affected by weather phenomena or indicate approaching weather. Approaching weather is
indicated by planets to the left of the IC; if you mentally reverse the chart, viewing the

=== Page 28 ===
Midheaven as south, then approaching weather is indicated by planets to the right of the Mid-
heaven. Venus could, for example, be 6 degrees to the left of the IC in a lunar phase chart and
transit during the week to form a conjunction with the IC; this could then be used to time a
rain forecast.
A i-degree orb is used for transiting planetary aspects. Usually these are the faster-
moving planets (Sun, Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars), which generally act only as they ap-
proach exactitude in their aspects to the meridian or horizon in an ingress or lunar phase
chart. The time frames used in astrometeorology—three months or one week—are too short to
result in much movement of the outer planets (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, Pluto). The
outer-planet configurations are longer term, and the weather phenomena associated with them
are usually triggered by the faster-moving planets. However, when an outer planet aspects an
ingress or lunar phase chart planet or angle within i degree, the weather effect is often more
intense.
Retrograde,Stationary,andZeroorHighDeclinationPlanets
Because the outer planets (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, Pluto) are retrograde during as
much as half their orbit, their retrograde periods have a minimal effect in weather forecasting.
However, these planets have a very strong effect when they are stationing to change direction,
either retrograde or direct.
The opposite is true of Mercury, Venus, and Mars, which take on extremely negative charac-
teristics during their retrograde periods. When these three planets are retrograde, even easy as-
pects to or frorn them should be interpreted in the negative. Mercury retrograde can be asso-
ciated with storm-related events such as power and communication outages, and a retrograde
Venus can indicate increased precipitation. Retrograde Mars can accompany elevated temper-
atures, dryness, or storms.
The effects of all stationary planets (whether stationary direct or stationary retrograde) are
generally negative, especially when they are in aspect to the horizon and meridian.
Planets at o degrees (low declination) or far north or south (20 degrees or more north or
south in high declination) declination also bring those planets into high negative focus. When
seven or more planets are in northern declination, temperatures in the Northern Hemisphere
are higher; when seven or more are in southern declination, temperatures are lower overall in
the Northern Hemisphere. The reverse is true for the Southern Hemisphere. Signs of north-
ern declination are Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, and Virgo; southern declination signs
are Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, and Pisces.
Individual planets are affected by these previously mentioned conditions in these ways;
Mercury's tendency toward wind is increased with precipitation and cooler temperatures in

=== Page 29 ===
autumn and winter.
Excessive humidity and precipitation are characteristic of Venus, with cooler temperatures in
autumn and winter.
Mars indicates atmospheric disturbance in summer and winter, heat waves in summer, and
generally dry air in spring and autumn.
Jupiter is associated with elevated temperatures and amplifies the nature of other planets it
aspects.
Saturn indicates overcast skies, excessive humidity, cooler temperatures, and persistent pre-
cipitation.
Weather phenomena associated with Uranus include cold fronts, colder temperatures (se-
vere cold in winter), frost, storms, cloudy skies, and precipitation.
Although Neptune is still associated with warmer temperatures, humidity, and precipitation,
these periods are ripe for unusual weather occurrences.
Pluto intensifies heat/cold, high winds, and storms.
Eclipses
Eclipses occur between two and seven times each year, but most years have four, sometimes
five, eclipses. Eclipse dates are listed in ephemerides and on various Internet sites and can be
found using astrological calculation software.
When you're studying an ingress chart, always look for the ingress chart longitudes and lati-
tudes that receive a hard aspect from an eclipse, as these locations are often the site of a major
weather event during the succeeding six to twelve months. But major weather events can occur
a month or two prior to an eclipse that aspects an ingress chart, so also look for any upcoming
eclipses within about six months after the ingress. Also check for eclipses that aspect the longi-
tude and latitude in lunar phase charts, looking for eclipse aspects to these charts.
Sometimes one eclipse will be at the sign and degree of the meridian or horizon of an
ingress chart and another eclipse will fall on the meridian or horizon of a lunar phase chart for
the same location, or vice versa. At other times, only one chart is aspected by an eclipse. Those
ingress and lunar phase chart angles that are aspected by one or more eclipses often indicate
the location of powerful weather events.
For example, if Saturn is square the meridian in an ingress chart and an eclipse aspects the
same meridian, storms in that location have the potential to be much stronger. The storm
would be even stronger if another eclipse aspected the horizon in a lunar phase at the same
location, and especially so if Saturn or other storm indicators were active in the lunar phase
chart.
Planetary Aspects

=== Page 30 ===
Use the planetary configurations listed here as guidelines rather than representative of finite
weather phenomena. Much depends on the interaction between the ingress and lunar phase
charts and the transits to both, as well as the climatology of the location. Remember, too, for
example, that if an ingress chart shows heavy seasonal precipitation, even an easy planetary as-
pect aligned with ingress Neptune conjunct the IC could indicate rain.
Again, the planetary aspect must aspect the longitude and/or latitude (almost always both if
there is a strong weather event) of the location in order to reflect a weather event at that loca-
tion.
Sun-Mercury
Easy Aspects: fair in all seasons; breezy in summer and windy in all other seasons; cooler in
spring, summer, and winter.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: precipitation in all seasons; high wind in spring (gales and strong
fronts with Mercury retrograde) and winter (blizzards with Mercury retrograde), breezy in
summer, windy in autumn.
Sun-Venus
Easy Aspects: fair with rising or mild temperatures all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: warm, humid, and showers in spring and summer; cloudy, rainy,
and cooler in autumn; foggy, abundant precipitation, and cooler in winter.
Sun-Mars
Easy Aspects: warmer in spring and autumn, hot in summer, moderate temperature rise in
winter; evaporation in spring and summer, dry in autumn.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: warmer, storms all seasons.
Sun-Jupiter
Easy Aspects: northerly air flow all seasons; warmer and pleasant all seasons.
Hard Aspects: mild to warm all seasons; breezy in autumn and winter; thunderstorms in sum-
mer.
Neutral Aspects: warmer temperatures.
Sun-Saturn
Easy Aspects and Parallel-Contraparallel: partly cloudy in spring and autumn; frost in spring and
autumn; breezy with showers in summer; fair in winter; colder all seasons.
Hard Aspects and Conjunction: low pressure, colder, cloudy, east to northeasterly winds, heavy
precipitation and storms all seasons.

=== Page 31 ===
Sun-Uranus
Easy Aspects: cooler (sudden cold waves possible), fair, and northwesterly winds all seasons.
Hard Aspects: cooler, precipitation and storms, overcast, damp, windy, sudden changes all sea-
sons.
Neutral Aspects: sudden change to cooler, clear; northwesterly winds all seasons.
Sun-Neptune
Easy Aspects: fair, warmer, calm to breezy.
Hard Aspects: fog, warm/hot, misty, humid, squalls, storms, precipitation, variable wind.
Neutral Aspects: warmer, unusual weather with sudden changes, ascending air flow, misty, fog.
Sun-Pluto
Easy Aspects: warmer all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: warmer or colder all seasons; storms all seasons.
Mercury-Venus
Easy, Hard, and Neutral Aspects: gentle breezes (usually southerly), warmer, moderate humid-
ity, partly cloudy all seasons.
Mercury-Mars
Easy Aspects: warm and windy all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: windy with gusts and sudden changes all seasons; thunderstorms
with hail potential in warm seasons, or hot and dry; seasonal temperatures in winter.
Mercury-Jupiter
Easy, Hard, and Neutral Aspects: warmer, fair, moderate northerly winds, cumulus clouds all
seasons.
Mercury-Saturn
Easy Aspects: partly cloudy, cooler all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: increasing cloudiness, low pressure, counterclockwise air flow,
humidity or damp, cooler, precipitation all seasons.
Mercury-Uranus
Easy, Hard, and Neutral Aspects: descending cold dry air, northwesterly wind with gusts, high
pressure, overcast, sudden changes, storms all seasons; hurricanes and tornadoes; hail in
warm months.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: major storms when either planet aspected by Venus, Saturn, Nep-
tune, or Mars; gales and strong fronts all seasons.

=== Page 32 ===
Mercury-Neptune
Easy Aspects: variable winds, sudden changes, warmer, moderate humidity, fair all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: high humidity, warm, cloudy, precipitation all seasons; potential for
fog in cool months; thaws in cold months; tornadoes and hurricanes.
Mercury-Pluto
Easy Aspects: strong winds all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: sudden changes, potential for severe wind damage from
destructive storms and fronts; hail all seasons.
Venus-Mars
Easy Aspects: fair, warmer all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: precipitation and storms all seasons.
Venus-Jupiter
Easy and Neutral Aspects: warmer and fair to partly cloudy all seasons.
Hard Aspects: warmer and cloudy all seasons; precipitation.
Venus-Saturn
Easy Aspects: cooler, partly cloudy to fair all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: overcast, humid/damp, cooler, easterly winds, heavy precipitation,
counterclockwise air flow all seasons; rain turning to sleet or snow in winter; fog in autumn
and spring.
Venus- Uranus
Easy Aspects: clear and cooler all seasons; cool nights with possible frost; crisp in autumn and
spring.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: penetrating cold, overcast, northwesterly winds, and precipitation
(drizzle to heavy) all seasons.
Venus-Neptune
Easy Aspects: warmer and humid all seasons; cloudy and showers in summer.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: warmer, heavy precipitation (usually isolated cloudbursts), and flood
potential all seasons; thaws in cold months.
Venus-Pluto
Easy Aspects: warmer and breezy all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: intense precipitation and windy storms all seasons.

=== Page 33 ===
Mars-Jupiter
Easy Aspects: warmer and dry, drought all seasons.
Hard Aspects: warmer and storms all seasons.
Neutral Aspects: warmer and thunderstorms all seasons.
Mars-Saturn
Easy Aspects: cloudy and windy all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: destructive windy storms, followed by cooler temperatures all sea-
sons.
Mars-Uranus
Easy Aspects: gusty breezes, overcast, and cooler all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: descending cold dry air, and wind and storms all seasons; tornadoes
and hurricanes; hail in warm months; sleet in winter.
Mars-Neptune
Easy Aspects: warm and humid all seasons; fog in cooler months.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: humid, rising moist air, and isolated precipitation all seasons; torna-
does and hurricanes; rain and thaw in winter.
Mars-Pluto
Easy Aspects: hot or cold and windy.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: warmer, storms all seasons.
Jupiter-Saturn
Easy Aspects: cooler and possible precipitation all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: cloudy, storms, low pressure, and below normal temperatures all sea-
sons.
Neutral Aspects: more intense precipitation, low pressure, cooler, and storms all seasons.
Jupiter-Uranus
Easy Aspects: cool, breezy, dry, and fair all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: cooler, storms, higher precipitation, and windy all seasons.
Jupiter-Neptune
Easy Aspects: above normal temperatures, fair, and sunny all seasons; thaw in winter.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: isolated heavy precipitation with flash flood potential, cloudy, and
humid all seasons; mist or fog in cool months.

=== Page 34 ===
Jupiter-Pluto
Easy Aspects: unseasonably warm or cold and dry all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: warm or cold; storms with high winds all seasons.
Saturn-Uranus
Easy Aspects: unseasonably cool all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: cool and storms all seasons.
Saturn-Neptune
Easy Aspects: precipitation, cooler all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: above normal precipitation with possible floods and flash floods,
humid all seasons; cloudy, night fog in spring; cloudy, heavy precipitation, humid in sum-
mer; overcast, chronic heavy rain in autumn; excessive snow, unseasonably cold in winter.
Saturn-Pluto
Easy Aspects: cloudy and windy all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: storms with high winds all seasons.
U r anus-Neptune
Easy Aspects: unseasonably cool and potential for unusual weather all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: unseasonably cool, overcast, humid, gusty wind, and storms all sea-
sons.
Uranus-Pluto
Easy Aspects: windy, overcast, and cool all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: storms with high winds all seasons.
Neptune-Pluto
Easy Aspects: warm, humid, and breezy all seasons.
Hard and Neutral Aspects: warm, humid, wind, and isolated precipitation all seasons.
[contents]

=== Page 35 ===
CHAPTER 3
National and Local Forecasting
You can create a forecast for any location on any date by using basic astrometeorological prin-
ciples and the ingress and lunar phase charts. Any date can be selected, from tomorrow to ten,
fifty, or a hundred or more years in the future. All that's necessary is an ephemeris for the
appropriate time frame and charts calculated for the most recent ingress and lunar phase prior
to the forecast date. An ephemeris lists the date and time of each solar cardinal ingress, eclipse,
and lunar phase, as well as the longitudinal and declination positions of each planet for each
day.
You can also generate this information in astrological software programs, many of which can
also create an ephemeris and a list of aspects to the lunar phase or ingress chart for a desig-
nated time period, as well as a list of transiting planetary aspects.
NationalForecast
The ingress chart is used to forecast the general weather conditions for a country or region (as
well as for a specific location). The season (spring, winter, autumn, or summer) is determined
according to the date for which the ingress chart is calculated. The ingresses, which mark the
beginning of each season, occur on or about June 21 (summer), September 21 (autumn),
December 21 (winter), and March 21 (spring). Each is valid for approximately three months, or
until the next ingress occurs.
When preparing a national forecast, the goal is to develop a general overview of conditions
for the succeeding three months. For example, one possibility for Jupiter square Uranus is an
intense cold front. This does not mean the entire country will experience day after day of in-
tense cold fronts, nor does it mean that the area affected by the square will be visited by an in-
tense cold front each day during the forecast period. Rather, temperatures will tend to be below
normal for the area where the square is in effect when averaged for the three-month period.
The same can be said, for example, of Venus, a planet of moisture. A location where it is
square the meridian might experience an abnormally high level of precipitation, but it would
not necessarily rain every day for three months. However, you could correctly forecast above-
normal precipitation for the season.
Because the outer planets—Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto—move more slowly
than the inner planets, they affect long-term, seasonal trends in weather when they aspect the
meridian or horizon at a given location. They provide many of the underlying weather trends
that are then activated by the inner planets as they transit the zodiac and aspect the ingress and
lunar phase charts. An exception to this rule is the retrograde periods of Mercury, Venus, and

=== Page 36 ===
Mars, as they can have a significant effect on a particular region both by the stations they make
and by revisiting certain degrees in certain signs that aspect the meridian or horizon at the
lunar phase or ingress.
The easiest way to begin to prepare a national seasonal forecast is to create an ingress map
using an astrological mapping program like Solar Maps, included in later versions of Solar
Fire. (Version 9 of Solar Fire now simply calls Solar Maps "Astro-Mapping.") The figure shown
here (National and Local Forecasting 1) is a computer-generated map for the winter 2011
ingress chart. To generate this map, first calculate the ingress (or lunar phase) chart and then
access it in Solar Maps. Use these settings in the Lines menu: Zodiacal (rather than In Mundo)
for Planet/Angles lines; do not use Local Space Lines, Celestial Lines, or Paran Lines.
Although the map might appear overwhelming at first, it's really quite straightforward. The
aspects to the horizon (As and Ds) and the meridian (Mc and Ic) are shown along the top and
bottom and left and right sides of the map. Each aspect has a line drawn to show the locations
it aspects.

=== Page 37 ===
National and Local Forecasting i: Solar Map for Winter Ingress, December 21, 2010
Notice that the horizon lines are slightly arced from northwest to southeast. These lines
often indicate the path that storms and fronts follow as they move across an area, region, or
country, aspecting many different longitudes and latitudes. The meridian lines are vertical,
running north and south along a specific longitude. Always note where the lines intersect,

=== Page 38 ===
especially if you're looking for potential severe weather locations; these are "target" locations.

=== Page 39 ===
25 26
« X 26 X
20 46
28 00 59
n
04°
10
£08 Cf W10 13 39
vjO 58 W04 T 24 24' 00 "00
o '*25 25
S
00° 59 27
«Q rib
14 10' 08' 04
9
m- 16
22 00'
<Q 07 25
fTF 35' 19
National and Local Forecasting 2: Winter Ingress / Natal Chart / December 21, 2010, Tue
5:40 pm CST +6:00 / 40°Noo' ogfWoo'/ Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
It doesn't matter what longitude and latitude you use to calculate the chart, because the hori-
zon and meridian lines shown on the map will be visible for all locations. I use a longitude and
latitude in the middle of the country (95W 40N) to first calculate the ingress chart; then the
mapping program uses this chart to create the map. Using a longitude and latitude for the
middle of the country also gives a quick reference in that if you turn the chart clockwise, the
planets move to the east, and if you turn it counterclockwise, they move to the west.
First, let's look at the ingress aspects as shown in the winter ingress chart for 2010 (National
and Local Forecasting 2) and what they indicate:
• Sun semisquare Venus; fog, rain, cooler temperatures

=== Page 40 ===
• Sun square Uranus: cold, windy, sleet/snow, cold wave
• Sun sextile Neptune: warmer, little wind
• Sun parallel Mars: warmer, windy, storms
• Retrograde Mercury square Jupiter: cloudy, northerly air flow, windy, precipitation
• Retrograde Mercury square Uranus: arctic air mass, high pressure, gusty northwest winds,
cold, cloudy, tornadoes, hail
• Retrograde Mercury sextile Neptune: cooler, windy, variable cloudiness, storms, tornadoes
• Venus sextile Mars: fair, warmer, humid/damp; or precipitation
• Venus semisextile Saturn: cooler, fair to partly cloudy
• Venus sesquisquare Uranus; cold, precipitation, cloudy, northwesterly winds, arctic air
mass
• Venus parallel Neptune: abundant precipitation, cloudy, warmer
• Mars semisquare Neptune: thaw, warmer, fog, low pressure, tornadoes
• Jupiter conjunct Uranus: high pressure, cold, cold front, precipitation, windy, arctic air
mass
• Jupiter semisextile Neptune: warmer, fair, thaw
• Solar eclipse: January 4, 2011, at 13 Capricorn
As is obvious from this list, the weather could be almost anything and everything. So the
next task is to determine which weather pattern will dominate in which location. For that, we
use the map (National and Local Forecasting 1) and its aspects.
Before analyzing the map, though, there are two important considerations to remember.
First, consider the local climatology. Second, the weather is never the same in any location day
after day throughout an entire season. For example, if the ingress map shows heavy precip-
itation in Denver, that doesn't mean it will snow every day of the season. The ingress chart
shows trends and the potential for specific weather events.
Now look at the Uranus conjunct Mc line, which is just to the right of the Mercury square
Mc line. Because both planets aspect approximately the same longitude, temperatures will be
below average in these states (very cold in northern locations), and there is high potential for
severe thunderstorms in southern locations.
The Saturn square Asc line represents the path storms will follow from Montana southeast
to Georgia/Florida, and it crosses the Mercury and Uranus lines in central Illinois. The inter-
section of these lines also reinforces the already present indication of below average temper-
atures. The Mars conjunct Ds, Neptune semisquare Ds, and Venus trine As lines (look above
Montana) also intersect the Mercury and Uranus lines. On their own, these planets indicate
strong thunderstorms, with Venus providing moisture; in combination with the Mercury and

=== Page 41 ===
Uranus lines, severe storms with tornado potential are likely.
In January 2011, there were tornadoes in Mississippi. January also brought a cold wave that
dropped the temperature to -46 F at International Falls, Minnesota, and later in the month,
frigid temperatures into the Deep South (ingress Pluto was square the meridian and Saturn
was aligned in hard aspect with the horizon). The January solar eclipse was also active in this
area because it was aligned with the latitude line that ran from Wisconsin southeast to Al-
abama.
Now look at the West, where Neptune is conjunct Mc (look above Idaho/western Montana)
along a longitude that runs through the mountains. Venus semisquare Ds intersects the Nep-
tune line, as do retrograde Mercury and Jupiter. This region received record snowfall during
the winter of 2011. Notice the other latitude lines to the east of there; Mars, Neptune, Venus,
and Saturn. Storms traveled from the West into the Midwest, including a blizzard at the end of
January/early February, and a major storm in Oklahoma and Arkansas, followed by extreme
cold, dropping the temperature to -31 F in Oklahoma (ingress Pluto was aligned in hard aspect
with the horizon).
It's also important to look at the signs on the horizon and meridian, although planetary as-
pects take priority. Finding the signs on the meridian requires some mental interpolation be-
cause the signs are not shown on the map. This is where the ingress chart calculated for the
middle of the country comes in handy. When in doubt, calculate a chart for several regions in
order to determine where the longitudinal sign changes.
Each degree of longitude (or latitude) equals about 1 degree of a sign. So if you begin at the
middle of the country where 19 Pisces is on the Midheaven, you know that the Midheaven
sign will change to Aquarius 19 degrees to the west, or at about 105W (eastern Montana south
to New Mexico). To the east, the Midheaven sign will change to Aries about n degrees to the
east, or at about 85W (Michigan south to Alabama). You can identify the latitude signs based
on the planetary latitude lines because the chart tells you what sign the planet is in; use the
same method of decreasing or increasing the sign degrees based on the degrees of latitude. It
can be helpful to write the signs and the declinations along the top of the map and along the
latitude lines.
You can also find the Ascendant by using a tables of houses. To do this, first find the page
that has the appropriate Midheaven degree and sign listed at the top. Then move down the
center column to the correct longitude and look to the left or right to find the sign degree
under the Ascendant column.
However, I often find it easier to use an old-fashioned technique: a hand-drawn map. If you
want to do this, use a country map with state or province outlines and write the Midheaven
and Ascendant signs on it along with the ingress planets that aspect them.

=== Page 42 ===
Sign interpretation can be a bit of challenge because you're dealing with two signs for the
horizon—one on the Ascendant and one on the Descendant—and two signs for the merid-
ian—one on the Midheaven and one on the IC. Somewhere in the "middle," the sign influence
will flip from one to the other. For example, in the winter of 2010 ingress chart (National and
Local Forecasting 2), the Sun at o Capricorn is conjunct the latitude line at about 105W 40N,
which you can determine by rotating the chart counterclockwise until you reach the approx-
imate Midheaven of 9 Pisces and then mentally adjusting the latitude degrees. (Keep in mind
that this method is not perfect; it will, however, give you a general idea, which you can always
confirm by calculating another chart.)
So, northwest of the 105W 40N, where Cancer is emphasized, temperatures should generally
be warmer than those to the southeast, where Capricorn is emphasized. This was true because
the southern states had far colder weather than the northern ones during that winter. You can
do the same with the latitude lines, remembering that the Midheaven is south and the IC is
north (in the Northern Flemisphere). In much of this ingress chart, the Pisces (wet) influence
was to the south and the Virgo (dry) influence to the north, which also characterized the winter
weather.
Again, though, the sign influence pales in comparison to the planetary influence. It's far
more influential when a wet planet is in a wet sign, a dry planet in a dry sign, a hot planet in a
hot sign, etc.; at this ingress, Venus, a planet of precipitation, was in wet Scorpio.
It's also a good idea to scan the ephemeris for the succeeding three months to determine
when the inner planets will transit the signs and degrees of the ingress chart planets, because
these transits often trigger weather. It might not be as accurate or as detailed a forecast as one
that incorporates the use of the lunar phase chart, but it nevertheless works fairly well and also
can alert you to look at the lunar phase chart for confirmation. Do the same with the ingress
chart horizon and meridian degrees and signs. For example, you can spot a heat wave by track-
ing the aspects of transiting Mars, particularly the conjunction or square, to the ingress merid-
ian degrees and signs. When a Mercury or Venus retrograde or direct station aspects an
ingress (or lunar phase) meridian, it can indicate a stationary front (a front that is "parked" or
moves very slowly and often brings high levels of precipitation).
January 9-12, 2011, provides a good example to illustrate the effects of transiting planets to
the ingress chart. Transiting Mars moved from 24 to 27 Capricorn and Venus was at 2-6
Sagittarius on those dates, as transiting Saturn moved toward a retrograde station at 17 Libra—
which you can see by quickly scanning the ephemeris shown here (National and Local Fore-
casting 3). During these few days, a storm moved from the South to the Northeast along the
East Coast of the United States.
Transiting Saturn aspected the ingress horizon in Georgia and the ingress meridian in the

=== Page 43 ===
Northeast, transiting Mars aspected the ingress horizons from South Carolina to New York,
and transiting Venus aspected many of the same locations through semisquare aspect. Tran-
siting Mars was also sextile a transiting Jupiter-Uranus conjunction and semisextile transiting
Neptune. Just from these aspects you would know to check the lunar phase charts for more
information. Note also how the transiting planets indicate the direction in which the storm
traveled. The ingress Ascendant in the South was 24 Capricorn, and in New York it was 27
Capricorn. The ingress Midheaven in the Northeast was 17 Aries, and Venus aspected the
ingress horizons and meridians by sesqui-square (17-21 Capricorn) and the ingress latitude in
many Southern locations by trine. Note that the storm traveled the path of the hard aspects
rather than the easy one (trine).

=== Page 44 ===
04 0S:S2 131839 O Sollr Edipic (nuf 0.BS8) January 2011
Day S. T.
h in
o Hirv#
01 Sa
02 Su 03 Mo 04 T« 05 Wc 06 Jh 07 fr 08 Sa
09 So 10 Mo 11 Tu 12 VMr 13 Hi 14 Fr 15 Sa
16 Su 17 Mo 18 1u 19 Wp 20 Th 21 Fr 22 Sj
23 Su 24 Mo 25 Tu 26 27 Th 28 fr 29 Sa
30 Su 31 Mo
06 41 13
06 4 5 09 06 49 06 06 S3 02 06 S6 59 07 00 56 07 04 52 07 08 49
07 12 45 07 16 42 07 20 38 07 24 3S 07 28 31 07 32 28 07 36 2S
10B 12 10
11 13 20 12 14 31 13 IS 42 14 16 S3 15 1803 16 19 14 17 20 24
21 34 22 43 23 S2 25 00 26 08 27 IS 28 22
07 07 07 07 07
40 21 18 48 14 52 II 56 07 08 00 04 08 04 00
08 07 57 08 11 54 08 IS 50 08 19 47 08 23 43 08 27 40 08 31 36
08 3S 33 08 39 29
25 29 28 26 30 33 27 31 38 28 32 42 29 33 46 00* 34 48 01 3S SO
36 52 37 S3 38 54 39 54 40 54 41 S3 42 S2
43 SO 44 47
298i 13 S3
12 38 24 25 50 II 0815 48 38 21 33 2S 04 ■ Ol 45 16 23 28 28 31 10
I0X 30 II 22 23 34 OTP IS 06 16 09 06 28 10 16 100 23 22 22 S3 01
OSB 43 12 18 56 54 02^ 35 33 16 38 27 Olfi 02 28 IS 42 05 009 30 OS
IS 18 31 29 59 58 14A 28 30 28 40 IS 128.33 29 26 08 14 09/ 25 45
22 27 S2 0518 16 30
19/ 50
20 20 21 21 22 23 24
25 26 27 28 29 00 IS 01
03 04 05 06 08 09 10
12 13 15 16 18 19 21
22 23
09 35 08 46 30 19 12
09 09 12 18 27 37 SO
04 20 37 S6 16 37 59
22 47 12 38 04 32 00
30 59
238. 34
24 32 25 30 26 29 27 28 28 28 29 28 00/ 29
01 30 02 32 03 33 04 36 05 38 06 41 07 44
08 48 09 52 10 56 12 00 13 OS 14 10
16 20 17 26 18 32 19 38 20 45 21 SI 22 S8
24 OS 25 12
19 09 19 SS 20 42 21 28 22 IS 23 02 23 48
24 3S 25 22 26 08 26 55 27 42 28 29
0O« 03 00 49 01 36 02 23 03 10 03 57 04 44
05 31 06 19 07 06 07 SI 08 40 09 27 10 14
11 02 II 49
26X 33
26 41 26 49 26 58 27 06 27 15 27 24 27 33
27 42 27 51 28 01 28 10 28 20 28 30 28 40
28 SO 29 00 29 10 29 20 29 31 29 42 29 52
OOT 03 00 14 00 25 00 36 00 47 00 59 01 10
01 22 01 33
16 42 16 45 16 47 16 49 16 52 16 54 16 56
16 58 16 59 17 01 17 03 17 04 17 06 17 07
17 08 17 09 17 10 17 II 17 II 17 12 17 13
17 13 17 13 17 14 17 14 17R 14 17 13 17 13
17 13 27 54 17 12 27 57
26X 58
26 59 27 00 27 02 27 03 27 05 27 06 27 08
27 10 27 II 27 13 27 IS 27 17 27 19 27 20
27 22 27 24 27 27 27 29 27 31 27 33 27 35
27 37 27 40 27 42 27 44 27 47 27 49
26«44
26 46 26 48 26 49 26 SI 26 S3 26 55
26 58 27 00 27 02 27 04 27 06 27 08 27 10
27 12 27 14 27 16 27 18 27 20 27 22 27 24
27 26 27 29 27 31 27 33 27 35 27 37 27 39
27 41 27 44
0518 20 0218 42
02 43 02 43 02S 43 02 43 02 42 02 41 02 39
02 38 02 36 02 36 WO 36 02 36 02 38 02 40
02 42 02 43 02R 43 58 [02 42 00 02 04
02 39 02 35 02 31
02 26 02 21 02 17 02 15 02 14 020 14 02 IS
02 16 02R 16
DaU tor Juiian Day Ayanamu SVP X 0 Mean
01-01.2011 2455562.50 24 00 55 OS X 06 40 02 IS 18 R
• f> PHASI5 OO
04 09:03 O 131S39 12 11:31 C 19 21:22 O 26 12:58 O
2ITS4 29027 061.13
Ai"KTA??fAN 01 02:31 3 ■ O 03:56 X U tf 02 07:22 5 * Jl 14:03 X <f 7 03 01:45 3 tt Y 01:50 X a * 02:09 3 □ V 17:42 X if T 20:48 X U <f 21:37 X 11 O
04 08:28 9 □ V 12:52 H <f V 13:34 9 A V 13:40 9 A h 15.-01 D □ h 17:49 X II ? 23:50 X <f if 05 0*59 » « f 10:30 X * ¥ 10:43 3 tt * 12:16 3 M 9 06 01:01 2 II 9 20-J9 5 ii y
07 01*0 X A h 12:31 9 / 1401 o o h 14:44 3*9 20:51 X <f * 08 04 .17 X O 9 14:09 3 * y 17:37 3 II h 09 05:22 3 II 06032 3 K V 17:20 3 * O
10 00:16 3 8V 01:14 3 8 1
IAST ASflCT 3 1NGKCSS Day H m Day h m 31 19:58 01 01:22 / 03 02O9 03 07:39 IS OS 12:16 05 16:08 m 07 20:51 08 02:57 X 10 11:12 10 15:24 T 13 02:47 13 03:37 0 IS 1247 IS 13:23 D 17 17:58 17 19:30 0 19 21:27 19 22:17 Si 21 18 59 21 23:11 9 23 20:09 24 00:00 a 25 22:05 26 02:16 I 28 03:01 28 06:55 / 30 10:11 30 14:04 v
06:26 3 M cf 16 06X18 3 9 08:20 3 □ 9 20:47 3 A h 09:44 X <f ¥ 17 14:42 3 A y 11:12 3^1 1SXM3 3 □ V 13:23 3 8 h 17:58 3 0 1 20^)1 9 ■ O 21:57 O * V ?0toi 9 * y 21:58 9 » y 72:28 3 A 9 18 05:46 3 <P 9 23:06 9 U <f 05:46 3 cf y 05:50 9 cf y 11 00:13 9 □ V 06:46 3 8 9 02:54 3 □ y 20:37 9 □ 1 19 00:54 3 □ t) 12 01:48 3 h 04.-02 3 8 cf 10:26 3 8 y 05:39 3 8 O 10:30 * V 14:21 3 8 9 21:52 3 * y 16:12 3 8 y 23:00 3 □ Cf 18.-09 3 A V 13 02:47 3 A 9 21:27 3 A 1 11:25 9 « 22:39 O * 1 15:00 3 A y 20 03:43 3 <P <f 15:21 1 ■ V 10:19 O ■ 18:00 3 8 9 21:18 3 A 9 23:36 3 8 y 23:26 3 8 y 21 02:26 3 * h 14 00:36 <f * 1 18^9 3 cf y 19:21 3 8 O 20:11 3 8 cf 22 09:01 3 A y 15 03:16 3 A O 11:02 3 8 1 08.-06 3 □ r 17:11 1 T 08:26 3 M V 18:34 9 II O 09:35 3 8 9 18:44 3 A 9 11:02 3 *1 21:21 3 8V 12:47 3 A <f 23 00:30 3 8 1 22:42 <f ■ 01:49 3 0 9
DICLINATION O 3> 9 9 cf * h y y
01 is 23S03 22SSO 20S 11 ISS 17 23SIO 025 32 04S19 OlS 53 135 03 18SSO
02 S* 22 SO 24 07 20 21 IS 30 23 03 02 29 04 20 01 S3 13 03 IB SO 03 Mo 22 S2 24 OO 20 30 IS 44 22 17 92 25 04 21 01 52 13 02 18 SO 01 «u 22 47 22 3S 20 39 IS S7 22 SO 02 n 04 21 01 Si 13 02 IS SO 05 Wr 22 40 20 02 20 SO 16 10 72 43 92 If 04 22 01 SI 13 01 IB SO 06 Th 22 34 16 U 21 01 16 24 22 36 02 14 04 23 01 SO 13 00 18 SO 07 »r 72 26 12 27 21 12 16 37 22 28 02 II 04 23 01 49 13 00 18 SO 04 SJ 22 19 07 S^ 21 24 16 SO 22 2i 02 07 04 24 01 49 12 59 18 SO
09 VJ 22 11 03 07 21 IS 17 03 22 13 02 03 04 24 01 48 12 58 18 49 10 M0 22 02 01 21 44 17 16 22 Ol 01 S9 04 25 01 47 12 SB 18 49 II Is 21 S3 06 30 21 S7 17 28 31 16 01 SS 04 25 01 47 12 S7 18 49 12 Wr 21 «4 II 03 2 2 07 17 41 21 47 01 Si 04 2S 01 46 12 54 IS 49 13 16 21 34 IS 14 22 17 17 53 31 38 01 47 04 26 01 45 12 56 IS 49 14 H 21 24 18 S2 22 26 IS OS 31 29 01 43 04 26 01 44 12 SS 18 49 IS SJ 21 13 21 44 22 34 IS 17 21 19 01 39 04 26 01 43 12 54 IS 49
16 Su 21 02 23 34 22 42 IS 2B 21 10 01 35 04 26 01 43 12 54 IS 49 17 20 SI 24 13 22 48 18 39 31 00 01 31 04 26 01 42 12 53 18 49 IS lu 20 39 23 21 22 S4 18 SO 20 49 01 26 04 27 01 41 12 52 >8 49 19 VW 20 27 21 04 22 S9 19 01 20 39 01 22 (M 27 01 40 12 52 18 49 20 T>i 20 14 17 29 23 03 19 11 20 28 01 IS 04 27 01 39 12 51 18 49 21 ff 70 02 12 43 23 OS 19 21 20 18 01 13 04 27 01 38 12 SO IS 49 22 is 19 at 07 Ol 23 07 19 30 20 06 01 09 04 27 01 37 12 SO 18 49
23 Su 19 >4 01 12 23 07 19 40 19 SS 01 04 04 26 01 37 12 49 If 49 24 Mo 19 20 04 S 44 23 07 19 48 19 41 01 00 04 26 01 36 12 44 18 49 2S In 19 06 10 24 73 OS 19 S7 19 32 00 SS 04 26 01 35 12 47 18 49 26 vw IS Si IS 21 21 02 20 OS 19 20 00 SI 04 26 01 34 12 47 18 49 27 16 IS 36 19 23 » SS 20 12 19 OS 00 46 04 26 01 33 12 46 18 49 28 If IS 21 22 16 22 S2 20 70 18 55 00 41 04 25 01 32 12 45 18 49 29 Sa IS OS 23 S2 22 4S 20 26 18 42 00 37 04 25 01 31 12 44 18 49
30 Su 17 49 24 04 22 37 20 33 18 30 00 32 04 21 01 30 12 44 IS 49 31 Mo 17 32 23 03 22 28 20 38 18 17 00 27 04 24 01 29 12 43 «S as
0*. 7 3 M 1 11:05 X ■ y 03:01 X A ¥ S Chiron 11:10 3 II V 22:05 X A Y 06:31 X n 9 01 Oec. 06 5 54 1*08 9 II cf O II 08*9 X A * 03 27*43 19:19 9 * 1 26 03:53 r 12:18 cf II y W 27 53 20X>9 3 cf V 06:11 h SR 22:35 5 * O 0< 28 03 2338 3 II h 09:58 9 □ r> 29 01:34 ^ * cf 28 13 12:58 X * y 14:17 ^ * h 28 24 24 00:23 3 f 1 16*9 X O <f 28 35 06:26 3 A o 19X)6 X M O 30 03:18 X <f 9 28 6 10:08 3 C y 20X38 X II y 09:46 I * y 28 57 11-00 3 A cf 22:18 X II cf 10:11 9 □ V 29 09 16:53 3) □ 1 30 29 21 25 0130 3 □ 9 27 06:06 X N 9 31 02:02 X if f 04:37 3 <f h 10:51 X * 9 06:37 S 11 9 07:23 3 * 9 28 02:39 3 □ y 22:40 SOt)
National and Local Forecasting j: January 2011 Ephemeris Page
LocalForecasting
Local forecasting is tough and can really test your forecasting skills, particularly if you're

=== Page 45 ===
looking at a specifi c date. It requires close examination of the ingress and lunar phase charts as
well as the transits, and even then it's easy to miss the triggering aspect or to be off on the tim-
ing, as this example for Long Pond, Pennsylvania, on August 7, 2011, illustrates (National and
Local Forecasting 4); rain began at 3:20 pm.
The summer ingress chart for Long Pond (inner wheel) had several planetary configurations
that indicated rain and storm potential during the season. Most obvious is the Uranus-Pluto
square, with Pluto aligned with the meridian and Uranus aligned with the horizon and merid-
ian, along with the Sun conjunct the Midheaven, creating a T-square configuration. In itself,
Uranus square the meridian is a thunderstorm and weather front aspect, and it's even stronger
because Saturn was contraparallel Uranus (storms).
Also in this chart was a Mercury-Saturn square, which was widely in aspect to the Uranus-
Pluto square, but neither Mercury nor Saturn aspected the meridian or horizon. Mars was
trine/sextile the horizon and semisextile/inconjunct the meridian. The Sun was parallel Venus,
and Venus was parallel the Midheaven and Ascendant, which indicated an increased potential
for moisture in Long Pond.
At the lunar phase (middle wheel of National and Local Forecasting 4), Uranus was still
square Pluto, with both planets aspecting the meridian (semisquare/sesquisquare). Mars was
conjunct the ingress Midheaven; it was also semisquare/sesquisquare the lunar phase merid-
ian, and square Uranus, opposition Pluto, and trine Neptune, which was opposition retrograde
Mercury (rain). Mars was sextile retrograde Mercury (wind), also aspecting the ingress merid-
ian and horizon.
Also at the lunar phase, the Sun was conjunct Venus (rain), which was square Jupiter (rain)
and also sextile Saturn (cloudy skies), which was in turn sesquisquare Neptune (rain). These
aspects gain added emphasis because the Sun and Venus were parallel and both were contra-
parallel Pluto; all three were in declination aspect with the lunar phase meridian.
Nearly every aspect at the lunar phase forecasted rain, and this only increased with the tran-
sits of August 7 (outer wheel of National and Local Forecasting 4). Retrograde Mercury was still
opposition Neptune and in aspect with the ingress meridian and horizon. Venus had advanced
to a nearly exact sextile with lunar phase Saturn and was still parallel the lunar phase Mid-
heaven, activating that point.

=== Page 46 ===
National and Local Forecasting 4
Inner Wheel=SMmmer Ingress / Natal Chart / June 21, 2011, Tue / 1:18 pm EDT +4:00 Long
Pond, PA / 4i°Nojti2" 075oW27'48" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Middle Wheel=lMnor Phase / Natal Chart / August 6, 2011, Sat / 7:08 am EDT +4:00 Long
Pond, PA / 4i°No3'i2" 075°W27'48" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=i?flm / Natal Chart / August 7, 2011, Sun / 3:20 pm EDT +4:00 Long Pond, PA
/ 4TN0J12" 075oW27'48" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
There were two transits that indicated the timing for rain, but both required much attention
to detail in order to identify within a minute when rain would begin. The first was the tran-
siting Moon at 2 Sagittarius 16, which was sextile/trine the ingress horizon and inconjunct/
semisextile the ingress meridian. The Moon formed an inconjunct/semisextile with Mars and

=== Page 47 ===
was just past lunar phase Mars and approaching transiting Mars. All of these aspects were
close but not exact, and notice that the Moon had already passed its aspect to retrograde Mer-
cury opposition Neptune, a major rain aspect.
It was the transiting Ascendant at 3 Sagittarius 13 in a nearly exact inconjunct to the ingress
Midheaven that indicated the timing; this was the triggering aspect.
Much easier than forecasting the onset of weather within a few minutes is to identify a time
frame. It was clear that there would be rain on August 7, 2011, and you could have done well by
selecting a window of about an hour from 3:00 to 4:00 pm as the Moon formed an exact aspect
with the lunar phase Mars-Midheaven conjunction and the ingress Ascendant. That would
have been more than adequate for most events, and you could have refined the timing on the
go by checking local radar.
[contents]

=== Page 48 ===
CHAPTER 4
Wind
From winter blasts of frigid northern air to the gentlest of summer breezes, wind is often asso-
ciated with changing weather patterns. Wind is created by tight pressure gradients, which are
shown on weather maps. They're the curving lines drawn around the center of a high- or low-
pressure system or in the vicinity of a weather front. When there are many lines close together,
the wind velocity is higher; when there are fewer lines, the wind velocity is lower. High pres-
sure pushes air toward low pressure, and wind velocity increases either as the two systems
move closer together or as the contrast in pressure between the high- and low-pressure sys-
tems increases.
Barometric pressure typically ranges from 980 mb (very low) to 1049 mb (very high), but
there is no cutoff number to determine high or low pressure. Wind velocity is also determined
by friction as the air moves around buildings, trees, and geologic formations such as hills and
mountains. There is much less friction over water than over land, because there is little to slow
the movement of air. The Coriolis effect (related to the spinning of Earth) also contributes to
wind velocity.
Air moves clockwise around high-pressure systems and counterclockwise around low-
pressure systems. High pressure generally results in favorable weather, while low pressure is
associated with stormy conditions.
In a high-pressure system, descending cold air is warmed by the surrounding higher-
pressure air. Water in the air evaporates and becomes vapor, but the warming keeps the vapor
from condensing into clouds and precipitation. The opposite is true with a low-pressure sys-
tem. The rising air cools and condenses water vapor into clouds and precipitation. The greater
the pressure differences between the high- and low-pressure systems, the greater the temper-
ature differences between two locations. You've probably experienced this when a cold front
moves through and the temperature drops significantly.
Earth is a complex weather machine with major pressure patterns around the globe, such as
the Icelandic Low, Aleutian Low, Asian Highlands, Bermuda High, and Pacific High. These
pressure patterns, global wind patterns, and temporary, constantly changing high- and low-
pressure systems are central to daily weather. Wind patterns include the jet stream, which has
a significant effect in moving weather around the globe.
The jet stream travels from west to east in bands of high-speed, high-altitude (250 mb or
35,000 feet) wind that range from 80 to more than 170 mph. Swooping north and south and
curving around massive high- and low-pressure systems, the jet stream defines the boundaries
between warmer and colder air on the earth's surface. In winter months, the jet stream drops

=== Page 49 ===
farther south, bringing cold Arctic air; in the summer, it recedes to more northern latitudes.
However, when the jet stream drops far south in warmer months, temperatures are colder
than normal; when it travels in a more northerly pattern during the winter months, southern
(and sometimes northern) temperatures are warmer than normal. The strongest winds within
the jet stream are found in jet streaks, areas where the upper air converges or diverges, result-
ing in cyclonic intensification (divergence and lowering surface pressure) or weakening (con-
vergence and rising surface pressure).
Jupiter and Uranus are the planets of high pressure; Saturn and Neptune signify low pres-
sure. Uranus dominates when cold air descends from the upper atmosphere.
Mercury, the most prominent planet of wind, manifests according to the character of the
planets it aspects. However, other planets—Mars, Uranus, and Pluto—and planetary configu-
rations also indicate wind. When any of these planets (Mercury, Mars, Uranus, Pluto) are on
the angles or square the meridian, the forecast includes wind, the intensity and nature of
which depends on the aspects they make and which planets are involved.
Wind direction changes depending on which planets are active. The general wind directions
associated with the planets are as follows: southerly, Venus and Neptune; northerly, Jupiter;
northwesterly, Uranus; easterly, Saturn; westerly, Mars and Pluto; and variable, Neptune.
Uranus indicates downslope winds, while Neptune is associated with an upslope air flow.
A counterclockwise air flow, such as that found in tornadoes, extratropical cyclones, and
hurricanes, is reflected in aspects with Saturn, Neptune, or Uranus. Venus and Neptune indi-
cate breezes and Uranus signals erratic gusts. Mars and Pluto are associated with higher veloc-
ities, while Neptune can indicate little or no air movement. Retrograde Mercury, especially
when stationary direct or retrograde and strongly placed in an ingress or lunar phase chart,
often indicates high wind.
In this chapter, we'll look at the planetary configurations as they relate solely to wind. Wind
as a storm component is included in succeeding chapters.
December14,2002,Reno,Nevada
Reno, Nevada, experienced winds ranging from 24 to 60 mph on December 14, 2002, includ-
ing an 82 mph gust, the strongest ever recorded in the area. The winds, which were at their
fastest between 3:00 and 4:00 pm, blew shingles off roofs and toppled trucks, power lines, bill-
boards, carports, trees, and fences.
This wind event is a good example of the power of retrograde Mercury. The planet of wind
was retrograde at 9 Libra at the autumn ingress (inner wheel of Wind 1), where it was sextile
Jupiter and the IC. Also important was Mercury's sesquisquare to Uranus, a high-wind and
gust aspect, particularly with retrograde Mercury. In addition, Saturn was trine Uranus and

=== Page 50 ===
semisquare Jupiter and the IC, bringing in the potential for the lower barometric pressure
associated with tight pressure gradients.
On its own, the lunar phase chart of December n, 2002 (middle wheel of Wind 1), shows
maximum potential for a weather event. Mars (wind) was conjunct Venus and the Midheaven
at 4-7 Scorpio, and all were square Neptune. Venus and Neptune are both associated with a
southerly air flow, and winds blew from the south all day. In addition, Venus, Mars, and Nep-
tune indicate warmer temperatures; Reno had a high that day of 63 F, almost 20 F above the
average for December 14. The same date saw the jet stream far north over the northwestern
United States, reflecting the warmer temperatures in Reno.
Another clear sign that there would be a wind-related weather event in Reno was the lunar
phase Ascendant at n Capricorn. Ingress retrograde Mercury was square and Uranus
sesquisquare this point. And, of course, the lunar phase Ascendant was semisextile/
inconjunct the ingress Midheaven/IC-Jupiter, linking the two charts. But even this was not
enough to suggest the high-wind emergency that occurred, or at least not its timing. So we look
to the transits of December 14, the date of the event (outer wheel of Wind 1).

=== Page 51 ===
o /w 26
40 20 T X VI <Y) c*. 40 12
:-iiv
08 09 2r> 27
12- T 19 .•-:f As 53 22 55
06' CM
,9-"
OH 2:V HO' ^22*0 46 ?y 35' ^19"0
38
,5"t' 06°
 H a* _ 16-m,™ ^ 38'
06° As28' » 06'
n
7 . 06*''
3^^ ' ^fiT06 ^ 27""Wo m. PS" m'04o.1 . 9
3
OS .n M Mc 35 la^g. (Tb
(f
' 00" « 15- 0?
>'o
■vy cA 10
V 27'
n or
53 22 18
4
55'
20 40' 17* cn 03 40 12
^26' 13
Wind i
Inner Wheel=/\utumn Ingress / Natal Chart / September 22, 2002, Sun / 9:55:24 pm PDT
+7:00 Reno, NV/ j90Nji'47" 1190 / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Middle Wheel=LMnflr Phase / Natal Chart / December 11, 2002, Wed / 8:48:55 am PST +8:00
Reno, NV/ J90Nji'47" n^W^S^G" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Wirtd / Natal Chart / December 14, 2002, Sat / 3:00 pm PST +8;oo Reno, NV /
390N3i,47" iig°W48'46" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Three days after the lunar phase, Mercury had advanced to 9 Capricorn, where it was con-
junct the lunar phase Ascendant and, most important, square ingress retrograde Mercury,
making a strong connection between the two charts and activating the potential of the ingress
Mercury. At the same time, transiting Mars and Venus were sextile the lunar phase Ascendant,

=== Page 52 ===
another indicator of southerly winds. Another high wind aspect, Mars parallel Uranus, was
within a i-degree orb at the lunar phase, and exact on December 14.
This example illustrates another factor to look for when comparing ingress and lunar phase
charts. Notice that on the date of the wind event, Uranus had returned to its position at the
ingress (and also repeating the Mercury-Uranus aspect at the ingress), having retrograded and
turned direct in the interim. This phenomenon, along with transiting planets triggering an as-
pect in the ingress chart, is often seen at the time of weather events.
The wind abated at about 6:00 pm, when the Moon completed its transit of Aries and en-
tered Taurus. The Moon's sign change is often an excellent timer of the beginning or ending of
a weather event.
These charts illustrate another principle in weather forecasting. Notice Neptune conjunct the
ingress Midheaven at 9 Aquarius. When the chart is turned counterclockwise (representing a
location west of Reno), Neptune is exactly conjunct the Midheaven, and lunar phase and tran-
siting Venus and Mars in Scorpio are square that planet and point. At the time that Reno was
experiencing high winds, the California and Oregon coasts were being drenched with rain
accompanied by high winds. Some areas received more than nine inches in twenty-four hours.
So even if you looked only at the charts for Reno, you could easily predict significant precip-
itation to the west.
SaltLakeCity, Utah, AprilS ,1964
Sixty mile per hour winds blew in Salt Lake City, Utah, on April 3, 1964, pushing trucks and
trailers off highways. Pilots flying in the vicinity reported unusual turbulence and strong wind
over the mountains that surround the city.
The potential for a windy season is apparent in the spring ingress chart (inner wheel of
Wind 2), with Mercury square the meridian and Uranus sextile/trine the IC/Midheaven. Two
aspects to Uranus indicate wind potential as well; Mercury inconjunct Uranus (gusts) and
Jupiter sesquisquare Uranus (high wind). Pluto's wind-making potential was expanded by its
high declination (20N01) and the sesquisquare from Jupiter. The Moon, parallel the IC, was
square Mars (wind) and trine Saturn (low pressure), which was semisquare the Ascendant.
The lunar eclipse prior to the ingress (December 30, 1963) occurred at 8 Cancer, conjunct the
ingress IC. These aspects indicated the potential for high wind, but an appropriate lunar phase
chart and aspects by the transiting planets were also necessary to confirm that a weather event
would actually materialize.
Mercury's placement in the lunar phase chart of March 27, 1964 (middle wheel of Wind 2),
doubled the effects of the ingress Mercury. In the lunar phase chart, Mercury was conjunct the
Descendant and square the meridian, and formed two aspects to Uranus: sesquisquare and

=== Page 53 ===
parallel (high wind, gusts). Jupiter was also square the meridian and was parallel Mercury and
Uranus (high wind), which in turn was semisquare the Ascendant and sesquisquare the IC.
Uranus also formed an inconjunct with the Sun (gusty winds). The Mercury-Uranus-Jupiter
combination brought a high-pressure system to the area with the low pressure necessary to
produce tight pressure gradients and the increased wind velocity associated with Mars
sesquisquare Neptune, an aspect that indicates a rapidly falling barometer. At the solar eclipse
of January 14, 1964, the Sun and Moon were at 23 Capricorn 43, conjunct the lunar phase IC.
In addition to the presence of the Mars-Saturn semisextile (wind) in the lunar phase chart,
this aspect also connected the two charts because Mars had advanced far enough by the date of
the lunar phase to aspect ingress Saturn, which was semisquare the ingress Ascendant. Lunar
phase Jupiter was sextile the ingress Moon, activating the lunar aspects in the ingress chart.
However, the major planetary configuration between the lunar phase and ingress charts that
indicated ideal conditions for a high-wind event was the lunar phase Sun conjunct the ingress
Mercury, with both square the ingress meridian. To further connect the two charts, lunar
phase Saturn was in a closer semisquare to the ingress Ascendant than it was at the ingress.
On April 3, 1964 (outer wheel of Wind 2), the transiting Sun at 14 Aries triggered Saturn
(low pressure) in all three charts through a semisquare. Jupiter (high pressure) at 28 Aries was
sesquisquare Pluto (high wind) in high declination in all three charts and parallel Uranus
(high pressure and high wind). Mars was at o degrees, transitioning from southern to north-
ern declination, which often occurs at a weather event because it intensifies the effects of a
planet. In this case, the effect was compounded because Mars was parallel the ingress Sun
(unsettled atmosphere, windy). Transiting Mercury was contraparallel ingress and lunar phase
Saturn (wind, low pressure).

=== Page 54 ===
08° VJ
16 25
00 57 7H-
13
55 22
Ob /w
29 13"
17* + 01
1)3 18
DO 1,'
a 04 " ^ 08 OH' 29°
Mcos 10 », 42 *56 8^ 11 15 23
Oo 18^20°A$ " 27" T 02 fo^fYy •12
• N 94^39' 1 1
7
T 6 ' 27" ^07° Jj ^ 21°T47' • ^24
05' 05' 36- ■ 2 ^24" .y; 28 2rT58' " V - 14
9 • 18' 12 29 48 rt 28 y 02 06° w ■ 09-frp IIK 42' 1 T "r12° T ' D 26" 35
06
^ 55' 22 47' 39
b •Q 29 23° 13 29 o
Mc
23 16 25'
E 57 00
08° Cg 02'
Wind 2lnner Wheel=Spring Ingress / Natai Chart / March 20, 1964, Fri / 7.10 am MST
+7:00 Salt Lake City, UT/ 40^45'39" 111° W53 '25" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean
Node
Middle Wheel=iwnar Phase / Natal Chart / March 27, 1964, Fri / 7:48 pm MST +7.00 Salt
Lake City, UT/ 40^45'39" iiTW^'2^" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Wind / Natal Chart / April 3, 1964, Fri / 12:00 pm MST +7.00 Salt Lake City,
UT/4o0N45,39" iiFWjj'zj" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Contacts from transiting planets to ingress chart angles (longitude and latitude of Salt Lake
City) were numerous: transiting Sun at 14 Aries conjunct and parallel ingress Ascendant, tran-
siting Saturn at 1 Pisces semisquare ingress Ascendant, and the Moon contraparallel ingress

=== Page 55 ===
IC. The lunar phase IC was in parallel aspect with the transiting Moon.
The significant transiting planetary configurations that day were the same as those to the
lunar phase and ingress charts with one significant exception: Mercury at 2 Taurus semisextile
Mars at 4 Aries. On its own, that aspect excites westerly winds, but in combination with the
Mercury-Uranus sesquisquare and parallel in the lunar phase chart, wind velocity reached gale
strength (55 to 63 mph).
SouthernCalifornia,November30,2011
A well-known weather phenomenon in Southern California is the Santa Ana winds. These
strong downslope winds blow through mountain passes in their descent from the Mojave
Desert when a high-pressure system, along with its clockwise air flow, dominates to the east.
The strongest Santa Ana winds occur when there is a low-pressure system just to the north.
The relatively short distance between the two systems typically increases wind velocity to 40 to
50 mph, with gusts in some places of as much as 100 mph. The descending cold, dry air of the
high-pressure system is heated in its descent and arrives as a dry, hot wind, warming 5 degrees
for every 1,000 feet of altitude it drops. These high-velocity dry winds often fuel intense fires.
The charts shown (for San Bernardino) are representative of those throughout the affected
area.
The possibility of destructive Santa Ana winds was apparent in the autumn ingress chart of
2011 (inner wheel of Wind 3). In fact, a National Weather Service employee said the area had
not seen such a strong Santa Ana in more than a decade. More than a hundred trees were
downed by the wind, tractor-trailers toppled, and more than 340,000 people were without
power. The highest wind gust recorded in the mountains was more than 100 mph, and one
gust hit 73 mph in the Los Angeles Basin.
The most striking wind-related alignment in the ingress chart was Mars (wind) at 2 Leo con-
junct the Ascendant. Dryness is reflected in all the signs on the angles of this chart—Aries,
Leo, Libra, and Aquarius—as well as the Sun sextile Mars. Mars was inconjunct Pluto (wind)
and trine Uranus (high pressure).

=== Page 56 ===
T 22 34
48 20
a 01 57 27 CO
n 40'
V Mc 01 As 04 24 00 02 <J2 06 CO 5C 24 26- 44
43 02 15
^20 26 00 02" 07' tz
24 28
10
02 02
12
<2 M
33 33
25 17*^ ***92 02 As ITF. 06 14 25 o
f 06 2%) 02' 28 loir 20' 46
«G>n 20 05 20 36' 06 04 24 (f 02 25
■Q
or 02 o 28 16 15 43 02 15 25 13 09" Mc 55
O
48 20 25 (Tb HK 57 27
22 34
Wind j
Inner Whccl=7\utumn Ingress / JVoto/ Chart / September 23, 2011, Fri / 2.05:14 om PDT +7.00
San Bernardino, CA /34°Noy'iy" iiy0Wi8'o8" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Meow
Node
Middle Wheel=iunar Phase / Natal Chart / November 24, 2011, Thit / 10:09:40 pm PST
+8:00 San Bernardino, CA /340Noy'iy" ny" Wi8'o8" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus /
Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Sonto Ana Wind / Notoi Chart / November 30, 2011, Wed / 12.00 pm PST
+S:oo San Bernardino, CA /340Noy'iy" iiy°Wi8'o8"/ Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus /
Mean Node

=== Page 57 ===
Notice that Saturn (low pressure) is north and Jupiter (high pressure) is south. Combined
with Mars trine Uranus, linking another high-pressure planet to that area, the setup was ideal
for a major Santa Ana event during the season.
By the date of the lunar phase about two months after the ingress (middle wheel of Wind 2),
Saturn was closer to the ingress IC and Jupiter had retrograded to 1 Taurus, forming a square
with ingress Mars. In addition, the lunar phase Midheaven was conjunct ingress Jupiter. All of
this reflects the atmospheric conditions necessary for and in effect at the time of a major Santa
Ana event. There was a high-pressure system (Jupiter) to the southeast and a low-pressure sys-
tem (Saturn) to the north. This produced the tight pressure gradients that resulted in very high
winds.
Adding more wind energy to the event was lunar phase Mercury making its retrograde sta-
tion at 20 Sagittarius in an approaching trine to the lunar phase Ascendant. This aspect was
well within orb by November 30 (outer wheel of Wind 3), because Mercury had retrograded to
16 Sagittarius. On the date of the event, Mars was trine the lunar phase Midheaven and
semisquare lunar phase Saturn conjunct the ingress IC.
There were many connections that linked the lunar phase chart to the ingress chart, empha-
sizing low pressure, high pressure, and wind at the Southern California longitude and latitude.
The lunar phase Sun-Moon conjunction was trine the ingress Ascendant and contraparallel
ingress Mars, sextile ingress Sun, and semisquare ingress Saturn. Stationary retrograde Mer-
cury was sextile ingress Saturn, lunar phase Jupiter was square the ingress Ascendant-Mars,
lunar phase Mars was sesquisquare/semisquare the ingress meridian, and ingress Jupiter was
conjunct the lunar phase Midheaven.
fcpnfentg]

=== Page 58 ===
CHAPTER 5
Drought
People sometimes react to news of drought as if it were something unusual or a new weather
phenomenon; in fact, it is a part of the normal climatology, just like other forms of weather.
The Pilgrims experienced drought in 1621 and 1623, and fields of grain in New England
caught fire in 1749, 1761, and 1762. There were many droughts in the 1800s, including one on
the Great Plains from 1881 to 1887. In the twentieth century, farmers battled drought in the
1930s, 1950s, 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s in varying locations throughout North America, and in
the twenty-first century, drought has been a concern in western, southeastern, and central
parts of the United States.
Drought is a relative term that generally can be defined as abnormal dryness in a particular
region. If, for example, Alabama were to receive only twenty-four inches of rain in a year, or
half its normal amount, the state would be in a severe drought condition. However, if Nevada
received the same twenty-four inches, the opposite would be true, as its norm is well below
that.
So drought does not mean there is no precipitation, but rather a diminished supply. At the
same time, temperatures are often well above average during drought periods, causing mois-
ture to rapidly evaporate. Hydrologists measure drought using the drought severity index,
which measures soil moisture, evaporation, and precipitation over a long-term period. Normal
conditions prevail when the index is between -2 and +2, moderate drought between -2 and -3,
drought between -3 and -4, and severe drought below -4.
The primary planets of drought are Mars, Jupiter, and Pluto, especially when in aspect with
each other. If all three are active in an ingress or lunar phase chart, excessively high temper-
atures and dryness can be expected. The same is true when these planets are parallel, conjunct,
or square the horizon or meridian.
High temperatures result when Mars is in close conjunction with the Sun, and any aspect
between Mars and the Sun, Moon, Venus, or Mercury usually indicates excessive heat. This is
even more true when these planets are in Leo, and sometimes in Aries. Saturn and Uranus,
especially when in Gemini, Leo, Virgo, or Aquarius, can forecast dryness in colder seasons.
Uranus conjunct the Midheaven indicates cold, dry air dipping far to the south, and Uranus
and Jupiter reflect dry high-pressure systems. Planetary aspects denoting windy conditions are
important as well, because wind pulls moisture from the soil, adding to the dryness.
Drought is not a singular event that spans a week or a month. It is a trend that affects a sea-
son, several seasons, a year, a series of years, or even a decade. Forecasting drought thus re-
quires a succession of charts that indicate dryness, wind, and above-average temperatures.

=== Page 59 ===
Colorado,2002
Colorado was in a severe drought in 2002, with a drought severity index of -8.74 throughout
much of the year. According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA), an index that low had not been seen in the region since 1685. That conclusion was
based on tree ring analysis. Mandatory limits regarding water use were imposed in Denver for
the first time in twenty-one years. High temperatures, rapid evaporation, and snowpack that
was only 53 percent of average contributed to the severe drought.
April was very warm and dry, and only one significant storm occurred in May. There was
some rain in June, but little soaked into the dry soil. Reservoirs were depleted, stream flows
were low, heat was intense, and fires raged. July was very hot and dry, and there were more
fires and extreme heat in August. Some precipitation finally arrived in September.
The three ingress charts covering these months and the three months prior all show a pre-
dominance of dryness and heat.

=== Page 60 ===
05° 20'
® 53'
00- 24. f
39
vs 27
09°
w ^ 15°
28' 00' 20' 07 18 39'
nv 06* /w
.... 22 26° 15'
00'
cT 09
D 25'
180X 24'
09 09
T
52' 52'
ITF
18° 22'
% » <Q or
15'
10°
%
n 53'
R
or
s
12°
26°
05° <£ 20'
39' <32 ZD 27 O ..
Drought i: Winter Ingress / Natal Chart / December 21, 2001, Fri / 12:21:30 pm MST +7.00
Denver, CO /3g0N44'2i" lo^Wjg'oj" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
The winter ingress chart had Mars trine Jupiter, with Jupiter inconjunct Pluto, square the
horizon, and opposition Mercury (Drought 1). Mercury was also square the horizon and sextile
Mars, which was semisextile the Ascendant. Uranus was semisquare/sesqui-
square the horizon and meridian, with Venus in Sagittarius (fire sign) sextile Uranus and
contraparallel Jupiter. The Mercury influence indicates wind that aggravated rapid evaporation
and compounded the heat and dryness factors of the other planets.

=== Page 61 ===
02° T 23'
03 41'
O
30°
T
30'
X 9 08 10'
15
/
14 CT
¥ T 3€ 13 26 11' o 5r 10
29' II 45' Vv 09°
t40irII321 16 10 or
32' 1o
V06'$13.
20 20
CO
06 06'
17
. 10 57
Q
or 16
03 41'
^,0- (ri. 08
02' ^ 23'
Drought 2: Spring Ingress / NotaJ C/iort / March 20, 2002, Wed / 12:16:09 Pm MST +7:00
Denver, CO /44'21" 104° Wjg'oj" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
At the spring ingress, the Sun in Aries, a fire sign, was conjunct the Midheaven, Jupiter was
square the meridian, and Mercury was square Pluto. Venus, also in Aries (emphasizing heat,
not moisture), was square the horizon and trine Pluto, which was parallel Uranus and incon-
junct/semi-sex-tile the horizon (Drought 2).

=== Page 62 ===
cT 15 44 22
4- 20 52 •LO
VI CD
57' 57
50 SI 07
^53 9
15° 22'
t v 57
59 20 m.
16
5
06 3/"
np nu 29 12
06°^ 12'
Drought y. Summer Ingress / Natal Chart / June 21, 2002, Fri / 7:24:25 am MDT +6:00
Denver, CO /44'21" lO^Wjg'oj" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Indicators of heat and dryness increased with the summer ingress (Drought 3). Mars was
conjunct Jupiter conjunct the Ascendant, Mercury was semisquare/sesquisquare the horizon
and sextile/trine the meridian, and Venus in Leo was trine/sextile the meridian and sextile
Mercury. In addition to the Uranus-Pluto parallel in effect at the spring ingress, Venus and
Mars were parallel Jupiter, with Mars adding intensity through its conjunction with Jupiter.
Great Plains ,1930s
One of the worst disasters in the United States was a decade-long drought that affected not
only the Great Plains but most of the country at various times. The most seriously affected
states, known collectively as the Dust Bowl, were Kansas, Colorado, New Mexico, Oklahoma,

=== Page 63 ===
and Texas. At its worst in the winter of 1935-36, the Dust Bowl included 50 million acres.
Other severely affected states were Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, and
Wyoming.
Drought first visited the Great Plains in the latter half of 1930 and early 1931. Welcome rains
were present later in 1931, but dry weather returned in 1932 and continued year after year, in
some areas until 1941. The summer of 1932 was a scorcher, only to be topped by 1934 and
1936. The area affected by drought began to shrink in 1937 and was down to 9.5 million acres
by early 1939. However, extreme drought returned in 1939, to be followed finally by adequate
precipitation in 1940 and early 1941.
Because the affected area was so widespread, a longitude and latitude in western Kansas, the
center of the Dust Bowl, is used here to illustrate the planetary configurations. It is apparent
from the charts that this location was severely affected, but it's important to remember that
dryness was widespread. Because it is beyond the scope of this book to review all forty ingress
charts for the decade, only a selected few are included. Especially notable factors in the others
are mentioned, however.
In August 1934, the drought severity index for western Kansas was -5.96; August 1936 and
October 1939 were a close second with -5.55. Between August 1932 and October 1940, the
index was consistently below normal. During the worst years, the area received about eleven
inches of annual rainfall, less than 60 percent of normal.
The September 23, 1930, ingress, which was the beginning of what would come to be known
as the Dirty Thirties, shows the onset of dry conditions (Drought 4). Mars was conjunct and
parallel Jupiter, and both planets formed an inconjunct and a contraparallel with the Ascen-
dant. Both planets were very high in northern declination, and Jupiter also formed a conjunc-
tion and parallel with Pluto. All three major planetary configurations associated with drought
were present, and all aspected the horizon.

=== Page 64 ===
Drought 4: Autumn Ingress / Natal Chart / September 2}, 1930, Tue / 12:36 pm CST +6:00
Great Plains / j8°Noo' 100" Woo' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Other indicators of higher temperatures were Venus trine Mars, Mars semisquare Neptune,
and the long-term aspect of Neptune semisquare Pluto. Windy conditions were promised with
the Sun conjunct and parallel retrograde Mercury, and Mars and Jupiter square Uranus, which
was trine the Ascendant, reflecting a high-pressure, low-moisture pattern.
Dry conditions continued throughout the winter of 1930-31. At the ingress, Jupiter and Pluto
were still conjunct and parallel, opposing Mercury. Jupiter and Pluto were contraparallel the
Ascendant and square the meridian. Mercury was parallel the Ascendant and square the
meridian. Retrograde Mars formed a semisextile with Jupiter and Pluto. The Sun, in a
sesquisquare with Mars, was parallel the Ascendant, and Uranus again occupied the lower

=== Page 65 ===
meridian.
At the 1931 spring ingress, Jupiter and Pluto were parallel and Pluto was conjunct the IC.
Mars, Jupiter, and Pluto were all parallel, and Mars was square the horizon and trine the Sun.
The heat and dryness abated somewhat later that year, but returned in the summer of 1932.
At that ingress, Jupiter was conjunct and parallel the Ascendant and contraparallel the IC, trine
Uranus, and semisextile Pluto, which was semisextile/inconjunct the horizon. Mars was
semisquare Venus and semisextile the Sun. The Sun, Mercury, Venus, and Jupiter aspected
the meridian. Uranus, in a square with Pluto, was trine/sextile the horizon.
By that winter's ingress, Jupiter formed a sextile with Pluto conjunct the Ascendant; Jupiter-
Pluto is probably the single most indicative aspect of severe drought. Uranus was square Pluto
and semisextile and contraparallel Mars. The sextile was still present in the spring 1933 ingress
chart.
As the heat and dryness continued into the spring and summer of 1933, the worst was yet to
come. That autumn, the first of massive, devastating dust storms occurred on November 13,
1933. Nicknamed "black blizzards," the storms were dirt-filled black clouds as much as 20,000
feet high that roared across the Great Plains, piling soil in drifts. Visibility was reduced to a
few feet at times as the roiling mass masked the sun. The worst of the storms were so powerful
that skies from the Great Plains to the East Coast were darkened, and soil settled on vessels in
the Atlantic Ocean.
The September 23, 1933, ingress chart shows the continuing drought and potential for black
blizzards (Drought 5). Mars was semisquare Jupiter and the Sun, which were conjunct and
parallel. Uranus was trine the IC and inconjunct/semisextile the horizon, while Pluto formed
an inconjunct/semisextile and contraparallel with the meridian and a sextile/trine with the
horizon.

=== Page 66 ===
23° H 00'
10 20 CD CD 26 00
¥
24
32
26 T
25
10 ITF 40
23
flF
00 47 00
O 51 02 13
09
19 1 19
16 ra. 49 09 m 10 49 m. 18
9 18°
(f
20 lo-
rn. VI 00 26
0 CO CM
] 1 /
/
/
/ /
/ 07
23° S 00'
Drought 5; Autumn Ingress / Natal Chart / September 23, 1933, Sat / 6.02 am CST +6:00
Great Plains /j8°Noo' ioo°Woo' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
The Uranus-Pluto square, also an aspect of high wind, was still within orb, and Mars was
parallel Saturn (windy storm), which was sesquisquare/semisquare the meridian and horizon.
Mercury was contraparallel the Ascendant. The Uranus-Neptune sesqui-
square (unusual weather), which had been within orb more often than not since the sum-
mer of 1930 because of the retrograde pattern of the planets, was nearly exact.
Mercury, the planet of wind, turned retrograde the day before the lunar phase of November
10, 1933, activating its negative retrograde effects (Drought 6). It was contraparallel Pluto (high
wind), which was inconjunct Mars (gusts). Major storm potential was also apparent with Sat-
urn conjunct the IC and in a semisquare with Mars, which was trine Uranus (dryness, high

=== Page 67 ===
pressure). Neptune was still semisquare Pluto (high wind), and Jupiter trine Saturn expanded
the storm energy.
There were many lunar phase aspects indicating wind and dryness but only two that showed
potential for moisture: Uranus square Pluto (thunderstorms, but also high wind) and Neptune
semisquare Pluto (low pressure, but also high wind).
Every planetary aspect was connected with the angles. In addition to Saturn conjunct the IC,
Mercury was semisextile/inconjunct the horizon, Mars was semisquare/sesqui-
square both the horizon and meridian, Jupiter was trine/sextile the meridian, and Neptune
was inconjunct/semisextile the meridian.
There were significant aspects between the lunar phase and ingress charts, nearly all of them
indicative of wind. Retrograde lunar phase Mercury was sextile ingress Jupiter at o degrees
south (northerly wind) and contraparallel ingress Pluto (high wind). Lunar phase Mars was
inconjunct ingress Pluto (wind) and thus also configured with these other Pluto aspects: lunar
phase Uranus square ingress Pluto, and Pluto returning to its ingress position (high wind).
Lunar phase Saturn was parallel ingress Mars (windy storm), and it also had returned to its
position at the ingress.
Angular contacts between the lunar phase and ingress charts were numerous: lunar phase
Mars was conjunct the ingress IC and square the ingress horizon, the lunar phase Ascendant
was semisquare ingress Ascendant and sesquisquare the IC, and the lunar phase IC was
square ingress Venus, semisquare the IC, and sesquisquare the Ascendant.
On November 13, key planetary configurations in the ingress chart were activated. Transiting
retrograde Mercury at 2 Sagittarius was parallel Pluto and sextile Jupiter. Transiting Mars at 26
Sagittarius dominated with its trine to Uranus, inconjunct to Pluto, and semisquares to Venus
and Saturn, and was conjunct the IC. Mars and Saturn were triggered by the transiting Sun in
parallel to them, and the Moon in Virgo was conjunct the Ascendant, square the meridian, and
parallel Mercury, Jupiter, and the Sun. Jupiter was parallel Mercury, further increasing the
wind.

=== Page 68 ===
SI 14
06 05
D (TF CO
f OD 14 34
* 17 24
12
39 fTP 42'
04 10 03
n
12 04
12
05 05
nv
20' 20
39 *32 (II T
O 24
¥
25
04 04 10
22 T 12 04 23 12 VJ
19 cT 04
9 10'
06 05
X 34 14
11° ^ 14'
Drought 6: Lunar Phase / Natal Chart / November 10, igjj, Fri / 6:18 am CST +6:ooGreat
Plains /}80Noo' ioo"Woo' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
The transiting Virgo Moon formed a square with lunar phase Mars and a semisquare/
sesquisquare with the horizon and meridian. Of equal significance was transiting Mars
semisquare/sesquisquare the lunar phase meridian, horizon, and Saturn. Retrograde Mercury
was contraparallel Pluto, Uranus square Pluto, and the Sun parallel Saturn. Mars was trine
Uranus, inconjunct Pluto, and semisquare Saturn.
The Saturn involvement in the transits and lunar phase and ingress charts, and Saturn's as-
pects to the angles in both charts, show the widespread and lasting nature of the dust storm,
which covered much of the United States in its eastward transit. The ninth-house position of
lunar phase Pluto shows that the storm came from northwest of the point of observation. Most

=== Page 69 ===
of the storms generated in Montana and Wyoming.
As the months passed, conditions deteriorated even further. At the 1933 winter ingress, Mars
was opposition Pluto, and Jupiter opposed Uranus. Three months later at the spring ingress
(March 21, 1934), Jupiter was square Pluto and sextile/trine the horizon. Mars was just past a
conjunction with the Sun, and Uranus was square Pluto.
When summer 1934 arrived on June 21, Mercury was conjunct Pluto, Uranus was conjunct
the IC, and Mars and Jupiter formed a trine. Mars was square Neptune and parallel Pluto to
add to the stifling heat. Mars, Jupiter, and Pluto all aspected the horizon.
In 1935, the year of forty dust storms, the spring ingress occurred on March 21 with Pluto
sesquisquare retrograde Mars in the seventh house, which formed a semisextile with retro-
grade Jupiter. At the summer ingress, Pluto was conjunct the IC and Jupiter conjunct the De-
scendant. That autumn, Mars was contraparallel the IC square Saturn conjunct the Ascendant,
and also contraparallel Pluto, which aspected both the ingress horizon and meridian.
The hottest summer of the decade, in 1936, was preceded by a hot and dry spring, with Mars
trine Jupiter and square the horizon, Uranus inconjunct/semisextile the meridian, and Pluto
inconjunct and contraparallel Jupiter, which was contraparallel the Ascendant.
At the summer 1936 ingress, Pluto was conjunct and square the meridian, and Uranus was
square the horizon. Mars was semisquare Uranus and semisextile and parallel Pluto. The Sun
and Venus, conjunct Mars, were semisextile and parallel Pluto. This sizzling combination re-
sulted in temperatures as high as 121 F in North Dakota, 108 F in Iowa, 113 F in Kansas, and
112 F on the Eastern Seaboard.
Although temperatures cooled somewhat after the summer of 1936, the planetary aspects of
heat and drought persisted in western Kansas until 1940, when some of the thousands of
families who had fled to California began to return to rebuild the Great Plains.
NortheasternilnitedStates, 1961-66
The first indications of drought that afifected the Northeast in the 1960s appeared in Sep-
tember of 1961. By the end of October, it was classified as a mild to moderate drought covering
the region from northern Virginia to southern Vermont. New York City reported a water short-
age with reservoirs at 30 percent of capacity.
In July and August of the next year, the drought had become moderate to severe, but precip-
itation over the winter months eased the situation by spring 1963. Dry weather returned in
October, when it was very warm, to be followed by six months of wet weather.
It was dry again in May 1964, and by September, many areas were classified in the severe
drought category. June, July, and August 1965 were the driest yet, with New York City receiv-
ing 37 percent of its normal rainfall (the average for the entire year was 50 percent). There was

=== Page 70 ===
moderate precipitation in January and February 1966, but spring and summer were dry. The
drought ended in October 1966, beginning with heavy rain the day of the autumn ingress.
The summer 1965 ingress chart reflects the dry conditions that summer (Drought 7). Jupiter
was square the Uranus-Pluto conjunction, combining the planet of high pressure with a major
drought aspect. Mars was square the Sun.
Windy conditions were indicated in part by Mercury semisextile Jupiter and sextile Uranus
and Pluto. Saturn's opposition to Pluto and the Uranus-Pluto conjunction showed potential for
windy afternoon thunderstorms after hot days. Saturn and Venus trine Neptune, Neptune sex-
tile Pluto, and the Sun sesquisquare Neptune helped keep the atmosphere steamy and cloudy,
with the potential for showers. Jupiter was square Saturn, normally a configuration of above-
normal precipitation. So the question is why all these configurations didn't manifest as much-
needed moisture.
A look at the planets that aspected the angles reveals the explanation. Only the Sun and
Venus formed any aspect to the horizon or meridian. The Sun formed an
inconjunct/semisextile with the meridian, and Venus was sesquisquare/semisquare the
meridian and horizon. With both these planets in Cancer, the potential for moisture was there,
but drought prevailed until a lunar phase triggered the ingress chart; then the city received a
little rain.

=== Page 71 ===
or H 41
28 16' cn T v vD
06 25'
G 13
00
9 ir © 49'
18° S 00' 08' 29
as 34"
<Q 39
08 38'
22
59' ^ +
05 05
56' W 11'd? 12* 56'
to 52 Oi 13
23' fT? 26°
O 08' 29
(If \
38' 08
35'
rru
17
28 16'
n 25' 06
m. 01°^ 41'
Drought 7; Summer Ingress / Natal Chart / June 21, 1965, Mon / 10:56 am EDT +4:00 New
York, NY / 40° N42'51" 074° Woo^j" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus /Mean Node
At the end of June, transiting Mars in Libra was square the ingress Sun, transiting Jupiter
was parallel ingress Venus, and transiting Mercury was parallel Jupiter. Mars was at o degrees
north declination, intensifying the heat and dryness.
In early July, transiting Venus and Mercury entered Leo (contraparallel the ingress IC) and
formed a sextile with transiting Mars in Libra as transiting Jupiter formed a parallel with the
ingress Sun and Venus. At the same time that transiting Mercury and Venus were parallel
transiting Pluto, they did the same with ingress Jupiter. At mid-month, transiting Mercury and
Venus were sextile ingress Jupiter and contraparallel ingress Neptune, and the Sun was contra-
parallel the ingress IC. Transiting Mars in Libra was trine ingress Jupiter and square ingress

=== Page 72 ===
Mercury and Venus at the end of the month as the Sun formed a parallel with ingress Pluto, a
square and parallel with the ingress IC, and a conjunction with the ingress Ascendant.
Transiting Mercury, which turned retrograde on August 2 at o Virgo, quickly returned to
Leo to semisextile the ingress Sun and square the ingress meridian, indicating even more heat
and dryness. Transiting Mars in dry Libra was square ingress Venus, and transiting Venus in
dry Virgo formed a conjunction with ingress Uranus and Pluto. Transiting Mercury and
Venus were contraparallel transiting Mars and the ingress Ascendant, while the transiting Sun
was parallel Pluto, and transiting Mars was contraparallel transiting Uranus.
By mid-August, transiting Venus was conjunct and Jupiter square ingress Mars, and both
were contraparallel the ingress Ascendant. Transiting Uranus was parallel the ingress Ascen-
dant at the end of the month, and transiting Venus was parallel ingress Mars. All month, tran-
siting Jupiter was parallel the ingress Sun and Venus.
More than a year would pass before New Yorkers saw a normal amount of precipitation; the
drought ended on September 23, 1966, when rain arrived. In the ingress chart, Jupiter did not
aspect the horizon or meridian and formed only a few aspects: sextile the Sun, semisquare
Venus, and trine Saturn. Mars was still square Pluto, but neither of these planets aspected the
horizon or meridian.
Mercury was square the meridian and conjunct and parallel the Ascendant, along with Sat-
urn parallel and Uranus contraparallel the Ascendant. These were key factors indicating rain
for the drought-stricken area and were the only planets that aspected the ingress chart angles.
The aspects in the ingress chart were Mercury parallel Saturn (cloudy, falling barometer, pre-
cipitation, cooler) and contraparallel Uranus (overcast, rain, storm, cooler), and Mars square
and contraparallel Neptune (low pressure, cloudburst). Cooler temperatures were indicated by
Jupiter trine Saturn, Saturn contraparallel Uranus, and Mars semisextile Uranus. During the
last week of September, transiting Venus and Mercury were parallel the ingress Ascendant
(precipitation), and transiting Venus opposed ingress Saturn (heavy precipitation).
[wntgnts]

=== Page 73 ===
CHAPTER 6
Floods
Floods cause incredible destruction that can exceed that of hurricanes and tornadoes, affecting
large areas and even entire regions. They also can have far-reaching effects that last for
months, seasons, or years.
Floods generally occur in low-lying areas near water sources after extensive rain, or as a re-
sult of heavy rain combined with spring snowmelt. As the earth becomes saturated and unable
to absorb any more moisture, the water table rises. When it reaches its peak at ground level,
the water begins to flow into natural channels, rivers, and streams. As more and more rainfall
is diverted to these bodies of water, they rise and overflow their banks, sometimes becoming
virtual lakes. Standing water also builds up in low-lying areas when streams and rivers can ac-
cept no more water.
Flash floods are more common in the arid areas of the western United States, However, they
can occur in any location that receives an unusually high volume of rain in a limited amount of
time. In the western states, flash floods are the result of cloudbursts that produce heavy rain
during a few hours' time. Because the earth is so hard and dry, it is unable to absorb the water
as fast as it falls. Thus the rain is channeled into otherwise meandering streams and dry wash-
es, where it races along over the earth or through mountainous valleys. Flash floods happen so
quickly that people miles downstream, often under cloudless skies, receive little or no warning
that a torrent of water is rushing their way.
A variety of atmospheric conditions cause floods. These range from long-term (an entire sea-
son or more) weather patterns to stationary low-pressure systems stalled in place for a day or
two. Heavy precipitation during early spring months, when combined with unusually warm
temperatures that hasten snow melt, can cause rivers and streams to rise and overflow their
banks and levees.
Potential for flooding is indicated in ingress and lunation charts by a dominance of storm
and precipitation planets such as Venus (precipitation), Saturn (low pressure, storms), and
Neptune (low pressure, heavy precipitation). When aspects involving these planets are repeated
over and over—ingress chart, followed by a succession of lunar phase charts—flood potential
increases. Because storms are slower in developing and longer lived when Saturn is active, the
combination of this planet with Venus and/or Neptune signals that precipitation is likely to ex-
tend over several days or even weeks. Strong aspects to the meridian are also necessary for
flooding, such as Neptune conjunct, parallel, or square the meridian.
Dyer sburg,Tennessee,April2011

=== Page 74 ===
Flooding was widespread in the Mississippi River Valley in the spring of 2011 as a result of
record levels of rain during consecutive weeks. Six states were severely affected, primarily in
April and early May. About twenty people died as a result of the flooding, and damages were
estimated to be more than $2 billion.
Dyersburg, Tennessee, experienced the worst flooding in the area, with damage and destruc-
tion to more than 600 homes and businesses. Many area rivers and creeks overflowed their
banks, and the Forked Deer River, a tributary of the Mississippi, reached 47.8 feet on May 10.
This was the second highest level ever recorded.
Rather than look at an individual rain event, we'll look at the ingress chart and then the
lunar phase charts for the weeks of major storms and heavy rainfall that led up to the flooding
of May 10. The most severe storms produced tornadoes in addition to heavy rain, and there
was an increasingly strong presence of Neptune, the planet associated with flooding, as the
weeks unfolded.
The March 20, 2011, spring ingress chart had Mercury and Jupiter opposition Saturn
(storms), with all three planets aspecting the horizon and meridian and in declination with
each other (Floods 1). Venus, which was parallel Neptune (heavy precipitation), was trine/
sextile the meridian and semisextile/inconjunct the horizon, and also semisextile Mars, which
was square the meridian and conjunct the Descendant (wind, warm air). Venus was also
semisquare Pluto (heavy precipitation). The warm planets—Venus, Jupiter, and Neptune—
indicated warm, moist air for thunderstorm formation, and Mercury and Saturn indicated cold

=== Page 75 ===
Floods i: Spring Ingress / Natal Chart / March 20, 2011, Sun / 6:20:43 Pm CDT +3:00
Dyersburg, TN /36°N02'04" oSg0 Wij'oS" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node

=== Page 76 ===
27 43
38 14
07
n
30 04 03' 00
*
, ir 05 18
9 18
¥ or«f19' T1 0 u i cp
rf n?0 431
.0 07 ^ 13'
\ Vrw 02 02° J 1 38
. ^ 18°T18'^
r\2rTl5'
44' V-/
i fTU
44'
—13ft .
/AO* 04° 03
n MF
05 18
15'
27 43'
n <Q 38 14
19 © 41'
Floods 2: Lunar Phase / Natal Chart / April 11, 2011, Mon / 7:05:22 am CDT +j;oo Dyersburg,
TN/36°N02'04" o8g°W23'o8" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
The lunar phase of April 11, 2011 (Floods 2), had Venus conjunct the ingress Descendant and
square the ingress meridian, a classic placement for heavy precipitation. Lunar phase Mars
was semisquare ingress Venus and transiting Neptune (heavy precipitation, tornadoes). Mer-
cury was retrograde in this chart and conjunct lunar phase Jupiter (high wind) and ingress
Mercury (high wind), semisquare Neptune (tornado, wind, precipitation), and square the lunar
phase meridian. The lunar phase Sun was sextile ingress Venus (precipitation) and square the
lunar phase meridian.

=== Page 77 ===
25 25
fib
15* 15'
\
fi X 44
20' T 19' O O
aXM' T 14' ■). 03'
kt 12' tfV
2X' (f
9 ^ V2'
07'
29 25° n
07
39
21
H
00
00
08
X 05 40
Floods j: Lunar Phase / Natal Chart / ApriJ 17, 2011, Sun / 9:43:5s pm CDT +5:00 Dyersburg,
TN /36°N02'04" 0S90 W2j'oS" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Neptune had an even stronger presence at the April 17, 2011, lunar phase, with Neptune con-
junct the lunar phase IC, a notable aspect of heavy precipitation and flooding (Floods 3). As-
pects to Neptune were Venus semisextile, Mercury semisquare, and Sun sextile (heavy precip-
itation, tornadoes). Mars was conjunct Jupiter (thunderstorms), which was sesqui-square/
semisquare the lunar phase meridian. The stormy combination of Mars opposition Saturn as-
pected the horizon. Indicating even more precipitation in Dyersburg was ingress Venus (pre-
cipitation) sesquisquare/semisquare the ingress meridian and square the lunar phase Ascen-
dant. Pluto, which was semisquare ingress Venus, was trine/sextile the lunar phase meridian.

=== Page 78 ===
? 1
i 28'
H
28'
R
34'
06'
V5 Y
26"^^^ T 20°
t-^Ts-176 2i-
02^°
*9 ;>•'■ —- 14 /
37' O 10°
30' 04°
K
00
08
03'
13° 50'
02°
Floods 4; Lunar Phase / Natal Chart / April 24, 2011, Sun / 9:46:52 CDT +5:00 Dycrsburg,
TN / j6°No2'o4" o8g0W2j'o8" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Meon JVode
Neptune was again strong at the April 24, 2011, lunar phase (Floods 4), where it was square
the lunar phase horizon and semisquare Mercury (storm, tornado), which was inconjunct/
semisextile the lunar phase meridian and conjunct the ingress Jupiter (moist, southerly air).
Mars was conjunct ingress Mercury (storm) and trine/sextile the ingress meridian. As the
week unfolded, Venus formed a semisquare with ingress Venus and a square with Pluto
(heavy precipitation).

=== Page 79 ===
21 09' 11
fTP T \ ▼ (\70
11V \0/vj 46' 53'
21'
07 07
«Q
45"
40' H 00
60
2r T 40 09" 02 T 39 14 vX) X 50 T 56
9 16 T 11° 53 T 22 30 30' 23
*■
cT 12 12
28 04
T II 62 19
26° K 25'
Floods y. Lunar Phase / Natal Chart / Moy 3, 2011, Tue / 1:50:41 om CDT +5:00 Dyersburg,
TN/36°No2'o4" o8g0W2j'o8" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Meon Node
May 3, 2011, was the final lunar phase (Floods 5) before the May 10 flooding (also the date of
the next lunar phase). Mercury was opposition ingress Saturn (storm, heavy precipitation),
Mars was conjunct Jupiter (thunderstorms), Venus was opposition ingress Saturn (heavy pre-
cipitation), and the lunar phase horizon was semisquare/sesquisquare the ingress horizon.
The final aspect that indicated overflowing rivers and creeks was Neptune square the merid-
ian.
Heppner, Oregon, June 14,1903
About 250 residents of Heppner, Oregon, lost their lives when a flash flood roared through the
town of 1,500. Damaging and deadly, a flash flood is more limited in scope than other floods,

=== Page 80 ===
arising very quickly when torrential rains rapidly fill small streams or rivers; this is in contrast
to a series of storms over days or weeks that gradually fill rivers to overflowing. The Heppner
flood is an extreme example of a flash flood.
A cloudburst erupted over Balm Fork Canyon, south of Heppner, and the water raced down
the narrow canyon, picking up haystacks, chicken pens, and livestock that then piled up be-
hind a laundry building that straddled the canyon near the edge of town. When this makeshift
dam then failed, a wall of water from fifteen to fifty feet high rushed through the town, de-
stroying about a third of Heppner's structures. Although the time of the fl ood varies somewhat
in historical accounts, it occurred about 5:15 pm, shortly after the thunderstorm began.
The ingress chart (inner wheel of Floods 6) offers little to indicate the potential for a flash
flood, at least from the perspective of typical precipitation and flooding aspects. What the chart
does show is a tendency for dryness, which had indeed been the case that spring. This made
the area even more susceptible to a flash flood because it was difficult for the dry, hard earth to
absorb precipitation. Mars inconjunct Jupiter and square the horizon was one indicator of dry-
ness, and the other was Pluto square the meridian.
Heavy precipitation is, however, indicated in the lunar phase chart (middle wheel of Floods
6). Mars was conjunct the Midheaven and square Neptune, which was square the meridian,
an aspect of heavy precipitation and strong thunderstorms. Also aspecting Neptune was Venus
through a semisextile and parallel, and Venus was semisquare the Sun-Pluto conjunction (in-
tense precipitation), in declination aspect to the lunar phase horizon, and sesquisquare/
semisquare the ingress meridian. Jupiter square Uranus is also associated with thunder-
storms, and this aspect was in effect with lunar phase Jupiter square ingress and lunar phase
Uranus. Retrograde Mercury trine Saturn indicated precipitation and a strong weather front
because lunar phase Mercury was square ingress Mercury.

=== Page 81 ===
Floods 6
Inner Wheel=Sprmg Ingress / Natal Chart / March 21, 1903, Sat / 11:15 am +8:00
Heppner, OR /45^21'12" iig°Wjj'24" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Middle Wheel=Lunor P/iase / Notol Cliart / June 9, 1903, Tue / 7:07:54 pm PST +8:00
Heppner, OR / 45"N21'12" iig°Wjj'24" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Flood / Natal C/iart / June 14, 1903, Sun / 5.15 pm PST +8;oo Heppner, OR /
45°N2i'i2" iig°Wj3 '24" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
On the date of the flood (outer wheel of Floods 6), the Sun was opposition Uranus (storm,
precipitation), Venus was sesquisquare lunar phase and transiting Jupiter and inconjunct
ingress Jupiter (precipitation), and sextile/trine the lunar phase meridian. At the time the
thunderstorm began, a few minutes before the water began to rush down the canyon, the

=== Page 82 ===
transiting meridian was square retrograde lunar phase Mercury, activating those aspects. The
transiting horizon triggered the Jupiter aspects through a trine/sextile that was exact a few
minutes before the flash flood rushed through town. The third aspect was the transiting Moon,
which formed a semisquare to lunar phase Mars in aspect with Neptune and the ingress Sun.
The transiting Moon was also trine ingress Pluto.
Although it might have been difficult to predict a flash flood from these aspects—at least
without making the connection between a dry spring and heavy precipitation—it would have
been possible to predict a thunderstorm and its timing.
Salem,Oregon,December 1964
Salem was just one city affected by major flooding that impacted Oregon, coastal northern
California, southwest Washington, Idaho, and Nevada. Seventeen people died in Oregon, and
flooding from the Willamette River, which runs through Salem, covered almost 153,000 acres.
The Willamette crested at 30 feet in the early morning hours of December 23, flooding hun-
dreds of buildings; more than 1,000 people were rescued from flooded homes. Agricultural
losses were also high, exceeding $10 million, sections of surrounding highways were under
water, and more than thirty bridges were impassable. The Willamette crested again on Decem-
ber 24, at 29.5 feet.
The September 22, 1964, autumn ingress chart (inner wheel of Floods 7) had a key signi-
ficator for abundant precipitation and flooding: Venus conjunct the Descendant and square
Neptune, which was square the horizon. Any time you see this aspect aligned with the merid-
ian or horizon, particularly when one (or both) planet is in a water sign, you can be sure there
will be heavy precipitation during the season. Storms and heavy precipitation were also indi-
cated by Venus semisextile Pluto, Jupiter square Saturn, and Mercury conjunction Uranus.
Temperatures were seasonal the week of the December n, 1964, lunar phase (outer wheel of
Floods 7), in the low 40s, until the temperature dropped to a high of 34 F on the 16th, followed
by 19 F on the 17th; there was no rain on either of these days. The cold wave that began on the
16th is reflected in transiting retrograde Mercury sextile ingress and lunar phase Saturn, which
were conjunct, and retrograde Mercury sesquisquare ingress Pluto and Mercury.

=== Page 83 ===
Floods 7
Inner Wheel =AutumM Ingress / Natal Chart / September 22, 1964, Tue / 5:16:38 pm PDT
+y:oo Salem, OR /44^56^5" i2j0Wo2'o2" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=lMnflr Phase / Natal Chart / December 11, 1964, Fri / 10:01:21 pm PST +8:00
Salem, OR i2j°Wo2'o2" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
In the December n, 1964, lunar phase chart, Venus and Neptune were conjunct the IC and
opposition Jupiter conjunct the Midheaven. Rut it wasn't until later in the week that this aspect
was activated, resulting in heavy snow. The combination of frozen soil, which is unable to ab-
sorb much moisture, and heavy snow increased the flooding potential during the following
week.

=== Page 84 ===
Floods 8
Inner Wheel=AMtMmn Ingress / Natal Chart / September 22, 1964, Tue / 5.16:38 pm PDF
+7:00 Salem, OR / 44"N123° Wo2,02" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=iMnor Phase / Natal Chart / December 18, 1964, Fri / 6:41:11 pm PST +8:00
Salem, OR / 44°N56'35" 123° V/02'02" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
As temperatures began to rise under the influence of the December 18 lunar phase (outer
wheel of Floods 8), the snow began to melt and the rain began to fall. Temperatures and rain-
fall amounts on the days leading up to the first crest were December 18, 23 F, .09": December
19, 37 F, 1.04"; December 20, 43 F, .74"; December 21, 55 F, 2.28"; and December 22, 61 F,
i-43"-
At this lunar phase, the Sun was conjunct Mercury inconjunct/semisextile the horizon (pre-
cipitation), Mars was sextile Neptune (warmer), and Venus was square ingress and lunar phase

=== Page 85 ===
Saturn (heavy precipitation). Transiting Venus advanced into Sagittarius, moving closer to the
ingress meridian (conjunction to the Midheaven), and crossing it on the 21st and 22nd, the
days with the highest levels of precipitation. At the same time, the transiting Sun moved into a
sesquisquare with the ingress Venus-Descendant conjunction.
RapidCity,SouthDakota,June9,1972
During five hours on June 9, 1972, fifteen inches of rain fell on Rapid City, South Dakota. A
strong flow of moist air from the Gulf continued to pump fuel into thunderstorms stalled west
of the city. With the intense rain falling in an area of fewer than a hundred square miles, water
surged down Rapid Creek, Canyon Lake quickly rose to twelve feet above its norm, and debris
clogged the dam spillway. At 10:45 Pm. the dam broke, sending a torrent of water rushing
through the city, and by 12:15 am on June IO> the raging body of water in Rapid Creek was six
and a half feet above fl ood stage.
The March 20, 1972, spring ingress chart (inner wheel of Floods 9) had Mars contraparallel
Neptune (flash flood), an aspect that was aggravated by Jupiter in high declination semisextile
Neptune. Venus parallel Saturn (heavy prolonged precipitation, overcast skies, low pressure,
southerly air flow) was augmented by Saturn opposition and contraparallel Neptune (heavy
precipitation, flash flood, low pressure, thunderstorms). All the factors necessary for intense
rain were present, including the unusual weather indicated by Uranus semisquare Neptune.
Thunderstorms were also indicated by retrograde stationary Mercury opposition Uranus.
Mercury was semisextile Venus (rain, southerly air flow) and semisquare Saturn (overcast
skies, falling barometer, rain). Venus formed other rain aspects as well, with its incorijuiict to
Uranus and sesquisquare to Pluto. Mars and Neptune were contraparallel in high decli-
nation—the planetary configuration of a falling barometer and flash flooding.

=== Page 86 ===
Floods g
Inner Wheel=Spnng Ingress / Natal Chart / March 20, 1972, Mow / 5:22 am MST +6:00
Rapid City, SD /440N04'50" lofWij'^o" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=lMnor Phase / Natal Chart / June 4, 1972, Sun / j;22 MDT +5:00 Rapid
City, SD / 440 N04'50" lofWij'^o" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Meon Node
Neptune in the ninth house showed the precipitation coming from the west. Mercury was
semisextile/inconjunct the horizon and Venus was sextile it. Jupiter, which was semisextile
Neptune, formed a critical contact with the meridian with its contraparallel to the 1C, and
Uranus was parallel the Ascendant. The solar and lunar eclipses of January—25 Capricorn and
10 Leo—contacted the ingress angles.
By the time of the lunar phase of June 4, 1972 (outer wheel of Floods 9), Venus had turned
retrograde and was in high declination, a harbinger of heavy precipitation. It formed a parallel

=== Page 87 ===
with Mars (hot, humid, rain), an opposition with Jupiter in high declination (cloudy, excessive
rain), an inconjunct with Neptune (hot, humid, cloudy, rain), and a square to stationary retro-
grade Pluto (hot, thunderstorms). Jupiter was parallel the IC.
Mars conjunct the Midheaven and square the horizon indicated thunderstorms with its con-
traparallel to Jupiter and square to Uranus, which was conjunct the Ascendant. Mars was also
sesquisquare Neptune, which was semisquare/sesquisquare the horizon and the meridian
(flash flood, falling barometer). The Sun conjunct and parallel Mercury (both in high decli-
nation) also indicated rain, while its contraparallel with Jupiter indicated thunderstorms. In-
tense rain accompanied by thunderstorms and a falling barometer were reflected in Sun con-
junct Saturn, with the Sun contraparallel the IC and trine/sextile the horizon.
Lunar phase stationary retrograde Venus strongly aspected the ingress chart through an
opposition with Jupiter (warm, cloudy, rain) and a semisquare to Venus (rain, cloudy). Jupiter
was conjunct Jupiter, that planet having returned to its position in the ingress chart. The thun-
derstorms of Mars were activated by its semisquare to ingress Saturn and square to ingress
Mercury and Uranus. Equally powerful was lunar phase Neptune forming contraparallels with
ingress Venus (cloudburst, heavy rain, flood) and Saturn (above normal precipitation, low pres-
sure, flash flood).
The horizon and meridian of both charts were similarly energized: ingress Mercury was con-
junct the lunar phase Descendant, while aspects to the lunar phase Ascendant were formed by
ingress Uranus (conjunction), Venus (inconjunct), and Saturn (sesquisquare). The lunar phase
IC was aspected by ingress Mercury (square), ingress Venus (trine), ingress Saturn
(sesquisquare), ingress Neptune (semisquare), and ingress Jupiter (parallel). Lunar phase Sun
and Mercury were square the ingress horizon and parallel the ingress IC, and lunar phase
Mars was trine/sextile the ingress horizon and parallel the ingress IC. Other lunar phase plan-
ets aspecting the ingress angles were Jupiter contraparallel the IC and the Sun parallel the IC.
Transiting aspects to the ingress chart on June 9, 1972, confirmed what was apparent at the
ingress and lunar phase. Retrograde transiting Venus at 1 Cancer was square the ingress Sun
(rain, hot, humid), semisquare ingress Venus (rain), parallel the IC, and parallel ingress
Jupiter (warm, thunderstorms), which was also contraparallel the transiting Sun (warm, thun-
derstorms). Transiting Mars at 18 Cancer semisquare ingress Saturn and contraparallel ingress
Jupiter indicated stronger thunderstorms, as transiting Neptune formed parallels with both
ingress Venus and Saturn. Transiting Mars was parallel and Jupiter contraparallel the ingress
IC.
In the five days between the lunar phase and when the rain began, transiting retrograde
Venus moved into a contraparallel with lunar phase Jupiter (warm, cloudy, thunderstorms)
and transiting Mercury a parallel with Venus. Transiting Mars formed a conjunction with the

=== Page 88 ===
lunar phase Midheaven.
The transit-to-transit aspects of June 9, 1972, indicated more of the same, with the Sun at 19
Gemini semisextile Mars at 18 Cancer, and Mars sesquisquare Neptune at 3 Sagittarius. There
were many parallels indicating rain and thunderstorms: Sun parallel Venus and Mars and con-
traparallel Jupiter; Mercury parallel Venus and Mars and contraparallel Jupiter; Venus contra-
parallel Jupiter and parallel Mars; and Mars contraparallel Jupiter.
DesMoines,Iowa, 1993
Rain seemed as though it would never end in the Mississippi River Valley during the spring
and summer of 1993, when many areas in Minnesota, Nebraska, Iowa, Kansas, Illinois, and
Oklahoma received up to two feet of rain, much of it in July when it was too late for crops to be
planted or replanted. Flooding extended to 10 million acres.
In Des Moines, Iowa, possibly the hardest hit major city, it was a case of "water, water every-
where, but not a drop to drink" when sewage treatment facilities were damaged by flooding in
July. There, the Raccoon River topped out at more than nine feet above its official flood level of
twenty-five feet. This major flood was a long-term event, reflected in two ingress charts.
The first indicator for heavy precipitation in the spring ingress chart (Floods 10) was retro-
grade Venus square Mars in Cancer, with both planets in northern declination (heavy rain). At
best, the combination indicated heavy precipitation but not necessarily flooding. Venus was
also contraparallel Saturn (heavy prolonged rain, especially with a Venus-Uranus aspect),
square Uranus (heavy rain), and square Neptune (heavy rain, flash flood, cloudbursts). Retro-
grade planets always have a negative effect, even when in positive aspect.

=== Page 89 ===
02
05 11
29^- x
/X/b ® 25
f 00° ;
/ sq' 10° X
^-v * 44'
T /O 29'
06° 00V 5-
, Q 00' /
+ 18°^ /
10'
21 20
n
37' 50' 20 26
27'
T 16'
24
P231 fn,250 ^ 41 -- r .' fTb
55' 55'
%3
11
59
n
21' 06 27
14 rr?
cf ii OS' cr> <Q 10' 29
02° ,0 30
Floods 10: Spring Ingress / Natal Chart / March 20, iggj. Sat / 8:41 am CST +6;oo Des
Moines, IA /4ioN}6'02" ogfWj6'j2" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Another retrograde planet, Mercury, was trine Mars (thunderstorms and westerly winds),
inconjunct retrograde Jupiter (northerly air, precipitation), and semisquare Uranus (thunder-
storms).
Mars square Jupiter and Jupiter semisquare Pluto (thunderstorms) combined their force
with Jupiter sesquisquare Saturn (above-normal precipitation), Saturn square Pluto (windy
storm), and Saturn semisextile Neptune (rain).
Jupiter was sesquisquare/semisquare the horizon, and Saturn was square the horizon. The
lunar aspects to Mercury (parallel), Venus (semisquare), and Mars (sesquisquare) helped acti-
vate those planets through the Moon's inconjunct/semisextile to the meridian. The lunar

=== Page 90 ===
eclipse of December 9, 1992, at 18 Gemini was semisquare/sesquisquare the meridian, and
the solar eclipse of December 24, 1992, at 2 Capricorn was inconjunct/semisextile the merid-
ian.
As is often true with unusual weather, Uranus and Neptune were in aspect—conjunct and
parallel—and in the ninth house, an alert that weather would come from the west. They were
trine/sextile the horizon, activating that latitude, but it was the Ascendant-IC parallel that
brought the Mississippi Valley into high focus. Without that one important aspect, it would
have been easy to predict severe rain to the west instead of centered in the Midwest.
As April unfolded, the spring ingress chart was first activated when transiting Mars in Can-
cer opposed Uranus and Neptune and formed a square with Venus. Saturn, transiting the late
degrees of Aquarius, was moving closer to a sesquisquare with Mars, which would become
exact in early May. At the end of April, transiting Venus turned direct at 3 Aries conjunct the
ingress Sun and opposition transiting Jupiter at 7 Libra, and transiting Mercury reached o de-
grees declination on April 20, unleashing its negative side. The transiting Sun formed a con-
traparallel with Saturn on April 24, and Mars's contraparallel to Uranus was exact two days
later.
May began with transiting Mars in the early degrees of Leo crossing the ingress IC, while
transiting Venus formed a nearly month-long contraparallel to ingress Pluto, which was con-
junct the ingress Descendant. Jupiter was at o degrees declination all month. The lunar phase
of May 21, 1993 (solar eclipse at o Gemini), was square transiting Saturn at o Pisces, which
formed a conjunction to the ingress Moon. Near the end of May, transiting Venus at 20 Aries
formed a square with ingress Neptune.
In June, Jupiter continued its stay at o degrees for the first three weeks as Mars continued
through Leo, opposing ingress Saturn and forming a square with ingress Pluto and the hori-
zon. This activated transiting stationary retrograde Saturn's conjunction with the ingress
Moon. The transiting Sun moved on to contraparallel ingress Uranus all month and for three
weeks was parallel transiting Mercury, which was parallel ingress Mars early in the month and
opposition ingress Uranus and Neptune mid-month.

=== Page 91 ===
32'
16 28
w X
¥ 42' 06
* 21 00 20 VI tt 02 13 18' 26 57
T
15 20
tt
9 14 o 37
02' 02
n 7^
fn,23 ■ 9J 36' 36
fib
00 21 CQ 26 57' -^w 00 05 ir o 25 20 15 52 19
16 fl
28 24
16 28 cn n? vJJ 42 06
08° ,0 32
Floods n: Summer Ingress / JVotol Chart / June 21, iggj, Mon / 4:00 am CDT +5:00 Des
Moines, IA /^FNjG'oi" ogf W}6'}2" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus /Mean Node
By the summer 1993 ingress (Floods n), Midwesterners were beginning to wonder if they
would ever see the end of rain and a glimmer of typical sunny summer weather. The ingress
chart could make only one promise: more rain. The solar eclipse of May 21, 1993, at o Gemini
was conjunct the Ascendant.
Uranus and Neptune were still conjunct in the ninth house, bringing rain from the west,
and sesquisquare and contraparallei the Ascendant. Mercury, parallel the Ascendant, was con-
traparallel and opposition both planets, an indicator of thunderstorms.
The Sun was semisquare Venus (rain), sextile Mars (heat), semisextile/inconjunct the hori-
zon, and trine Saturn (rain). The Venus-Saturn connection with the Sun was further energized

=== Page 92 ===
by Venus contraparallel Saturn and parallel Mars (heavy rain). Saturn was again activated by its
opposing planet, Mars, which also formed a contraparallel (windy storm). Mercury trine Pluto
furnished more westerly winds to bring storms to the Midwest. The Moon, semisquare/
sesquisquare the horizon, aspected these key planets; Venus (sextile), Mars (semisquare), Sat-
urn (sesquisquare), and Neptune (opposition).
Saturn opposition Mars, with both planets square the horizon, indicated continuing wet
weather in the Mississippi River Valley. Saturn in Pisces was associated with the prolonged
rain, and Mars in Leo added heat to generate thunderstorms.
The Mars-Saturn aspects were exact a few days after the ingress as Mars moved forward into
Virgo. The separation of that aspect might have ended the rain, except that Saturn, in retro-
grade motion, returned to Aquarius, bringing the ingress aspect closer and closer to exact.
When it reached that point on July 24, five inches of rain fell on central Iowa.
Mercury aspects throughout the month of July contributed to the ongoing downpour. As
that planet turned retrograde on July 2 at 28 Cancer, it formed a semisextile with ingress Mars
and an inconjunct with ingress Saturn the same day. Turning direct on July 26 at 18 Cancer, it
was conjunct the ingress Moon and opposition ingress Uranus and Neptune at the time of the
five-inch rain at the end of the month. In mid-July, retrograde transiting Mercury in Cancer
opposed ingress Uranus and Neptune at the same time that the transiting Sun was contra-
parallel those planets and parallel ingress Mercury.
Transiting Venus in Gemini formed a conjunction/opposition with the ingress horizon and
a square to ingress Saturn in early July. As it continued forward, Venus was contraparallel
Uranus and Neptune the last half of the month, and parallel ingress Mercury the third week.
Throughout the month at various times, the transiting Sun was parallel or contraparallel
ingress and transiting Mercury, ingress and transiting Uranus and Neptune, transiting Venus,
and the ingress Moon.
Uranus and Neptune gradually narrowed their orb of conjunction all month, an aspect that
would become exact in mid-August. But by then, the parallel aspect had separated, and the
planets lost some of their power. At the same time, the all-important summer ingress planet,
Saturn, was retrograding away from its exact opposition to ingress Mars.
[contents]

=== Page 93 ===
CHAPTER 7
Temperature
The sun is at its highest point in the summer in the Northern Hemisphere, so its rays are
more concentrated and focused, more direct, than they are in the winter, when light strikes
Earth at a shallow angle. The sun remains visible for longer periods of time in the summer
(the longest day of the year is the day of the summer ingress, and the shortest is the winter
ingress), thus giving it more time to heat the earth each day. As summer turns to fall and win-
ter, the sun shines in the Northern Hemisphere for fewer and fewer hours, causing the earth
to lose its retained heat faster than it gains new heat. The reverse happens when winter turns
to spring and summer; days gradually lengthen and the sun shines for more hours.
In addition to these seasonal factors, high-pressure systems often contribute to extended
periods of high heat in the summer months. These air masses can remain "parked" over a vast
area (many states) for several days or even weeks, continuing to build heat energy.
The planets of heat—Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto—are always prominent in
ingress and lunar phase charts that indicate high temperatures. When they are in combination
with each other, excessively high heat generally ensues. Uranus can also be associated with
high heat in summer because it is a planet of high pressure, as is Jupiter. Other seasons are
sometimes unseasonably warm when these planets dominate at the ingress.
The cold weather planets—Saturn, Uranus, and often Mercury—are invariably present in
ingress and lunar phase charts that refl ect lower temperatures. As in other intense weather sys-
tems, Pluto can function to intensify the cold rather than bring warmer temperatures. When
Saturn and Uranus are combined, temperatures are often unseasonably cold, and this can be
amplified when Jupiter is also involved. An emphasis of cold planets in generally warmer sea-
sons indicates unseasonably cool temperatures.
Aquarius nearly always indicates very cold temperatures, and the same is often true with
Capricorn. Mercury retrograde in Aquarius is associated with windy, cold weather, and Venus
in Aquarius can reflect icy temperatures.
Another important consideration when forecasting heat and cold is declination. When a sig-
nificant number of planets-—six or seven or more—are in southern declination, cold temper-
atures can be expected in the Northern Hemisphere; the reverse is true when many planets are
in northern declination—-temperatures are generally warmer.
The Sun, Mercury, and Venus are always so close together that they are all in southern decli-
nation during the winter months and in northern declination during the summer. The change
in declination generally happens within a few weeks of when the Sun enters north or south
declination (at the ingress), depending on the retrograde patterns of Mercury and Venus. As a

=== Page 94 ===
result, the impact of the slow-moving outer planets in long-term weather trends is of even
greater significance.
When many planets are in southern declination during winter months, the trend is for cold-
er weather; this is especially true when the planets are also in longitudinal aspect (conjunction,
opposition, etc).
The Moon, Mars, and Jupiter, which transit more rapidly, can be key factors in flipping tem-
peratures one way or the other, depending on whether they tip the balance to southern or
northern declination. Signs of northern declination are Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo,
and Virgo; southern declination signs are Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, and
Pisces.
Pinpointing a specific temperature is unrealistic with astrometeorology. Rather, think in
terms of temperature range: seasonal, unseasonal, above average, below average, etc. If you see
few or no planetary influences that would indicate temperatures below or above average, condi-
tions will be seasonal. Again, it's important to learn the climatology of the location. You can
find daily averages for most locations at www.wunderground.com.
Phoenix,Arizona, 1990and2013
Although the desert Southwest is accustomed to extreme temperatures on the hottest summer
days, there was a new high in Phoenix on June 26, 1990: 122 F. Air travelers found themselves
stranded when the airport was forced to close, because aviation tables listing parameters neces-
sary for takeoff stopped at 120 F. Motorists experienced overheated engines, and residents and
power companies hoped the high demand for energy and stress on air conditioners would sur-
vive the strain.
The summer ingress chart (inner wheel of Temperature 1) promised unseasonably high tem-
peratures, with Mars in Aries square Jupiter and Neptune and inconjunct Pluto. Mars and
Jupiter were in northern declination, further intensifying the planets' natural tendencies. Pluto
was heavily aspected: Sun sesquisquare, Mars inconjunct, Jupiter trine, and Neptune sextile.
Jupiter was in opposition and contraparallel to Neptune, and Venus was parallel and the Sun
sextile the Midheaven. Both the meridian and the horizon were aspected by the solar eclipse of
January 26, 1990, at 7 Aquarius.
The planetary pattern was nearly the same the next day when the lunar phase occurred
(outer wheel of Temperature 1), aggravating the ingress indicators. When an ingress and a
lunar phase occur very close together, the indicated weather pattern is usually intensified. The
Mars, Jupiter, and Neptune aspects were still in effect, and the Sun and Jupiter were contra-
parallel the IC. Aspecting the meridian by trine/sextile was the lunar eclipse of February 9,
1990, at 21 Leo.

=== Page 95 ===
On June 26, 1990, transiting Venus at 2 Gemini was semisquare ingress Jupiter and Mars.
The transiting Moon in late degrees of Leo was contraparallel ingress Mars, square ingress
Venus, and semisquare ingress Jupiter. The same transiting aspects occurred with the lunar
phase chart.
This event demonstrates the power and importance of parallels in astrometeorology. Pluto in
the fourth house of the ingress chart promised a hot summer to come in the West, but it was
only through a parallel that the lunar phase chart indicated which week would be one of exces-
sive heat; Pluto was contraparallel the Ascendant. To further indicate that Phoenix would expe-
rience intense heat, Jupiter and the lunar phase Sun were contraparallel the lunar phase IC,
and Venus was parallel the ingress Ascendant. Also significant was how the two charts were
linked; the lunar phase meridian and horizon aspect the ingress meridian and horizon by
semisquare/sesquisquare.

=== Page 96 ===
Temperature i
Inner Wheel=SMmmer Ingress / Natal Chart / June 21, 1990, 77m / 8:34 am MST +7.00
Phoenix, A2 / jj0N26'34" ii2°Wo4'24" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus /Mean Node
Outer Wheel=LMnar Phase / JVatal CTmrt / June 22, 1990, Fri / 11:54 am MST +7.00 Phoenix,
A2 /33°N26'54" ii2°Wo4'24" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus /Mean Node
Further indicators of high heat in Phoenix were ingress aspects to the angles: Sun trine/
sextile the meridian, and Uranus (high pressure) and Pluto inconjunct/semisextile the hori-
zon. In the lunar phase chart, the Sun was contraparallel and Uranus parallel the IC.
Twenty-three years later, Phoenix again experienced an extremely high temperature of 118 F.
The Sun, Mars, Jupiter, and Pluto were involved in the summer ingress charts of both 1990
and 2013, but Uranus had a much stronger presence in the 2013 event (inner wheel of Temper-
ature 2). In 2013, Uranus was sextile Mars (heat), square Pluto (high pressure, excessive heat or

=== Page 97 ===
cold), and sextile/trine the horizon; Pluto was semisquare and parallel the Midheaven and
semisextile the Ascendant. Other heat aspects at the ingress were Venus sesquisquare Nep-
tune, with Venus trine/sextile the meridian and Neptune semisextile/inconjunct the horizon;
and Venus, Mars, and Jupiter all in parallel aspect. There were seven planets in northern decli-
nation.
Lunar phase aspects (middle wheel of Temperature 2) for June 23 were mostly the same be-
cause only a few days separated the two dates. However, Neptune was conjunct the Mid-
heaven, trine the Sun, and sesquisquare Mercury (these aspects also indicate the start of the
monsoon season, which brings a southerly flow of moist, humid air). Lunar phase Uranus was
semisquare/sesquisquare the meridian (high pressure), Jupiter was trine/sextile the meridian
(high pressure), and the Sun was conjunct and parallel Jupiter (heat).
The temperature climbed all week and culminated on June 29 with 118 F. On that date, tran-
siting Mars was conjunct the June 23 lunar phase Ascendant, Venus was semisextile Jupiter
and sesquisquare/semisquare the lunar phase horizon, and the Sun was opposition Pluto
(high heat). The parallels in effect at the ingress and lunar phase were still active in the tran-
sits.
From a meteorology perspective, this high-temperature event was the result of a closed high-
pressure system over the western states. A closed high is an uncommon event and is distin-
guished from a "normal" high by its shape. On meteorology maps, high- and low-pressure sys-
tems are seen as large, loopy waves. When the wave looks like the top half of a circle or an oval,
high pressure is in effect; when the wave looks like the bottom half of a circle or an oval, low
pressure is in effect. These systems usually move in a wave-like pattern across the continent.
When a closed high occurs, however, it is seen as a closed circle or oval on a meteorology map,
and the high pressure is focused or concentrated over an area for an extended time (several
days to a week or more).

=== Page 98 ===
Temperature 2
Inner Wheel=SMmmer Ingress / Natal Chart / June 20, 201J, Thu / 10:04 Pm MST +7:00
Phoenix, AZ /jj°JV26,54" 112° W04'24" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus /Mean Node
Middle Wheel=Lunar Phase / Natal Chart / June 23, 2013, Sun / 4:32 am MST +7.00
Phoenix, AZ / jj°N26j4" 112° W/04'24"/ Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Luuar Pliase / Natal Chart / June 29, 2013, Sat / 9:53 pm MST +7.00 Phoenix,
AZ/33°N26'54" ii2°Wo4'24"/ Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus /Mean Node
The closed high for the 2013 event is reflected in the lunar phase chart through the Sun-
Jupiter conjunction trine/sextile the meridian, and the Mars-Uranus sextile, with Mars con-
junct the horizon. In the 1990 summer ingress chart, the Sun-Jupiter parallel was contra-
parallel Uranus, with Uranus trine/sextile the meridian. (A closed low can also occur, and this

=== Page 99 ===
usually marks an area of extreme low pressure associated with a storm.)
SummerlO 11 HeatWave
Areas from the Plains states to the East Coast experienced the hottest summer on record in
2011. The heat wave began in mid-July and extended into the second week of August. Many
records were set, including in Minnesota, with a record high minimum of 80 F; Arkansas,
with twenty consecutive days of 100 F; and Texas, which had the greatest number of 100 F
days in a calendar year. Kansas, where the average summer temperature is 101.2 F, saw 113 F
on July 27 in Hutchinson and Salina, and Hartford, Connecticut, set a new all-time record
high of 103 F on July 22.
Much of the heat wave was reflected in a Uranus-Pluto square (high pressure, heat), but
Venus, Mars, and Neptune were also prominent. At the ingress, there were thirteen aspects in-
dicative of excessive heat in addition to six planets in northern declination. The aspects were
Mars semisextile Jupiter, sextile Uranus, and square Neptune; Venus semisquare Jupiter;
Uranus square Pluto and semisextile Neptune; Sun semisextile Mars, sextile Jupiter, and trine
Neptune; and Jupiter semisextile Uranus, sextile and contraparallel Neptune, and trine Pluto.
The number of aspects explains why such a massive area was affected, because several of the
aspects made connections with many longitudes and latitudes across the continent. We'll look
at two examples, one in the Midwest and the other on the East Coast.
The June 21, 2011, summer ingress chart for Salina, Kansas (inner wheel of Temperature 3),
showed potential for high temperatures throughout much of the summer. Venus aspected
both the meridian and horizon through a conjunction and square, and Jupiter was semisquare
the Midheaven and sextile the Sun. Note Mars at o Gemini, west of Salina at the ingress. Mars
was conjunct the ingress Midheaven in Colorado, another area that experienced high temper-
atures during the summer of 2011. Using Mars, you could have tracked the heat progression as
this planet transited through Gemini and then Cancer, contacting longitudes all the way to the
east during the succeeding two months.

=== Page 100 ===
Temperature 3
Inner Wheel=SMmmer Ingress / Natal Chart / June 21, 2011, Tue / 12:16:30 pm CDT +3:00
Salina, KS / 38° N30'23" 097° / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus /Mean Node
Middle Wheel=lMnflr Phase / Noted Chart / July 23, 2011, Sat / 0:01 om CDT +5:00 Salina,
KS / 380N3o'23" ogy°W36'4o" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=HigIi Tfeot / Notol Cliort / July 27, 2011, Wed / 12:00 pm CDT +5:00 Salina,
KS /380N3o'23" ogy0W36'4o"/ Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
The temperature in Salina was 113 F on July 27, under the lunar phase chart (middle wheel
of Temperature 3), which had Uranus and Pluto conjunct and square the meridian. The angle
was also aspected by a trine/sextile from Jupiter, which was semisquare Mars. Ingress Venus
was sextile/trine the lunar phase horizon. The solar eclipse of June 1, 2011, at 11 Gemini was

=== Page 101 ===
conjunct the ingress meridian and square the ingress horizon, and the solar eclipse of July i,
2011, at 9 Cancer was conjunct/opposition the lunar phase horizon.
On the date of the season's highest temperature, July 27 (outer wheel of Temperature 3), the
transiting Moon formed a conjunction with lunar phase and transiting Mars as the ther-
mometer headed for 113 F. Transiting Mercury was sextile the ingress Sun, activating the solar
aspects, as well as the lunar phase horizon through a semisquare/sesquisquare. Also reflective
of high heat was transiting Mars parallel ingress Venus and transiting Venus parallel ingress
Mars.
Several days before the Salina high heat, the thermometer soared in Hartford, Connecticut,
when the temperature reached a record high of 103 F on July 22 (outer wheel of Temperature
4). The July 1, 2011, solar eclipse at 9 Cancer aspected the ingress meridian and horizon
through a conjunction and square (inner wheel of Temperature 4).
Ingress aspects were the same in the Hartford chart, but there, the Uranus-Pluto square was
aligned with both the meridian and horizon.
Mars in the Hartford July 15 lunar phase chart (middle wheel of Temperature 4) was trine/
sextile the meridian, parallel the horizon, and sextile Mercury, which was sesqui-
square the Uranus-Pluto square (both lunar phase and ingress) and conjunction-
opposition the lunar phase meridian. Lunar phase Venus was sesquisquare Neptune and
inconjunct/semisextile the meridian and horizon. Jupiter was semisextile Uranus, contra-
parallel Neptune, and trine Pluto, all indicators of high heat. The meridians in the ingress and
lunar phase charts were sesquisquare.
(Mercury conjunct the Midheaven or IC often indicates cooler, windy weather, but this obvi-
ously wasn't true later in the week, and in any case it would be less so with Mercury in Leo, a
fire sign. However, the high temperature on the day of the ingress was a seasonably pleasant
84 F. The next day, as Mercury moved away from the IC, the high was 90 F. It wasn't until the
21st that the temperature rose into the high 90s.)

=== Page 102 ===
05° $ 30'
10 or Mc n
<1
16" 22 09 36' 'A'£
00 GO" ■;u GO
o o" As 13 00° 16 GO 22' 10 ir A- ITF Oo1 07°^ 59 ■00' 09° 57
o 7*
/
■13
\
10 X)" 2)\ M 23 03 ;::j i i :vi
23 )0-46' 25
10
04 04
T ^17. 30" ' 1 ~6 T044 )j< 33T04')J( 30" T04° + ir^42' . tjll 42
3 4 ■ 50 13 As z
Go'
00 32' f 16' \ ir 19" 2" uu iff
/ 00 57 09 22 or.-
or,'
01 10 05 2^ 36 09
05° Vl 30
Temperature 4
Inner Wheel=Summer Ingress / JVotol Chart / June 21, 2011, Tue / i:i6:jo pm EDT +4.00
Hartford, CT/41^45'49" oy2°W4i'o8" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Middle Wheel=Lunflr Phase / Natal Chart / July 15, 2011, Fri / 2:39:36 am EDT +4:00
Hartford, CT / 41^45'49" 072° VT^i'oS" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Hig/i Heat / Natal Chart / July 22, 2011, Fri / 12.00 pm EDT +4:00 Hartford,
CT / 41°N4f 49" oy2°W4To8" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
On July 22, the transiting Sun was inconjunct ingress Neptune, transiting Mercury was
sesquisquare the ingress Ascendant and Midheaven, and transiting Mars was semisquare
ingress Jupiter. Transiting aspects to the lunar phase chart also indicated high heat; Mars par-
allel the horizon and semisextile the Sun, which was parallel the horizon; Venus conjunct Sun;
and Venus parallel Mars and the horizon.

=== Page 103 ===
RioGrande,Texas,March31,1954
The high heat of March 31, 1954, was unexpected and unusual in Rio Grande, Texas, even
though it's one of the southernmost cities in the United States. The temperature reached 108 F
a little more than a week after the spring ingress of March 21.
The ingress chart (inner wheel of Temperature 5) had strong aspects for high temperatures.
Mars opposed Jupiter, an aspect that was intensified because the two were contraparallel. Mars
was also trine Pluto, which was parallel Jupiter and sextile Neptune. Jupiter was parallel
Uranus and sesquisquare Mercury (high pressure), while Venus, Jupiter, Uranus, and Pluto in
northern declination also indicated a higher range of temperature for the season.
Pluto focused its energy on the ingress longitude, as did Venus and Jupiter sextile/trine the
meridian. Venus also was inconjunct/semisextile the horizon. The January 5, 1954, solar
eclipse at 14 Capricorn was sextile/trine the horizon and semisextile/inconjunct the meridian.
The lunar phase chart of March 27, 1954 (inner wheel of Temperature 5), retained the Mars-
Jupiter and Mars-Pluto configurations and the Jupiter-Pluto sextile, and added Mars sextile
Neptune and Jupiter sextile Pluto. One significant factor that indicated an elevated temperature
was numerous Venus aspects; Venus square Uranus, contraparallel Neptune, trine Mars, sex-
tile Jupiter, and trine Pluto. Both January 1954 eclipses aspected the lunar phase meridian: the
January 5 solar eclipse at 14 Capricorn (sesquisquare/semisquare) and the January 19 lunar
eclipse at 28 Cancer (semisextile/inconjunct).
Aspects between the ingress and lunar phase charts were also indicative of heat. The lunar
phase Sun was sesquisquare ingress Pluto, lunar phase Venus was trine ingress Pluto, and
ingress Venus was sesquisquare/semisquare the lunar phase meridian and sextile/trine the
lunar phase horizon.

=== Page 104 ===
Temperature 5
Inner Wheel=Spnng Ingress / Natal Chart / March 20, 1954, Sat / 9:54 pm CST +6:00 Rio
Grande City, TX/ 2 60N22'/[6" og80W4g'i2" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Middle Wheel=LMnor Phase / Nato! Chart / March 27, 1954, Sat / 10.14 flm CST +6:00 Pio
Grande City, TX/ 260N22'46" og8°W4g'i2" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=High Heat / Nato/ Chart / March 31, 1954, Wed / 12.00 pm CST +6:00 Pio
Grande City, TX/ 26°N22'46" 098^49'12" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Transiting aspects on March 31 (outer wheel of Temperature 5) activated the ingress chart.
The transiting Sun at n Aries was conjunct ingress Venus, transiting Venus at 25 Aries was
opposition and parallel ingress Neptune, and transiting Jupiter at 20 Gemini had moved to
within 19 minutes of exactitude in its opposition to ingress Mars. The transiting Sun was

=== Page 105 ===
parallel ingress Venus, and transiting Mars was contraparallel ingress Pluto. The transiting
Moon in late Aquarius and early Pisces set off the ingress Moon, Venus, Uranus, and Neptune
when it formed a semisquare or sesquisquare to each planet.
The lunar phase chart was activated by transiting Venus at 25 Aries in opposition to lunar
phase Neptune, and the transiting Moon aligned with the lunar phase meridian and Venus
and Uranus. Transiting planets in aspect to each other performed a function as well; Moon
semisquare Sun (set off solar aspects), Venus trine Mars, and Mars sextile Neptune. In addi-
tion, transiting Mars was semisquare/sesquisquare the ingress horizon.
Transiting Mars at 25 Sagittarius was trine/sextile the lunar phase meridian and contra-
parallel the lunar phase Ascendant, and transiting Jupiter was parallel the lunar phase Ascen-
dant. Transiting Venus and Jupiter were trine/sextile the lunar phase meridian.
In the ingress chart, transiting Mercury at 12 Pisces was trine/sextile the horizon and semi-
sextile/incon-junct the meridian, and transiting Mars was semisquare/sesquisquare the hori-
zon.
Lawrence,Kansas,Jitly24,1901
The Plains states experienced one of the hottest and most uncomfortable summers on record
in igoi. In July, the thermometer reached 90 F everyday of the month in Lawrence, Kansas. It
soared to 100 F or higher on twenty-one days, including thirteen consecutive days from July
8th to the 25th. For nine days in a row, residents sweltered in 104 F heat and experienced the
peak of 108 F on July 24.
The ingress chart (inner wheel of Temperature 6) had all the planetary configurations for a
hot summer. Seven planets were in northern declination, and the Sun, Mercury, Venus,
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune were in high declination. But that only set the backdrop
for what was to come with succeeding lunar phases throughout July.
Sun parallel Venus, contraparallel Jupiter, and conjunct Neptune all forecast coming heat,
especially with the Sun semisquare/sesquisquare the meridian and inconjunct/semisextile the
horizon. Neptune was inconjunct the Ascendant. Venus contraparallel Jupiter, in itself an as-
pect of heat, was intensified by the Sun-Venus parallel. The same was true of Venus semi-
sextile Pluto. Pluto was square Mars, an aspect of blistering heat, and both planets aspected the
meridian.
The planetary aspects and their connections to the longitude and latitude of Lawrence, while
apparent, were not enough in themselves to indicate temperatures above 100 F for such an ex-
tended period of time. When combined with the lunar phase aspects, however, it was apparent
that Lawrence would experience unprecedented heat. The solar eclipse of May 18, igoi, at 27
Taurus was trine/sextile the horizon.

=== Page 106 ===
The July 8,1901, lunar phase chart got things simmering with Pluto trine/sextile the horizon
and its square to the ingress meridian; Uranus opposed Pluto. The Sun had advanced to a
semisextile with Pluto, fueling the Venus-Pluto aspect in both charts. Mars was square Nep-
tune, and Venus had moved into sizzling Leo. Lunar phase Venus (heat) was parallel the
ingress IC, and Mercury was contraparallel the ingress Ascendant. The lunar eclipse of May 3,
1901, at 12 Scorpio was square the lunar phase horizon.
By the next week, similar aspects were targeting Lawrence, only the chart positions had
changed with the lunar phase of July 15, 1901. Lunar phase Mars was square the ingress Sun
and square Neptune. Venus was semisquare Mars at o degrees declination, intensifying its
characteristic heat. The ingress IC was parallel lunar phase Mercury and Venus, and the lunar
phase Sun was contraparallel the ingress Ascendant.
The lunar phase of July 23, 1901 (outer wheel of Temperature 6), occurred the day before the
thermometer peaked at 108 degrees. The Sun was semisextile Neptune and semisquare Pluto.
Venus was semisquare Mars and sesquisquare Jupiter, and the added aspect of Mars square
Jupiter pushed the temperature into an even higher range. Jupiter parallel Uranus indicated
high pressure over the area. The Sun was trine and contraparallel the IC and semisextile the
Ascendant, Mars was semisextile the Ascendant and Jupiter trined it, and Neptune was incon-
junct the IC and sextile the Ascendant. Aspecting the meridian was the solar eclipse of May 18,
1901, at 27 Taurus, conjunct the Midheaven.

=== Page 107 ===
Temperature 6
Inner Wheel=Summer Ingress / Natal Chart / June 21, igoi, Fri / 9:28 pm CST +6:00
Lawrence, KS / j80Nj8'i8" ogfWi^'oG" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus /Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Lunflr Phase / Natal Chart / July 23, 1901, Tue / 7:5s om CST +6:00 Lawrence,
KS / j80Nj8'i8" ogfWi4'o6" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Aspects between the July 23 lunar phase chart and the ingress chart were many. Of major
significance were lunar phase Pluto square ingress Mars and lunar phase Neptune conjunct
the ingress Sun. Another aspect indicative of high heat, Venus sesquisquare Jupiter, was
intensified (along with July 23 lunar phase and ingress aspects) by lunar phase Jupiter forming
a contraparallel with the ingress Sun, Venus, and Neptune.
Important contacts between planets and angles in both charts targeted Lawrence for

=== Page 108 ===
excessive heat. Lunar phase (and transiting) Mars was sesquisquare the ingress IC, ingress
Venus was sesquisquare the lunar phase IC and semisquare the lunar phase Ascendant,
ingress Sun was sextile the lunar phase IC, and lunar phase Venus was square the ingress
meridian. The lunar phase Sun was conjunct and parallel the ingress Descendant, and the
lunar phase meridian was sextile/trine the ingress horizon.
The ingress chart was activated on July 24 by these transits: Sun at o Leo semisextile Sun,
semisquare Pluto and Mars, and sesquisquare Uranus; transiting Venus at 23 Leo
sesquisquare Jupiter and parallel Pluto; Jupiter contraparallel Venus and the Sun; and Mars
contraparallel Moon. The transiting Moon in Sagittarius/Scorpio first formed a trine to ingress
Venus and a sesquisquare to ingress Neptune and then made a conjunction to the ingress
Midheaven.
ColdWaveof] 899
Temperatures plummeted to below o F as far south as Louisiana and the Florida Panhandle
during the mid-February 1899 cold wave, when an all-time low temperature was recorded in
Milligan, Ohio; -39 F. This cold wave was preceded by another at the end of January/early Feb-
ruary. Included in the February 1899 Monthly Weather Review, published by the American
Meteorological Society, was this comment:
These cold waves established many new landmarks for future reference, whether we con-
sider the instrumental reading or the physical phenomena resulting from the cold. The most
striking of the latter perhaps was the flow of ice down the Mississippi River on the 17th, past
New Orleans and into the Gulf of Mexico, an event never before witnessed within the mem-
ory of man. Ice an inch thick formed at the mouth of the Mississippi in East and Garden Is-
land bays [Louisiana], and the temperature fell to 10 degrees F on the 13th. The loss of
human life, from January 29th to February 13th, by freezing and avalanches (in Colorado) as
near as can be ascertained was 105 persons.
Two inner planets, Mercury and Mars, were retrograde at the December 21, 1898, winter
ingress (inner wheel of Temperature 7), and Venus was stationary direct. Retrograde and sta-
tionary planets often indicate extreme weather and characteristics that are opposite the norm;
for example, retrograde Mars can indicate cold weather rather than warm.
On the date of the ingress in Milligan, Ohio; Tallahassee, Florida; and Minden, Lousiana,
the Sun was conjunct retrograde Mercury in cold Capricorn, stationary direct Venus was con-
junct Uranus (cold), and retrograde Mars was trine Uranus (cold) and square Jupiter (cold).
There was also a long-term cold weather aspect: Saturn opposition Pluto. Six planets were in
southern declination. Saturn was parallel Uranus, and both planets were contraparallel

=== Page 109 ===
Neptune; all three were in declination with Mercury contraparallel Mars.
The lunar phase (a new Moon) in effect for the mid-February cold wave occurred on Feb-
ruary 10 (outer wheel of Temperature 7). The new Moon in icy Aquarius was sextile Saturn
(cold) and inconjunct retrograde Mars (cold). Mercury was square Jupiter in Aquarius and
Scorpio, both cold signs, and sextile Uranus (cold). Mercury was approaching a trine/sextile to
the ingress Pluto-Saturn opposition that would be exact a few days later. Retrograde Mars was
sesquisquare Uranus (cold). A new outer-planet aspect had formed by the date of the lunar
phase: Saturn opposition Neptune (cold, heavy precipitation). (Note: During this lunar phase
period, the Washington, DC, area experienced a blizzard, with snow accumulation of 25-30
inches.)
There was a massive high-pressure system centered north of Montana on February 10 that
had moved south by the morning of the nth, and then developed into a closed high (extreme
cold) that extended from Montana to the Dakotas and south into the central Plains by evening.
On the 12th, the closed high moved farther south, centered in the Plains on the north and
south Texas on the south. On February 13, the closed high moved eastward, with its southern
edge over the Florida Panhandle. Note the strong presence of Uranus in both the ingress and
lunar phase charts, and, to a lesser extent. Jupiter, both planets of high pressure.

=== Page 110 ===
21 o C£ 19'
Temperature 7
Inner Wheel=Winter Ingress / JVotal Chart / December 21, 1898 NS, Wed / 12:59:11 pm CST
+6:00 Milligan, OH /39°JV44'25" 082° Wo6'og" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean
Node
Outer Wheel=Lunar Phase / Natal Chart / February 10, 1899 NS, Fri / 3:51:43 am CST +6:00
Milligan, OH / 0&20 WoG'og" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node

=== Page 111 ===
10° ffi 27
08 .10
o" n 4^ 12 13
T 21 22 13 vD
15 00 ? / 40
07 55
CJ" 23 14 07 12 35
26 46"
/ 0
11
09° 09
38- T13° D ' I
T 10°— 4 5' Mc 1 41' 41'
irv
. 04
.520' 3^ , 27"
o0^ ^
9« .16' ■
2959
\ - 55'
07- MJ"-
ni/ ^
■ / 55
2900 X 28 .11:. 21 12 35
s
■10
o 21 36 07 42
D 08 W 21 24 04 08 40
h As 9 12
10 27
Temperature 8 Inner Wheel= Winter Ingress / Natal Chart / December 21, i8g8 NS, Wed /
o.-jg.'ii om CST +6:00 Minden, LA /32°Nj6'jj" ogfWiy'12" / Geocentric / Tropical /
Placidus / Meon Node
Outer Wheel=Iunflr Pliflse / Natai Chart / February 10, i8gg NS, Fri / 3:31:43 om CST +6:00
Minden, LA /32°Nj6'jj" og3°Wiy'i2" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node

=== Page 112 ===
19° VJ 16
26 OS
9 As 15 D7 04 03 OS
D
O ■i? 21 21 • oi
21 01 03 ■O
X 07
0^0 26" 18° n w 16 '^0 * 05 sr. * 10
11
D 20<>T 10' ^ 7 24- I1U04° 4 •
fib \ \
•ss-^-V 1 9.
6 -27- ^ 45-! 45' 20 Mc
ss
41 14 / / 23 T 01 03-
07 45 n cT 05 13 18
T 22 15
21 26 so
n o" 07 15
CT5 19 16 iO
Temperature 9 Inner Wheel=Winter Ingress / Natal Chart / December 21, 1898 NS, Wed /
12:59:11 pm CST +6:00 Tallahassee, FL /30°NiG'iy" 084° WiG'p" / Geocentric / Tropical /
Placidus / Meon Node
Outer Wheel=lMnor P/iase / Natal Ckart / February 10, 1899 NS, fri / 3:31:43 am CST +6:00
Tallahassee, FL /30°NiG'iy" 084° WiG'jji" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
The Ohio low temperature was caused by another meteorology factor: the o°C isotherm. This
tool is used by meteorologists to help determine temperature and what kind of precipitation an
area will experience (rain, snow, sleet, etc.). Isotherms, which can be seen on meteorology
maps, are a measure of the atmospheric temperature anywhere from the surface to about
1,000 mb (5,000 feet). Very cold temperatures are indicated at and north of the o°C isotherm.
On February 10, 1899, the o°C isotherm extended from Maine, across the Great Lakes, into
central Texas, and northwestward into Montana.

=== Page 113 ===
In Ohio, lunar phase retrograde Mars was conjunct/opposition the ingress meridian, acti-
vating the ingress Mars-Uranus trine (Temperature 7). The new Moon was trine/sextile the
lunar phase meridian, as were lunar phase Saturn and ingress and lunar phase Neptune, acti-
vating the lunar phase Saturn-Neptune opposition. Lunar phase Uranus was semisquare/
sesquisquare the lunar phase meridian. The lunar phase horizon aligned with the cold ingress
retrograde Mercury-Sun conjunction. The solar eclipse of January n, 1899, at 21 Capricorn was
conjunct the ingress Midheaven.
In Louisiana, the lunar phase Saturn-Neptune opposition was conjunct the lunar phase hori-
zon, and the new Moon was sextile/trine the same point (Temperature 8). The lunar phase and
ingress meridians were aligned by square aspect. Lunar phase Mercury was opposition ingress
Mars (cold), sextile lunar phase Uranus (cold), and semisquare/sesquisquare the lunar phase
horizon. The transits on February 14 were the triggers, as Mercury in cold Aquarius formed a
trine with ingress/lunar phase Pluto, a sextile with ingress Saturn, and a semisquare with the
ingress retrograde Mercury-Sun conjunction in cold Capricorn. Transiting Venus in cold
Capricorn was aligned with the ingress meridian, and the transiting Sun was semisquare/
sesquisquare the same point.
Florida's low temperature, also on February 14, is reflected in transiting Mercury sextile/
trine ingress/lunar phase Pluto and sextile ingress Saturn (cold), which was sextile/trine the
ingress meridian. The meridians in the lunar phase and ingress charts were square, and lunar
phase and transiting Mars were aligned with both meridians and sesqui-
square the ingress Venus-Uranus conjunction (cold, high pressure). The new Moon also as-
pected both meridians, by semisextile and trine. The transiting Sun was sextile/trine the
ingress horizon.
Omaha,Nebraska, January-February 1936
During one of the coldest winters in Omaha's history, the average temperature from January
18 to February 19, 1936, averaged -2.8 F. This was the same year that the Great Plains experi-
enced the highest temperatures and worst drought of the 1930s (see chapter 5).
The winter ingress chart (inner wheel of Temperature 10) is an excellent example of Saturn
in aspect with Uranus, possibly the coldest long-term combination; the sextile indicates ex-
treme cold. In the ingress chart, this aspect was intensified because the two planets were also
contraparallel. In Omaha, as in area locations, both Saturn and Uranus aspected both the hori-
zon and meridian through a trine/sextile to the meridian and semisextile/inconjunct to the
horizon. Without a deeper study of the ingress chart, however, it would be difficult to forecast
the extended cold wave based solely on this single aspect. By the time the bitter temperatures
arrived in January, and throughout the period, Saturn and Uranus were no longer in aspect.

=== Page 114 ===
The ingress Sun was conjunct and parallel the Midheaven and trine Uranus, another indi-
cator of cold weather, and one that activated the Saturn-Uranus sextile. The Uranus-
Neptune configuration of unusual weather was present (a sesquisquare), and seven of the
ten ingress planets were in southern declination (cold). The solar eclipse of July 30, 1935, at 8
Leo was trine/sextile the horizon, and the solar eclipse of December 25, 1935, at 3 Capricorn,
three days after the ingress, was conjunction/opposition the ingress meridian.
The month-long deep freeze began two days after the January 16, 1936, lunar phase (outer
wheel of Temperature 10), which featured Mercury in cold Aquarius conjunct and parallel the
Midheaven. Venus was sesquisquare Uranus (overcast, cold), Mars was sextile and contra-
parallel Uranus (overcast, cold), and Jupiter sesquisquared Uranus (intense cold front). The
Sun-Saturn semisquare was another indicator of cold temperatures.
Saturn and Uranus again aspected the horizon and meridian: Saturn inconjunct/semisextile
the meridian and square the horizon, and Uranus semisextile/inconjunct the horizon. The
lunar eclipse of January 8, 1936, at 17 Cancer was semisquare/sesquisquare the horizon, and
seven planets were in southern declination.
Aspects between the ingress chart and the January 16 lunar phase chart targeted that week as
the first of the intensely cold weather. The Ascendants were sextile, and ingress Mars (in
Aquarius and sextile Jupiter) was conjunct the lunar phase Midheaven, indicating cold Arctic
air pushed to the south. Ingress Jupiter was contraparallel the lunar phase IC.

=== Page 115 ===
03° 37'
Temperature 10
Inner Wheel=Winter Ingress / Natal Chart / December 22, 1935, Sun / 12:38 pm CST +6:00
Omaha, NE / jENi^'ji" 095° Wjfi'ij" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus /Mean Node
Outer Wheel=LMnflr Phase / Natal Chart / January 16, 1936, Thu / 1:40 pm CST +6.00
Omaha, NE / jfNiy'ji" ogfWyG'ij" / Geocentric / Tropical /Placidus/Mean Node
Other important aspects between the two charts were lunar phase Jupiter sesquisquare
ingress Uranus (intense cold front), lunar phase Venus sesquisquare ingress Uranus (overcast,
cold), lunar phase Mars sextile ingress Uranus (overcast, colder), and lunar phase Saturn
square ingress Jupiter (colder).
On January 18, transiting Mars at 3 Pisces formed an exact trine/sextile with the ingress
meridian and a parallel with ingress Saturn in its approach to a conjunction with the same

=== Page 116 ===
planet, while transiting Saturn at 7 Pisces was sextile ingress Mercury (cold). Transiting Mer-
cury at 16 Aquarius was sesquisquare/semisquare the ingress meridian. The transiting Moon
in Scorpio was square the lunar phase meridian and semisquare the ingress Sun, setting off
the ingress Sun-Uranus trine. The transiting Moon also formed a semisextile to the Venus-
Jupiter conjunction in the lunar phase chart (which was sesqui-
square lunar phase Uranus) and a square to lunar phase Mercury, while the transiting Sun
at 27 Capricorn was opposition ingress Pluto and parallel lunar phase Venus. Transiting
Jupiter was contraparallel the lunar phase Ascendant. Two other factors added considerable
thrust to the already apparent aspects: transiting Uranus turned stationary direct January n,
and transiting Mercury would form its retrograde station on January 23, the day before the
next lunar phase.
In the lunar phase chart of January 24, retrograde Mercury in Aquarius indicated icy tem-
peratures, as did Mars conjunct Saturn (cold). Uranus was aligned with the horizon and
square the Sun and Moon. Seven planets were in southern declination.
In the lunar phase chart of January 30, when there were six planets in southern declination,
the scenario was much the same, but more intense. Retrograde Mercury was conjunct the Sun
in Aquarius, with both planets aligned with the horizon, while Uranus was conjunct and par-
allel the Midheaven. Mars, in a separating conjunction with Saturn, was approaching a
semisquare to Uranus.
The icy blast continued into the next month with the lunar phase of February 7, 1936, and
six planets in southern declination. In that chart, Uranus was in an almost exact conjunction
with the IC, and retrograde Mercury, still in Aquarius, was square Uranus and the meridian.
Saturn, which had formed an inconjunct/semisextile to the horizon in the January 30 chart,
was sextile/trine the horizon in the February 7 chart.
When Mercury turned direct on February 13, residents of Omaha had only one more lunar
phase to go before the bitterly cold temperatures would begin to lift. At the lunar phase of Feb-
ruary 15, with seven planets in southern declination, Uranus was again prominent, this time in
a nearly exact square with stationary direct Mercury. Jupiter, contraparallel the IC, continued
its sesquisquare to Uranus, and Saturn again aspected the meridian and horizon. Lunar phase
Mercury was inconjunct/semisextile and Uranus sextile the ingress meridian.
Chicago,Illinois, January 10,1982
Chicago, noted for its frigid January temperatures, lived up to its reputation on January 10,
1982, when the low was -26 F and winds blew at 25 mph. The combination resulted in a wind
chill of -58 F. The icy temperatures on January 10 were only a single incident in what was one
of the most severe winters on record for Chicago and Illinois. There were eighteen major

=== Page 117 ===
winter storms, and the winter season was unusually long, extending from November through
April.
At the winter ingress (inner wheel of Temperature n), there were several key factors that
indicated a cold winter; Sun semisextile Uranus is a cold wave configuration, as are Mars sex-
tile Uranus, Jupiter semisextile Uranus, Saturn sextile Neptune, and Saturn contraparallel
Pluto. Note also that the planetary configuration of prolonged cold was present in a
semisquare: Saturn and Uranus. Mercury was prominent in its conjunction with the Descen-
dant, the Sun was contraparallel the Ascendant, and Pluto was semisquare and parallel the IC.
Venus, at its coldest in Aquarius, was inconjunct/semisextile the horizon. Eight planets were
in southern declination.
The many lunar phase aspects (and lunar phase-ingress aspects) involving Uranus reflect
the extreme Arctic high-pressure system and the blast of cold air that was channeled into the
area; a strong low-pressure to the east kept the cold air contained in a much narrower area, pre-
venting it from dispersing over a wider one. The barometer rose to an incredibly high 1057 mb.
(By comparison, the highest pressure ever recorded in the continental United States was 1064
mb at Miles City, Montana, on December 24, 1983.) The Saturn and Venus aspects (and the
approaching semisquare of the Mercury-Venus conjunction) were precursors of the storm of
January 12-13.

=== Page 118 ===
17 16
T
19
Mc «
9 17
07
26 10 06 12 n
45' 00°
A /
07
As^ o 19 0 02 16
11
12 07 07
cn
■^Twoe0 a>
1 27*
>K . -I 4 O ^ n-7«
14
\
19
lU/ 11 or .or
4' -^2>/ -53#>K - 2(r VoA". " ^ 09° + T "">
44
\ ,/ 33
2" 16"
, 48- m, O^^SO' ^ 07'
28' — 26' "h. /
to->
tf -V
02 7* CO o 00° 45
17
<Q 19 51
14° mp
Temperature n
Inner Wheel=Winter Ingress / Natal Chart / December 21, ig8i, Mon / 4:51 pm CST +6:00
Chicago, IL / 4TN51' oSy°Wjg' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=lMnor Phase / Natal Chart / January g, ig82, Sat / 1:53 pm CST +6:00
Chicago, IL / 4TN5T 0S70 W39' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
By the time of the January 9, 1982, lunar phase (outer wheel of Temperature 11), Venus, still
in Aquarius, had turned retrograde, aggravating its tendency toward cold. Its conjunction with
Mercury, with both planets square Jupiter, targeted Chicago through Venus's contraparallel to
the IC. More intensity was indicated by Mercury's sextile and parallel to Uranus. Other indi-
cators of cold weather were the Sun square Saturn, semisquare Uranus,
inconjunct/semisextile the meridian, and aligned with the horizon by declination, as well as
the still-present Saturn-Uranus semisquare. The wind, which only aggravated the cold, was

=== Page 119 ===
indicated by Pluto sesquisquare the lunar phase Ascendant; retrograde Venus conjunct Mer-
cury (semisextile/inconjunct the ingress horizon) and trine Mars, and ingress Mars
sesquisquare/semisquare the lunar phase horizon.
Lunar phase Venus formed a conjunction with ingress Venus, and both were in declination
aspect with the lunar phase meridian. The lunar phase Sun was square Saturn in both charts.
Further links between the two charts were the lunar phase horizon square the ingress merid-
ian and the horizons of both charts parallel each other.
On January 10, 1982, the transiting Sun at ig Capricorn was square ingress Saturn, and the
conjunction of Venus to its ingress position was exact. Transiting Venus at 7 Aquarius was also
semisextile ingress Mercury, transiting Mercury at 7 Aquarius was conjunct ingress and lunar
phase Venus, and transiting Jupiter at 7 Scorpio was square ingress Venus—all demonstrating
the chilling power of planets in Aquarius. Transiting Mercury was parallel ingress Uranus (de-
scending cold air), transiting Saturn was in declination aspect with the ingress meridian, and
transiting Mercury formed an inconjunct with the ingress Ascendant that morning; the Mer-
cury aspects reflected windy conditions.
The transiting planets also impacted the lunar phase chart. Transiting Venus at 7 Aquarius
formed a conjunction with lunar phase Mercury and was square lunar phase Jupiter, which
also was square transiting Mercury at 7 Aquarius. The transiting Moon in early Leo was trine
and contraparallel lunar phase Uranus and opposed lunar phase Venus and Mercury. It also
formed a contraparallel with lunar phase Mercury.
Transiting aspects that day were similar: Mercury conjunct Venus at 7 Aquarius, and Mer-
cury and Venus square Jupiter at 7 Scorpio. The triggering Moon in early Leo was also
sesquisquare/semisquare the ingress meridian and semisquare/sesquisquare the lunar phase
horizon.
[wntgntg]

=== Page 120 ===
CHAPTER 8
Hurricanes
Some of the worst weather-related disasters in history have occurred as a result of the destruc-
tive force of a hurricane, which comes from two factors: wind and water. Every fall, meteorol-
ogists watch storms developing near the Cape Verde Islands off the coast of Africa and then
track their progress across the Atlantic Ocean to the East Coast of the United States. Hurri-
canes that strike the U.S. can also form in the Gulf of Mexico, the Caribbean Sea, or near Baja
California. When hurricanes develop in the Indian Ocean, they are called cyclones; those that
develop in the Pacific Ocean are called typhoons.
The evolution of a hurricane from tropical depression to tropical storm to hurricane as it
gathers strength while traveling from the African coast to the U.S. coast can take a week or
more—ample time to build into a mass of destruction and to warn coastal residents if mete-
orologists and computer modeling correctly predict when and where it will make landfall. Deter-
mining these three factors—if, when, and where—is an area where astrometeorology can be of
tremendous value. Even if meteorology is used to forecast a hurricane, the astrometeorologist
can determine exactly when and where the eye will cross land, thereby saving lives and prop-
erty.
A hurricane is a massive collection of bands of thunderstorms spiraling counterclockwise to-
ward the center (eye) and moving generally east to west/west to east or north to south/south to
north over an ocean. Typically measuring 300 miles in circumference, with winds of 74 mph
or more, a hurricane can produce waves in excess of fifty feet. Unlike with an extratropical cy-
clone (a major—usually winter—storm over land that has a counterclockwise movement and
looks similar to a hurricane on satellite images), the center of a hurricane is warmer than the
surrounding air.
Hurricanes form in the tropics because the climate provides the necessary ingredients: a
wide expanse of warm water and warm, humid air. Warm water powers hurricanes, and inside
a hurricane, humid air rises and condenses into drops that release heat. The heat warms the
surrounding air, making it lighter. The lighter air rises, and as warm air rises, more flows in to
replace it, creating wind. High pressure in the upper atmosphere helps pump away the rising
air.
As the hurricane travels across the ocean, winds push the water toward its center, and as
long as the hurricane remains offshore, this wall of water is mostly submerged. However,
when the eye, which has lower atmospheric pressure, crosses land, the water wall rises and
surges over the land, with the wind pushing it. This water surge often causes more damage to
coastal areas than does the wind of a hurricane. It can be as much as twenty feet high, and is

=== Page 121 ===
compounded by the six to twelve inches of rain that generally accompany the storm's arrival on
land. The heaviest precipitation and highest winds in a hurricane are on the right side, in the
right front quadrant of the storm, where tornadoes also often occur once the storm makes
landfall.
Planetary signatures of a hurricane are hard and neutral aspects between Mercury and
Uranus, Mercury and Neptune, Mars and Uranus, and Mars and Neptune. Mercury or Mars
represents the wind, Uranus represents the upper atmosphere high pressure necessary to keep
the wind/water hurricane engine running, and Neptune represents counterclockwise winds
and low pressure. With strong Saturn aspects, the pressure in the eye can be much lower. Note
that the key ingredients of a hurricane are the same as those for a tornado, indicating the
counterclockwise air movement typical of both phenomena.
Hurricane Sandy,October29,2012
Hurricane Sandy, which evolved into Superstorm Sandy, affected twenty-four American states,
including the entire Hast Coast from Florida to Maine, and caused particularly severe damage
in New York and New Jersey, where it made landfall at about 8:00 pm with 80 mph winds. Its
storm surge flooded streets and subway tunnels, and many of New Jersey's beaches shrunk by
thirty to forty feet. Power outages affected 10 million people, and numerous fires ignited as a
result of ruptured natural gas mains. Total damage was more than $65 billion, making it the
second-costliest storm in U.S. history. At least 286 people died. Ingress and lunar phase charts
for Atlantic City, New Jersey, are used here, as this city was close to where Sandy made land-
fall.
The September 22, 2012, autumn ingress chart (Hurricanes 1) showed strong potential for
heavy precipitation, flooding, and a hurricane: Neptune conjunct the IC, which was com-
pounded by its placement in wet Pisces; this is an example of a planetary conjunction to the IC
that shows the greatest impact to the north. With this planet so prominent in the New Jersey/
New York area at the ingress, a hurricane was almost guaranteed. Mars (wind) was conjunct
the Ascendant and sesquisquare Uranus, another hurricane aspect that also indicates wind
and stormy conditions. There was a third hurricane aspect at the ingress: Mercury opposition
Uranus (hurricane, wind). Venus was square Mars and the Ascendant, another storm and pre-
cipitation aspect, and the area was also prime for a low-pressure system because of ingress Sat-
urn sextile/trine the meridian.
Sandy began on October 22, 2012, as a low-pressure system in the Caribbean Sea, as the
transiting Sun formed a conjunction with transiting Saturn conjunct the IC in the Caribbean
(Hurricanes 2). Both planets were sesquisquare Jupiter, an aspect of storms and low pressure,
and Saturn was trine Neptune (precipitation). The tropical disturbance quickly strengthened

=== Page 122 ===
and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Sandy, gradually intensifying as it moved northward.
Sandy became a hurricane on October 24, and crossed Jamaica, Cuba, the Dominican Repub-
lic, Puerto Rico, and the Bahamas on its path toward the United States, during which it was
upgraded and downgraded several times.
Sandy's progress through the Caribbean and northward along the American East Coast oc-
curred while the lunar phase of October 21, 2012, was in effect. Even though its impact on the
northeastern United States the night of October 29, 2012, was devastating, by that time Sandy
was no longer a tropical storm. It briefly reintensified to a Category 2 storm that morning, and
then diminished as it approached the New Jersey coast after the new lunar phase went into ef-
fect that afternoon.
As obvious as the hurricane potential is in the ingress chart, it is less so in the lunar phase
chart for Atlantic City (Hurricanes 3) and the comparison between the two because there are no
specific hurricane signatures. Nevertheless, there were significant aspects.

=== Page 123 ===
27" <Q 29*
21 41
9
cn
29 35
17
V
44'
o
? 00'
00' / 09° - 17 ^ 00'
ir 44
18' 26°
16 28°
28'
/ 17
fib i9oni/S2'
■ (f 33 33'
21 17° 00
57 27 T 49" VJ
1) 06 T 18' 26
\ 06
¥
21° 41
X 35 29
27
Hurricanes i: Autumn Ingress / Natal Chart / September 22, 2012, Sat / 10:48:59 am EDT
+4:00 Atlantic City, NJ /3gaN2i'5i" oy4°W25'24" / Geocentric / Tropical/ Placidus / Mean
Node

=== Page 124 ===
05
\ T
54'/ 15 39 27
CO 51' 01° .00 22 X 28
01 01
<Q 42' VJ290
3) 08
15'
V \ VJ 07
27 54'
<Q 47' 20
22 or (IF ag- io 57 10 22 (lb
d" fib
9 22
29o01
O1
26 18
UP 52 01
29°:^
Hurricanes 2: Lunar Phase / Natal Chart / October 21, 2012, Sun / 11:31:58 pm EST +5:00
Caribbean Sea / iy0Noo' 072° Woo' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Meon Node

=== Page 125 ===
Hurricanes j: Lunar Phase / Natal Chart / October 21, 2012, Sun / 11:31:58 pm EOT
+z}:00Atlantic City, NJ074° W25'24" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean
Node
The lunar phase chart of October 21, 2012, for Atlantic City had a Uranus-Pluto square (ex-
treme weather and high winds) in aspect to the meridian. Mars was semisextile Pluto and as-
pecting both the meridian (trine/sextile) and the horizon (sesquisquare/semisquare), bringing
the Uranus-Pluto aspect into effect at that longitude and latitude. Jupiter was parallel the
Ascendant and sesquisquare Saturn (storm, low pressure).
Ingress Mercury was conjunct the lunar phase IC (activating the ingress Mercury-Uranus
opposition), the lunar phase horizon was square ingress Saturn, and the lunar phase Sun-
Saturn conjunction was trine the ingress IC conjunct Neptune.

=== Page 126 ===
As the storm arrived in New Jersey, transiting Mercury was square the ingress IC-Neptune
conjunction, activating the hurricane potential of the ingress chart. Transiting Mars was semi-
sextile and transiting Venus semisquare the ingress Ascendant. These transits were the final
indicators of where Sandy would make landfall in the northeastern United States.
However, Sandy was not finished after it made landfall. Instead, it became Superstorm
Sandy, evolving from a tropical cyclone into an extratropical cyclone. Look again at the lunar
phase chart for Atlantic City and notice Uranus in the ninth house. This represents a blocking
high (high-pressure system) over the Atlantic Ocean that prevented Sandy from taking the
usual hurricane path; most hurricanes arc to the right, missing the northeastern United States.
So Sandy had nowhere to go but farther onto land. And there it encountered a large, intense
atmospheric trough (a low wavy loop that was the opposite of the high wavy loop of the high-
pressure system over the Atlantic). Sandy essentially became trapped between the deep trough
and the high-pressure system. Both of these systems are reflected in the October 29 lunar
phase chart (Hurricanes 4). Jupiter to the left of the IC represents the high-pressure system,
and Mercury to the left of the Midheaven and square Neptune represents the trough. Mercury
also indicates the strong cold front associated with the trough.

=== Page 127 ===
7* 22 10
35 29
uu
13 28
16
07 00
22 23 41 28
O
/ 06 m. 08 02 55
/
47 m..
52'
.-or 9 oo 24 33 15 15
X '
41' 41
24 T 05
¥
47
29 41*
06 T SI D 56 08
19
15
29 35
« cr> vjD 28 13
n 22 10
Hurricanes 4: Lunar Phase / Natal Chart / October 29, 2012, Mon / 3:49:26 pm £DT +4:00
Atlantic City, NJ /39°N21'51" 074° W25'24" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Sandy was able to transition from tropical to extratropical because of an influx of warm, trop-
ical air (lunar phase Venus semisquare/sesquisquare the ingress horizon) and cold air (lunar
phase Uranus sesquisquare/semisquare the ingress horizon). This was the only time in
recorded history that a hurricane transitioned into a hybrid storm. Its effects were in evidence
as far west as the Great Lakes, creating waves in some locations as high as twenty-three feet,
and three feet of heavy, wet snow accumulated in West Virginia and North Carolina.
HurricaneCharley,August13,2004
Charley, classified as Category 4, was the strongest hurricane to hit Southwest Florida since
Hurricane Donna in i960. It made landfall near Port Charlotte, which, along with other

=== Page 128 ===
nearby cities, was isolated for nearly two days because downed trees, power poles, power lines,
and debris filled the streets. Buildings collapsed under wind gusts as high as 147 mph. Dam-
age was more than $13 billion, and thirty-fi ve people died as a result of the storm.
The June 20, 2004, summer ingress chart (inner wheel of Hurricanes 5) had no major in-
dications of hurricane potential unless we look a bit closer. Mercury was sesquisquare Neptune
(hurricane), with Neptune sesquisquare/semisquare the meridian and semisextile/inconjunct
the horizon. What added to the potential of the weaker semisquare was retrograde Venus
square Jupiter and trine Neptune (heavy precipitation). Pluto (wind) was sextile/trine the
meridian, and although Uranus was sextile/trine the horizon and sesquisquare/semisquare
the meridian, it made no aspects to other planets.
This condition changed at the August 7, 2004, lunar phase (middle wheel of Hurricanes 5),
where stationary retrograde Mercury was opposition both lunar phase and ingress Uranus,
which was parallel the lunar phase Midheaven. By the time of the lunar phase, Saturn was
sesquisquare Uranus (storm) and semisquare Mercury. Lunar phase Venus was sesquisquare
Neptune (heavy precipitation).
There is an obvious reason why Charley targeted Port Charlotte: the signs on the lunar phase
and ingress charts are identical and the degrees are very close, a factor often seen in major
weather events. Add to that stationary retrograde Mercury square ingress retrograde Venus,
with Mercury trine the ingress Ascendant, and lunar phase Saturn (low pressure) square the
ingress meridian; lunar phase Mars was semisquare ingress Saturn (wind, storm).

=== Page 129 ===
Hurricanes 5
Inner Wheel=Summer Ingress / Natal Chart / June 20, 2004, Sun / 8:56:52 pm EDT +4:00
Port Charlotte, FL / 26°N58'55" 082° W05'27" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Middle Wheel=Lunor Phase / JVotol Chart / August 7, 2004, Sat / 6;oi pm EDT +4:00 Port
Charlotte, FL / 26^58'jj" 082° W05 '27" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus/Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Hurncone Charley / Natal Chart / August 15, 2004, Fri / 5:00 pm EDT +4:00
Port Charlotte, FL / 26°N58'55" 082° W05'27" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
As Charley made landfall (outer wheel of Hurricanes 5), transiting Venus (precipitation) was
opposition/conjunction the ingress horizon, and the transiting Sun was trine Pluto and the
ingress IC (wind). Most telling of the power of the hurricane, however, was transiting Mars
opposition ingress Uranus, which aspected both the meridian and horizon in the ingress
chart
HurricanesFrancesandJeanne ,2004

=== Page 130 ===
Two hurricanes hit Stuart, Florida, in 2004, one in August (summer ingress) and the second
in September (autumn ingress). The two charts are obviously very different, so we'll look at the
planetary indicators and positions that targeted this city twice during the same year.
The charts for Hurricane Jeanne bring up a dilemma that you'll see from time to time. The
autumn ingress occurred on September 22, but the lunar phase nearest the hurricane was Sep-
tember 21. The summer ingress was still in effect on September 21, and the autumn ingress
had yet to occur. In this situation, I usually use the ingress that is within a few days of the
lunar phase, but you should experiment and draw your own conclusions. Remember this as
you look at the charts for Hurricane Jeanne, because the lunar phase planets are behind their
positions at the ingress a day later.
The June 20, 2004, summer ingress chart for Hurricane Frances (inner wheel of Hurri-
canes 6) is nearly identical to that for Hurricane Charley because these hurricanes were in the
same season and made landfall in the same state. This brings up the question of why Frances
targeted Stuart instead of Port Charlotte. The answer is in the August 29, 2004, lunar phase
chart (middle wheel of Hurricanes 6), where Saturn (low pressure) was aligned with the merid-
ian at 22 Cancer/Capricorn. In the lunar phase chart for Port Charlotte for the same date, the
meridian is 20 Cancer/Capricorn. So Saturn was closer to the lunar phase meridian in Stuart.
The horizon in the Port Charlotte lunar phase chart was o Taurus/Scorpio, and in the Stuart
chart it was 2 Taurus/Scorpio. At the time of Hurricane Frances, transiting Mars (square
Pluto, wind) was exactly sesquisquare the Stuart horizon, but in Port Charlotte it was 2 degrees
from exact. The Mars and Saturn aspects thus targeted Stuart for Frances's landfall.

=== Page 131 ===
Hurricanes 6
Inner Wheel=Summer Ingress / Natal Chart / June 20, 2004, Sun / 8:56:52 pm EDT +4:00
Stuart, FL / 2y°Nii'^o" oSffWiy'u" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Middle Wheel=lMnor Phase / Natal Chart / August 29, 2004, Sun / 10:22:15 Pm 6DT +4:00
Stuart, FL /2y0NiT^o" o8o0Wiy'ii" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Hurncone Frances / Natal Chart / September 6, 2004, Mon / 2:00 pm EDT
+4:00 Stuart, FL / 2y0Nii'yo" o8o0Wiy'ii" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node

=== Page 132 ===
Hurricanes 7
Inner Wheel=Autumn Ingress / Natal Chart / September 22, 2004, Wed / 12:29:50 pm EOT
+4:00
Stuart, FL /27°Nil'50" 080" W 17'11" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Middle Wheel=lMnflr Phase / Natal Chart / September 21, 2004, Tue / 11:53:34 om EOT +4:00
Stuart, FL /2y0Nii'7o" o8o0Wi5'ii" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Humcone Jeanne / Natal Chart / September 25, 2004, Sot / 11:50 pm £DT
+4:00 Stuart, FL / 2y0NiiJo" o8o0Wiy'ii" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Meon Node
Now look at the ingress charts for Hurricane Jeanne. (Because they are only a day apart, the
lunar phase and ingress charts are nearly identical except for the horizon and meridian.) The
most obvious ingress aspect that made Stuart a target for the second time during the 2004
hurricane season was Mercury conjunct the Midheaven and square Pluto, which was also
square the meridian (inner wheel of Hurricanes 7). When Hurricane Jeanne made landfall

=== Page 133 ===
three days after the ingress (outer wheel of Hurricanes 7), transiting Mercury was conjunct
lunar phase/ingress Mars (wind). Ingress Saturn (low pressure) was semisquare/sesquisquare
the ingress meridian, and ingress Neptune, which was sesquisquare ingress Mars (hurricane,
wind, low pressure), was sextile/trine the horizon.
Jeanne, a Category 3 storm, turned north and remained over land to the Florida-Georgia
state line and eventually became an extratropical cyclone over Virginia on September 28, before
moving back into the ocean. Frances, a Category 2 storm, moved into the Gulf of Mexico.
The charts offer some clues as to why the storms turned in different directions. For Jeanne,
Mercury conjunction the Midheaven indicated winds blowing from the south to the north, and
the square to Pluto indicated an easterly direction; the storm traveled to the northeast. The
ingress chart for Frances also suggests a post-landfall direction. Lunar phase Saturn at 23 Can-
cer on the western side of the chart was square the ingress meridian, about 2 degrees from
exact. Ingress charts for areas to the northwest had lower degrees of Aries/Libra on the merid-
ian, and Frances followed the Saturn "path" to Tampa, which had 23 Aries/Libra on the merid-
ian. You can use this technique to narrow the forecast cone posted on the Web by the National
Hurricane Center. And because warm water is a hurricane's fuel, it's also helpful to check the
aspects of warm planets (Mars, Venus, Neptune) to offshore ocean locations along with Sea
Surface Temperature (SST) maps, also on the National Hurricane Center website.
Galveston,Texas,September 8,1900
One of the most devastating hurricanes to hit the United States powered into Galveston, Texas,
on September 8, 1900. Deaths were estimated at 10,000 to 12,000, with 6,000 in the city it-
self. As the eye of this Category 4 hurricane approached, winds reached no mph and a five-
foot water surge charged onto land. Because buildings had been erected on sand, many toppled
as the water and rain, driven by high winds, pounded them. Every building within three blocks
of the Gulf Shore was destroyed, with a total of 3,600 structures leveled in the storm's path.
Unfortunately, many of the people killed had taken refuge in the buildings when the storm hit.
Rain began early on the morning of September 8 at 7:45 am, accompanied by a plunging
barometer that fell to a low of 945 mb. By noon it was raining heavily, the wind was blowing at
40 mph, and four feet of water stood in the streets. That afternoon, winds increased and rain
fell in torrents. When the leading edge of the eye crossed the shoreline that evening at about
7:00 pm, the initial water surge of four feet was followed by another of twelve feet. It was only
the beginning. The storm continued all night.
This example illustrates how you can take a closer look at hurricane timing, including the
beginning of rain, the intensification of rain and wind, landfall, and the arrival of the eye.
The June 21, 1900, summer ingress (inner wheel of Hurricanes 8) shows hurricane potential

=== Page 134 ===
with Mercury sesquisquare Uranus. However, with only Uranus aspecting the Ascendant
(semisextile), it would take a lunar phase to activate the potential.
At the ingress, Mars was semisextile Neptune, but only Neptune aspected the horizon
(sesquisquare the Ascendant). Saturn was strong, aspecting the horizon and meridian, as well
as forming an opposition with the Sun (easterly winds, slowly falling barometer, and intense
rain with thunder), a contraparallel with Mercury (easterly winds, falling barometer, and rain)
and Neptune (counterclockwise low-pressure system, heavy rain, and humid), and a parallel
with Uranus (high wind and heavy rain). The lunar eclipse of June 13, 1900, at 21 Sagittarius
was sextile the ingress IC, and a significator of unusual weather was present with Uranus con-
traparallel Neptune.
Venus, which had turned retrograde four days before the ingress, was conjunct Mercury in
the ninth house in the water-producing sign Cancer. It was conjunct Mercury, and both plan-
ets were contraparallel Saturn and sesquisquare and contraparallel Uranus, increasing the
potential for damp, cold rain, as did their contraparallel with Jupiter, sextile to Mars, and semi-
sextile to Neptune.

=== Page 135 ===
Hurricanes 8
Inner Wheel=Swmmer Ingress / Natal Chart / June 21, 1900 NS, Thu / 3:40 pm CST +6.00
Galveston, TX/ 2g0Ni8' 094°W48' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Meow Node
Outer Wheel=Iunor Phase / Natal Chart / September 2, 1900 NS, Sun / 1:56 om CST +6:00
Galveston, TX / 2()0Ni8' 094° W48' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Meon Node
At the lunar phase of September 2, 1900 (outer wheel of Hurricanes 8), Saturn formed an
opposition to Neptune, adding fuel to the contraparallel between the two planets, and a parallel
with Uranus. This time, Mercury was trine Saturn (easterly counterclockwise winds and falling
barometer), and Saturn activated the ingress Ascendant by semisquare as it turned stationary
direct on September 4: a major low-pressure system occurred that week. The solar eclipse of
May 28, 1900, at 6 Gemini was trine/sextile the lunar phase meridian.
It would have been easy to overlook the hurricane potential in the lunar phase chart because

=== Page 136 ===
Mercury formed no aspect to Uranus, as it did in the ingress chart. But by September 8, Mer-
cury had moved forward to square that planet, which was trine/sextile the meridian and par-
allel/scon-trapar-allel the horizon.
Unlike in the ingress chart, lunar phase Mars formed five aspects that contributed to the
hurricane: sesquisquare Jupiter (thunderstorm), contraparallel Saturn (windy storm), parallel
Neptune (rapidly falling barometer, hurricane, torrential rain), semisquare Mercury (thunder-
storms), and semisextile Pluto (wind). Mars was conjunct and parallel the lunar phase Ascen-
dant and semisquare/sesquisquare the ingress meridian. Thunderstorms and wind were also
indicated by the Mercury-Pluto parallel in the lunar phase chart and by the transiting Sun
square the ingress Pluto.
Ingress retrograde Venus, after turning direct, had returned to its ingress place at the lunar
phase, indicating rain in its sesquisquare to ingress Uranus, square to ingress Mars, and con-
junction with ingress Mercury. Ingress Uranus sesquisquare lunar phase Venus added to the
rain potential, as did transiting Venus semisquare/sesquisquare the horizon. Lunar phase
Uranus was sesquisquare ingress Mercury, and the lunar phase Sun was square ingress
Uranus within 18 minutes of exactitude.
The hurricane's arrival in Galveston was imminent on the evening of September 7, 1900,
when transiting Mercury at 9 Virgo squared ingress Uranus and formed these aspects to lunar
phase chart planets: semisquare Venus, square the Moon, and conjunct the Sun. The tran-
siting Moon in Pisces trined the ingress Sun, setting off its low-pressure opposition to Saturn
and rain-making conjunction with Neptune. A series of planets in the lunar phase chart was
aspected by the transiting Moon in Aquarius and Pisces: contraparallel Sun, sextile Saturn,
opposition Mercury, trine Neptune, and sesquisquare Mars. Later that evening, the transiting
Sun at 15 Virgo was sextile lunar phase Mars.

=== Page 137 ===
Hurricanes g
Inner Wheel=Swmmer Ingress / Natal Chart / June 21, igoo NS, Thu / 3:40 pm CST +6:00
Galveston, TX/ 2g°Ni8' 094° W48' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Iwnor Phase / NotoZ Cliort / September 8, igoo NS, Sat / 11.06 pm CST +6.00
Galveston, TX/ 2g°Ni8' 094° W4S' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Soon after midnight, the transiting Moon was sextile ingress Saturn, further intensifying the
low pressure, and sesquisquare the lunar phase Ascendant. Around noon on September 8,
1900, the Moon sesquisquare the ingress Mercury-Venus conjunction reflected heavy rain, as
did the transiting Moon's sesquisquare to lunar phase Venus. The transiting Moon made as-
pects to planets in the lunar phase chart as well: parallel the IC, square Uranus, and
sesquisquare Venus before the arrival of the full Moon at 3:40 pm on September 8.
In the September 8 lunar phase chart (outer wheel of Hurricanes 9), Pluto was conjunct the

=== Page 138 ===
Ascendant (high wind), being squared by the Moon in the tenth house and the Sun in the
fourth. Saturn in the seventh house was in a nearly exact opposition to Neptune in the first
house, with both of them aspecting the meridian. Mercury was square Uranus. The full fury of
the hurricane was thus unleashed in the early evening as the transiting Moon moved into an
exact square to Pluto and the transiting Sun to a semisquare with Venus.
The wind and rain further escalated late that afternoon with the Moon's square to ingress
Uranus and Venus's semisextile to the ingress Sun. The eye arrived about 7:00 pm as the
Moon was trine/sextile the horizon, and the wind continued to howl into the night as the
Moon squared ingress Pluto and formed an inconjunct/semisextile with the meridian. The
ingress Moon and Pluto were parallel the lunar phase IC, and the ingress Sun, Mercury, and
Neptune were parallel the lunar phase Ascendant.
Hurricane Frederic,September 12-13,1979
Hurricane Frederic crossed the coastline near the entrance to Mobile Bay, Alabama, on Sep-
tember 12, 1979, destroying or severely damaging most beachfront homes. Maximum wind
speeds were 144 mph, with flood waters rising to between eleven and fourteen feet. Ninety to
ninety-five percent of the power was out in Mobile County, tornadoes were reported, 500,000
people were evacuated from a 100-mile area from Gulfport, Mississippi, to Pensacola, Florida,
and schools were closed for two weeks. Nine people died, and damages reached $1.5 billion.
Frederic then turned northward, finally exiting the North American continent in northern
Maine. As it traveled between Alabama and Maine, it caused $2.3 billion in property damage
and thirteen people lost their lives.

=== Page 139 ===
2V\1s
X wDls
? 00°,
5<y ^ H \ 26' 59 _ K 44*
T / O 29'
06° 00V ^
/n oo-
/ Y 18%
16^
24
55'
D /W oz-v 02°30
11 05'
21 '20°
W w
50'
10'
20
27'
24
£23^25%^ roz
55'
11
II
27' 06 27'
14 mP
cf 11 05 cn >JD 10' 29
02'^ 30
Hurricanes 10
Inner Wheel=SMmmer Ingress / Natal Chart / June 21, 1979, T/tu / 6:57 /?m CDT +5:00
>Mobile, AL / 30° N^ijg" o88°Wo2j^" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Itmar Phase / Natal Chart / September 6, 1979, T/tu / 5.'59 am CDT +5.00
Mobile, AL /jcPAfyTjg" 088° Wo2'35" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean No tie
The June 21,1979, summer ingress chart (inner wheel of Hurricanes 10) shows the potential
for heavy rains and flooding with Neptune conjunct the Ascendant and two other outer plan-
ets, Uranus and Pluto, also aspecting the ascending degree. These three planets, plus one
more, were the key factors in a powerful hurricane arriving on the shores of Mobile.
The ingress chart indicated the potential for a low-pressure system with counterclockwise
winds because Mercury was semisquare Saturn and Venus, with all planets in high decli-
nation; Saturn parallel Pluto suggested a storm with high winds. Thunderstorms manifested

=== Page 140 ===
when the Mars parallel Jupiter and Venus sextile Jupiter aspects were activated. Venus sextile
Jupiter generally indicates fair weather, but when either planet is aspected by Mars, as is the
case here, the combination has thunderstorm potential. In addition to Neptune's placement,
humid, wet weather was sure to be the norm with Sun parallel Mercury and sesquisquare
Uranus; Mercury semisquare Saturn; Venus square Saturn, contraparallel Neptune, and trine
Pluto; and Neptune sextile Pluto. The lunar eclipse of September 6, 1979, at 13 Pisces was
square the Ascendant, and the solar eclipse of August 22, 1979, at 29 Leo formed an incon-
junct with the IC.
Nevertheless, the planetary configurations in the ingress chart gave little clue that Mobile
would find itself in the middle of Hurricane Frederic in September. Absent were the classic
Mercury, Mars, Uranus, and Neptune hurricane aspects. Only Mercury semisquare Saturn
showed the potential for counterclockwise air flow, but hardly enough to forecast a hurricane.
This emphasizes the importance of studying the lunar phase charts and their aspects to the
ingress chart. Nevertheless, because Mobile is hurricane-prone and because Neptune is con-
junct the ingress Ascendant, it would be wise to be alert for lunar phases and hard aspect tran-
sits to Mercury-Saturn.
But before looking at the lunar phase chart for September 6, 1979, let's explore Frederic's
roots. The summer ingress chart for the Cape Verde Islands area off the coast of Africa (Hurri-
canes n) showed major potential for the formation of low-pressure storms with counter-
clockwise winds. When this ingress chart is rotated to reflect the longitude, latitude, and time
zone of the Cape Verde Islands, o Pisces/Virgo is on the horizon and 7 Sagittarius/Gemini is
on the meridian. Venus was parallel the IC (precipitation), and Uranus (high pressure) was
semisextile Neptune in the tenth and contraparallel the IC (precipitation). Mars was square the
horizon, while Saturn (low pressure) was in a nearly exact square to the meridian. Conditions
were ripe for development of many strong low-pressure systems with counterclockwise winds,
some of which would advance from tropical depression to full hurricane. The solar eclipse of
August 22, 1979, at 29 Leo formed an inconjunct/semisextile with the horizon, and the lunar
eclipse of September 6, 1979, at 13 Pisces was square the meridian.

=== Page 141 ===
A 09 10
rru
03 ¥ 40
18 17
01, 49 24 37 06
16 -/v 29 55' 25'
00
X
28'
59" 0 «Q 08
V
28 06° 37'
22 T CD
00 55 29
04 18 27
00
27 00 12
O 09 10
O* o CD
2) 9 CD 40 03
n 07 37
39- fiF08o 00° I
(IF I
28'
Hurricanes u: Summer Ingress / Natal Chart / June 21, 1979, TTiu / 9:57 pm AZ +2.00 Cape
Verde Islands / i6°Noo' 023° Woo' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
A look at the transiting planets in the weeks before Hurricane Frederic arrived in Mobile
shows a number of significant aspects. The Sun, Venus, and Mercury all transited 7 Virgo, set-
ting off the Cape Verde ingress Saturn square to the meridian and, subsequently, ingress
Venus and Neptune. Transiting Saturn, advancing in degree, was narrowing the orb in its ap-
proaching square to ingress Neptune, an aspect that would be exact when Frederic hit Mobile.
At the end of August, transiting Mercury conjunction Jupiter in Leo was semisquare the
ingress Saturn and meridian, providing the heat necessary to begin fueling what would be-
come Hurricane Frederic. The necessary warm water is reflected in transiting Mars inconjunct
Neptune.

=== Page 142 ===
As the storm developed into Hurricane Frederic on its trek across the Atlantic Ocean, the
lunar phase chart of September 6, 1979 (lunar eclipse), for Mobile showed that the city would
be its target (outer wheel of Hurricanes 10). Mercury conjunction the Ascendant and ingress
Saturn and square the meridian promised a low-pressure system with high winds. Neptune
parallel the IC and square Venus and Saturn confirmed the potential for a major low-pressure
system with heavy precipitation and counterclockwise winds. This was aggravated by the Sun
conjunction and parallel Venus and Saturn, the former also adding to the heat.
Mars in high declination had a role as well, with its semisquare to Mercury (thunderstorm,
whipping winds), trine to Uranus (overcast with wind gusts), inconjunct to Neptune in high
declination (humidity, low pressure), and square to Pluto (high wind). Uranus and Neptune
were still aspecting each other, indicating unusual weather. Mars was semisquare/
sesquisquare the meridian and semisquare/sesquisquare the horizon, and Pluto was
semisquare/sesquisquare both the horizon and the meridian.
However, the key factors in the immense storm were the four outer planets—Saturn,
Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto—all in aspect to each other at the same degree in different signs.
By September 12, Saturn had moved forward to 17 Virgo to complete the quartet.
Connections between the lunar phase and ingress charts also set things in motion. In addi-
tion to lunar phase Mercury forming a conjunction with ingress Saturn, Mercury was
semisquare Mercury, lunar phase Sun was square ingress Venus, and lunar phase Venus was
square ingress Neptune. Uranus had returned to within sixteen minutes of its position in the
ingress chart, and lunar phase Mars formed aspects with four ingress chart planets: conjunc-
tion Mercury, trine Uranus, inconjunct Neptune, and square Pluto. Lunar phase Mars also was
contraparallel/parallel the ingress horizon. Lunar phase Jupiter was square ingress Mars,
forming the primary thunderstorm-breeding configuration. Four ingress planets^—Sun, Mer-
cury, Venus, and Neptune-—aspected the lunar phase meridian by parallel or contraparallel.
On the day Frederic arrived, the transiting planets formed ominous aspects with each other
and with the lunar phase and ingress charts. Transiting aspects, all separating, were Sun at 19
Virgo conjunct Saturn at 17 Virgo (low pressure, precipitation), Sun square Neptune at 17
Sagittarius (hot, humid, squall), Mercury at 19 Virgo conjunct Saturn (falling barometer, pre-
cipitation, leaden skies, easterly and counterclockwise winds), Mercury sextile Uranus at 18
Scorpio (high pressure, erratic westerly wind gusts, descending cold air), Mercury square Nep-
tune (low pressure, leaden skies, tornadoes, squall). Mercury semisextile Pluto at 18 Libra
(westerly winds), and Sun semisextile Pluto (heat, thunderstorms). Note that each of these as-
pects, although separating, involved one of the four outer planets.
Other transiting aspects that day were Sun parallel Venus (hot, humid, rain), Mercury par-
allel Saturn, and Mars contraparallel Neptune (both in high declination), to create low pressure,

=== Page 143 ===
rapidly falling barometer, rising very moist air, counterclockwise winds—a hurricane.
The transiting planets contacted the ingress chart, forming more aspects to add to Frederic's
intensity: Sun square Neptune (hot, humid, squall); Mercury square Neptune (low pressure,
humid, tornadoes); Jupiter square Mars (thunderstorms); and Mars conjunct and parallel Mer-
cury (westerly whipping winds, thunderstorms), semisquare Saturn (destructive windy storm),
parallel Venus (thunderstorms), and contraparallel Neptune.
These were the aspects the transiting planets made to the lunar phase chart: Saturn exactly
square Neptune, exactly parallel Venus, sextile Uranus, and semisextile Pluto (cloudy, windy);
Mars semisquare Mercury; and Mercury parallel Saturn and contraparallel the Moon (windy),
parallel the Sun (showers) and Venus (showers), and sextile Mars (westerly winds). Note again
how the transiting planets aspected the four outer planets.
With so many outer planet contacts (and others that were separating), the question arises as
to why Frederic unleashed its fury on Mobile on September 12 instead of a few days earlier.
The transiting Moon on September 12 was in Gemini and triggered the outer planets, all at the
same degree and in aspect with one another, with the Saturn-
Neptune square as the prime force. This illustrates the pivotal role the transiting Moon can
play in timing weather. It was the Moon, the swiftest-moving planet, that indicated Frederic's
arrival on the shores of Mobile on September 12, 1979.
Sajfir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale
The Saffir-Simpson hurricane wind scale assigns a rating between 1 and 5 to each hurricane.
Each of the fi ve categories is defined by the sustained (not gusts) wind velocity and level of
wind damage caused by the hurricane.
Category!
Sustained Winds: 74-95 mph
Damage: Very dangerous winds will produce some damage. Well-constructed frame homes
could have damage to roof, shingles, vinyl siding, and gutters. Large branches of trees will
snap, and shallowly rooted trees may be toppled. Extensive damage to power lines and poles
likely will result in power outages that could last a few to several days.
Category^
Sustained Winds: 96-110 mph
Damage: Extremely dangerous winds will cause extensive damage. Well-constructed frame
homes could sustain major roof and siding damage. Many shallowly rooted trees will be
snapped or uprooted and block numerous roads. Near-total power loss is expected, with out-
ages that could last from several days to weeks.

=== Page 144 ===
CategoryS
Sustained Winds: 111-129 mph
Damage: Devastating damage will occur. Well-built framed homes may incur major damage or
removal of roof decking and gable ends. Many trees will be snapped or uprooted, blocking
numerous roads. Electricity and water will be unavailable for several days to weeks after the
storm passes.
Category4
Sustained Winds: 130-156 mph
Damage: Catastrophic damage will occur. Well-built framed homes can sustain severe damage,
with loss of most of the roof structure and/or some exterior walls. Most trees will be snapped
or uprooted and power poles downed. Fallen trees and power poles will isolate residential
areas. Power outages will last weeks to possibly months. Most of the area will be uninhab-
itable for weeks or months.
CategoryS
Sustained Winds: 157 mph or higher
Damage: Catastrophic damage will occur. A high percentage of framed homes will be de-
stroyed, with total roof failure and wall collapse. Fallen trees and power poles will isolate resi-
dential areas. Power outages will last for weeks to possibly months.
[contents]

=== Page 145 ===
CHAPTER 9
Snow, Sleet, and Freezing Rain
Snow, sleet, and freezing rain are all common forms of precipitation in northern latitudes.
Winter sports enthusiasts look forward to the first snowfall, while commuters everywhere
dread seeing any of the three falling from the sky.
Snow formation requires two ingredients: a sufficient supply of cold air and moisture. When
the cold air descends far south, usually as a result of a jet stream that dips into more southerly
latitudes, people living in areas normally receiving only rain can find themselves in the midst
of all three forms of winter precipitation. Conversely, when cold air and the j et stream remain
far to the north, areas where snow is the norm might experience only rain or sleet.
Major snowstorms and blizzards usually are the result of an extra tropical cyclone, which has
a distinctive "comma" shape and looks similar to a hurricane when viewed on satellite im-
agery. An extratropical cyclone can produce rain on the southern and eastern sides (warm sec-
tor) and snow on the northern and western sides (cold sector), with the heaviest precipitation
on the northern side, northwest of the low pressure. The cyclone has a counterclockwise move-
ment, like a hurricane, and is usually steered from west to east by strong westerly winds. Baro-
metric pressure is lowest at the center of the cyclone, and tight pressure gradients result in
high winds.
Snow storms form in varying patterns and at varying degrees of intensity across the North
American continent. Some begin in the Pacific Ocean, cross the West Coast, and continue
until they reach the Rocky Mountains. If the storm crosses the Rockies and enters the Plains, it
begins to gain strength, drawing moisture from the Gulf that mixes with cold, dry air descend-
ing southeastward from Canada. These contrasting air masses supply the needed components.
As snow storms make their way across the Plains, some veer northward to Canada, crossing
the Great Lakes. Others continue their path eastward and seem to die as they encounter the
Appalachian Mountains. However, sometimes the cold air and counterclockwise winds in the
upper atmosphere move into the Northeast or across the Appalachians to create a "secondary"
storm, resulting in some of the heaviest snowfalls in history along the Atlantic Coast. The same
area also experiences snow when warm, moist air rises along the Atlantic Coast and meets cold
air descending from the north; this can result in a nor'easter.
Rain can begin as snow and melt when it hits warm air closer to Earth. Freezing rain results
when snow melts on its descent through warmer air, then cools in cold air and forms ice as it
hits the colder ground. When snow melts and refreezes in colder air before hitting the earth,
sleet—actually small ice pellets—results. (Often an area will receive both sleet and freezing
rain, the two alternating throughout the storm with slight variations in atmospheric

=== Page 146 ===
conditions.) Snow remains snow when it falls through only cold air.
The first component of a snow storm—moisture—is provided by Venus, Neptune, or planets
in water signs. Add to that the ingredient of cold air, which comes from Uranus, Saturn, Mer-
cury, or planets in the cold signs of Capricorn and Aquarius. The attendant clouds are indi-
cated by, for example, Venus in aspect with Saturn.
Another required element of a snow storm is crystallization of water vapor. Without it, the
condensing water vapor does not form into an ice crystal (snowflake). Maximum crystallization
occurs when Venus (moisture) is in Aquarius (the coldest and most crystallizing sign) or when
Saturn or Uranus forms a sextile with another planet. When Venus in Aquarius is sextile Sat-
urn or Uranus, expect snow, especially if one or more of the planets forms a hard aspect with
the meridian at a specific location.
The Sun in negative or neutral aspect to Mercury, Venus, Saturn, or Uranus during winter
months indicates snow. However, it is the added influence of Mercury, planet of wind, that
brings the drifts associated with many snow storms. If retrograde Mercury forms a hard or
neutral aspect with the Sun and is appropriately positioned in the chart, a blizzard is likely.
Retrograde Venus is also associated with blizzards.
A snow storm becomes a blizzard when temperatures remain below 25 F and wind velocity
is 35 mph or higher. Thus a blizzard requires cold air and high-velocity winds, as well as mois-
ture. Mercury produces high winds when in aspect with Mars; if it negatively aspects Pluto, the
wind is intensified. Major snow storms, and especially blizzards, are often indicated by the
presence of Pluto (high wind) conjunct or square the meridian.
A major snow storm or blizzard requires a constant and extended flow of moisture. When in
hard aspect, Venus and Neptune can indicate heavy precipitation, as does the Sun with Venus
or Mercury. Planets in hard aspect to Saturn also increase the potential. Storms strongly influ-
enced by Saturn are slow to develop and dissipate, and Saturn provides the low pressure (as
does Neptune) component of a storm. Saturn is usually active in an extratropical cyclone.
Blizzard, January25-27,1978
This blizzard buried locations in the Ohio Valley and Great Lakes under heavy snow. Some of
the totals; Detroit, eight inches; South Bend, Indiana, three feet; Chicago, thirteen inches;
Lansing, Michigan, nineteen inches; and Indianapolis, fifteen inches. About twenty people
died as a result of the storm, and many were hospitalized due to exposure. About 100,000
vehicles were abandoned in Michigan alone, and airports were closed. Temperatures in Indi-
anapolis dropped to o F, and drifts were ten to twenty feet high. The charts shown here are for
Indianapolis and are representative of those across the region.
In the December 21, 1977, winter ingress chart (inner wheel of Snow 1), the Sun was

=== Page 147 ===
conjunct retrograde Mercury, a blizzard significator. The Sun also activated Uranus by
semisquare, an indicator of wind and snow. Still more wind was indicated by retrograde Mer-
cury sesquisquare and contraparallel Mars, opposition Jupiter, trine Saturn, semisquare
Uranus, and parallel Neptune (low pressure). To this was added the storm indicators of Mars
square Uranus (wind) and contraparallel Neptune (heavy precipitation, low pressure). Venus
was sesquisquare Mars and contraparallel Jupiter (precipitation).

=== Page 148 ===
Snow i
Inner Chart=Winter Ingress / Natal Chart / December 21, 1977, Wed / 6:23:09 pm EST +5:00
Indianapolis, IN /}g0N46'o6" o860Wog'29" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Middle Wheel=LMnor Phase / Natal Chart / January 24, igy8, Tue / 2:55:30 am £ST +5:00
Indianapolis, IN /gg°N46'o6" 086° Wog'29" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Snow Begins / Natal Chart / January 25, 197S, Wed / 4:37 pm EST +5:00
Indianapolis, IN / jg°N46'o6" 086° Wog'29" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
This combination signals blizzard potential because it incorporates all the necessary plan-
etary factors and aspects; Mercury (wind), Neptune (southerly, moist air), Uranus (cold, de-
scending air, high pressure), Venus and Neptune (precipitation, moist southerly air), Saturn
(cloudy, cold, low pressure), and Pluto (wind). Venus was square the meridian, Mars was
sesquisquare/semisquare the meridian and semisextile the Ascendant, Neptune was incon-
junct the Ascendant, and Saturn was semisquare the Ascendant.

=== Page 149 ===
The January 24, 1978, lunar phase chart (middle wheel of Snow 1) also had strong indicators
for a blizzard. Uranus (cold) was conjunct the Ascendant, sextile Mercury (wind), semisextile
Neptune (precipitation) and Pluto (wind), and sesquisquare Saturn (low pressure). Even more
important and indicative of a blizzard was retrograde Mars opposition the Sun-Venus conjunc-
tion in Aquarius. Mars was sesquisquare Neptune (storm, low pressure), and the Sun-Venus
conjunction was semisquare Neptune.
Lunar phase Mercury was conjunct the ingress horizon, the lunar phase Midheaven was
conjunct ingress and lunar phase Saturn, and the lunar phase Ascendant was trine the ingress
Midheaven. All of these aspects focused the blizzard indicators on the longitude and latitude of
Indianapolis.
The transiting Moon was a good timer for this storm. Snow began falling as the Moon
formed a trine to ingress Venus and an inconjunct/semisextile to the meridian. The next
morning (January 26), the barometric pressure fell to 958 mb (average pressure ranges from
about 980 to 1003, depending on location and low- and high-pressure systems in effect). This
dramatic pressure drop, something that is usually only associated with a strong hurricane, oc-
curred as the transiting Moon formed a conjunction with transiting/lunar phase/ingress Sat-
urn.
The Blizzardof 1888
Possibly the worst nor'easter in recorded history was the Blizzard of 1888, which hit the north-
eastern United States on March 12, 1888. It extended from Maine to Maryland and from Buf-
falo, New York, to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, dropping as much as four feet of snow in some
areas. Drifts towered to thirty and forty feet, with 50 mph winds; the temperature dropped to
10 F. In New York City, there were 200 deaths, and houses were buried in drifts of fifteen to
twenty feet. Throughout the affected area, 400 people died, including 100 seamen who were
on 200 vessels that sank.
Snow began falling just after midnight on March 12,1888, after several days of unseasonably
mild temperatures, and tapered to a light snowfall in the early morning hours of March 13.
The spring-like weather preceding the blizzard was the result of warm, moist air moving
northward along the Atlantic Coast. When this warm air encounters cold, dry Arctic air moving
south from Canada, a low-pressure system develops, and its counterclockwise air flow moves
the warm, moist air over land. The greater the temperature difference, the deeper the low, the
higher the winds, and the more intense the storm. Nor'easters thrive on cold air.
The December 21, 1887, winter ingress chart for New York City (inner wheel of Snow 2) set
the scene for what was to come the following March. Snow and colder temperatures were indi-
cated by the Sun semisquare Venus in wet Scorpio. Jupiter in Scorpio opposition and

=== Page 150 ===
contraparallel Neptune indicated above-normal precipitation and low pressure. Pluto conjunct
the Midheaven and square the horizon, spurred on by the sesquisquare from cold Uranus,
indicated high winds and storms, while Uranus sesquisquare Neptune showed potential for
heavy precipitation and unusual weather.
The Blizzard of 1888 is especially interesting because it occurred during two lunar phases,
the end of one and the start of another. The first lunar phase (outer wheel of Snow 2) set the
blizzard in motion, and the second (outer wheel of Snow 3) provided the fuel that secured the
storm's place in the record books. The lunar eclipse of January 28, 1888, at 8 Leo was semi-
sextile the ingress Ascendant, trine the ingress IC, square the March 4, 1888, lunar phase
Ascendant, and semisextile the March 12, 1888, lunar phase IC. The March 4, 1888, lunar
phase IC was conjunct the solar eclipse of February n, 1888, at 22 Aquarius.
The March 4, 1888, lunar phase chart is an ominous one for a potential blizzard category be-
cause of retrograde Mercury conjunct the Sun in wet Pisces and sesquisquare Saturn. The clas-
sic destructive windy storm breeders, Mars (warm air) and Saturn (cold air), were in an exact
square, and both were retrograde.

=== Page 151 ===
Snow 2
Inner Wheel=Winter Ingress / Natal Chart / December 21, i88y NS, Wed / 10:06 pm EST
+5:00 New York, NY/ 40^42 '51" 074° Woo^j" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean
Node
Outer Wheel=Lunflr Phase / Notoi Ciiart / March 4, 1888 NS, Sun / 10:26 jim £ST +5:00
New York, NY / 40^42'51" 074° Woo^j" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node

=== Page 152 ===
Snoiv 3 Inner Wheel=Wmter Ingress / Natal Chart / December 21, i88y NS, Wed / 10:06 pm
EST +5:00 JVeiv York, NY/ 40°N^i'yi" oy^Woo'ij" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus /
Mean Node
Outer Wheel=lMnflr Phase / Natal Chart / March 12, 1888 NS, Mon / 11:20 am EST +5.00
New York, NY/ 40°N42'51" 074°Woo'23" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
The lunar phase Sun sesquisquare Saturn, Venus contraparallel Neptune and square the
horizon, and Jupiter contraparallel Saturn indicated heavy precipitation. The Saturn aspects,
including the sesquisquare from Mercury, contributed to the cold temperatures indicated by
the Sun parallel Uranus, as did Sun conjunct Mercury, Venus in Aquarius square the horizon,
and Uranus sextile/trine the meridian. Through an opposition, Jupiter expanded Pluto's ten-
dency for high wind, and also represents the contrast between the warm, southerly and the
cold, northerly air flows that are characteristic of a nor'easter.

=== Page 153 ===
Both Venus and Mercury in the March 4, 1888, lunar phase chart were square their ingress
positions, identifying this week as one in which the ingress aspects would be activated. The
March 4 lunar phase chart had Sun square ingress Mercury, providing another trigger for
retrograde Mercury, which served as the focal point to kick off the blizzard. Lunar phase Mars
was semisquare ingress Mercury (high winds), a planet that also was sesquisquare ingress Sat-
urn (overcast, precipitation, counterclockwise winds).
When March 12 arrived, the Moon in Pisces activated ingress Mercury and Venus and the
Uranus-Neptune and Uranus-Pluto sesquisquares in both charts. The Moon continued its
transit through Pisces throughout the day and into the early morning hours of March 13, as-
pecting transiting Saturn, Neptune, Mars, and Uranus. The wind howled through the night as
transiting Mars was semisquare ingress Mercury.
Planetary positions at the March 12, 1888, lunar phase added fuel to the raging blizzard with
Mars square Saturn (windy storm), and Mercury forming a T-square with Jupiter and Pluto
(high wind and the contrasting air flow). Lunar phase Venus was sesqui-
square ingress Mars and square ingress Jupiter, indicating a source of warm, moist air.
Lunar phase Venus was also sesquisquare ingress Mars, further indicating a southerly flow of
air. Cold air is indicated by ingress Uranus parallel the lunar phase IC, which was also parallel
ingress Pluto.
The ingress and lunar phase (March 4) planets occupying the lower meridian pinpointed the
Northeast as the site of the blizzard, as did the ingress Ascendant conjunct the March 12 lunar
phase IC; the ingress Ascendant was opposed by the March 4 lunar phase Mercury, and there
was a Mercury-Midheaven conjunction in the March 12 lunar phase chart. Jupiter in both
lunar phase charts aspected the ingress meridian and horizon, and Saturn (both lunar phases)
was contraparallel the ingress IC, concentrating the low pressure over the area. The ingress
Sun was contraparallel the March 12 lunar phase Ascendant, lunar phase (both phases) Mars
was contraparallel the ingress Ascendant, and lunar phase (both phases) Pluto was parallel the
ingress Ascendant. The March 12 lunar phase IC was parallel the ingress Ascendant.
Chicago .Illinois ,January26-27,1967
Chicagoans awakened Thursday morning, January 26, 1967, to a small accumulation of snow
that had begun falling at 5:02 am. However, by mid-morning, four to five inches covered the
ground, and by 6:00 pm residents were trying to navigate through a foot of snow. When the
snow stopped falling the next morning at 10:10 am, twenty-three inches had accumulated.
Northeast winds that gusted to 53 mph created drifts of four to six feet. Temperatures ranged
from 26 to 29 F. Business losses were $150 million, and snow removal costs for the winter
soared to $5 million. Sixty people lost their lives in the blizzard.

=== Page 154 ===
The winter ingress chart (inner wheel of Snow 4) combined several key components of de-
structive weather conditions. The Sun parallel Venus (snow and colder) received added fuel
from Venus square Mars to transform the flakes into a storm. Other indicators of snow were
Venus semisquare Neptune and Saturn trine Neptune. The solar eclipse of November 12,
1966, at 20 Scorpio was semisextile the Ascendant.
But what indicated the potential for a major, crippling storm was Saturn opposition Uranus,
indicative of prolonged atmospheric conditions with the potential to affect an entire region for
months on end because of the slow movement of these planets. That aspect also signified cold
temperatures, sudden and extreme atmospheric disturbances, and more intense downfall. Sat-
urn also opposed Pluto (windy storm). The triple combination—activated by the transiting
Moon in Leo semisquare ingress and lunar phase Uranus conjunct Pluto (extreme weather),
sesquisquare lunar phase and ingress Saturn, square the lunar phase Ascendant, and oppo-
sition the lunar phase Aquarius planets (the lunar phase occurred about five hours before the
snow began, when the transiting Moon was square the lunar phase Ascendant)—resulted in
an unexpected storm that crippled Chicago, the major transportation hub of the Midwest.

=== Page 155 ===
cn 22 14 ZD
■13 17
n D Mc 25 28 05 15
38 37 CO
16 40 V T 20 \W 03 nr 24 ?:T 24 07 (TP OS 02
2? 10
i3 ii
o 08 18 18 57 12 7
T
6 /13"r14*}) 49" 24*— 42' 49'
12 02 m. m,
\As
07 23
/ /
45 58 17
13 CO. 49 fd. 28 09 rrb 24 X
O 07 22
13 36
24
9 05 17 ■13
G 25
22 n 14
Snoiv 4
Inner Wheel=Wmter Ingress / Natal Chart / December 21, 1966, Wed / 1:29 am CST +6:00
Chicago, IL / 41°Np' 087° Wjg' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=LMMflr Phase / Noto/ Chart / January 26, 1967, T/iu / o;4i om CST +6;oo
Chicago, IL / 4TN51' 0^7° W39' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Meow Node
Additional factors present in the ingress chart were Uranus sextile Neptune (unusual weath-
er), and Jupiter semisquare the Pluto-Uranus conjunction to amplify the high winds and
stormy conditions. Mars semisquare Neptune indicated the moist air that met the Saturn-
Uranus cold front. However, it was the previous lunar phase (January 18, 1967) that showed
the strong flow of warm, moist, southerly air into the area. That chart had a Mercury-Jupiter
opposition spanning the Midheaven/IC. On January 24,1967, two days before the snow began
falling, Chicago was an unseasonable 65 F with thunderstorms.

=== Page 156 ===
The full fury of the storm was apparent by mid-morning on January 26, 1967, when the
transiting Moon opposed lunar phase Mercury, and by 6:00 pm, Chicagoans had no doubt
they were in the midst of a major storm when the transiting Moon opposed the lunar phase
IC. It wasn't until the next morning, when the transiting Moon was separating from an oppo-
sition to the lunar phase Venus-Neptune square, that snow stopped falling.
The ingress chart alone was not enough to indicate this major snowstorm in Chicago, de-
spite the trines, sextiles, and inconjuncts from the outer planets to the meridian. That would
happen with the lunar phase of January 26, 1967 (outer wheel of Snow 4).
On its own, the lunar phase chart warned of a major snowfall with Venus in icy Aquarius in
a nearly exact square to Neptune in Scorpio. That square, an indicator of heavy precipitation,
was amplified by Venus parallel the Ascendant and Neptune parallel the IC. The lunar eclipse
of October 29, 1966, at 5 Taurus was conjunct the Descendant, and the November 12, 1966,
solar eclipse at 20 Scorpio was square the IC.
Mercury, a major player in the storm, was also in Aquarius. It was conjunct the IC, warning
of a potential storm emergency due to gusty winds, as did its parallel to the Sun and
sesquisquare to Uranus. The Sun-Uranus-Pluto sesquisquare indicated a cold front, overcast
skies, wind gusts, and snow, with the Uranus-Pluto conjunction activating the meridian
through a sextile/trine; it amplified the cold temperatures already promised by Aquarius.
Aspects to the ingress chart that compounded the potential of the lunar phase chart were
lunar phase Venus sesquisquare ingress Mars and semisquare ingress Venus, lunar phase
Jupiter sesquisquare ingress Mercury, and the lunar phase Sun opposition ingress Jupiter.
The outer planetary aspects of the ingress chart were still in force, being kicked off by tran-
siting Mars at 24 Libra—square Jupiter, inconjunct Saturn, and semisextile Uranus—and the
aspects made by the faster-moving Mercury and Venus in Aquarius. Mercury's main function
was to trigger the outer planetary trio with its exact semisquare to Saturn, while Venus aug-
mented the downfall with its square to Neptune.
But it was the transiting Moon in Leo square the lunar phase Ascendant and aspecting the
Saturn-Uranus-Pluto (semisquare and sesquisquare) in both charts that set things in motion.
The lunar phase also occurred in the fourth and tenth houses of the ingress chart, further
bringing Chicago into focus as the recipient of a major winter storm. The Moon continued to
travel throughout the storm, opposing lunar phase Mercury, the lunar phase IC, and, finally,
lunar phase Venus, when it became void-of-course and the snow ended.
A close examination of the charts involved in this storm easily explains why such storms
rarely occur. Necessary factors are major outer planetary configurations combined with tran-
siting planets in the exact positions necessary to trigger them from many perspectives. Every
planet, nearly all in hard aspect, were involved in and necessary to the formation of a storm of

=== Page 157 ===
this magnitude.
Other aspects to the angles that made Chicago the storm's target were lunar phase Jupiter
contraparallel the ingress IC, ingress and lunar phase Neptune parallel the lunar phase IC,
ingress Pluto contraparallel the ingress IC, and lunar phase Venus parallel the lunar phase
Ascendant. Most important, lunar phase Saturn was sesquisquare the lunar phase Ascendant,
a point that also was semisquare Uranus and Pluto. Ingress Mercury was parallel the ingress
IC, and ingress Saturn, Pluto, Uranus, and Neptune aspected the same angle.
IceStorm, January26-28,2009
Louisville, Kentucky, was at the center of an ice storm that left 700,000 residents without
power and another 200,000 without water as a result of felled trees and downed power lines.
Power was not completely restored until ten days after the storm. Precipitation began as freez-
ing drizzle and rain and then changed to sleet and snow in some of the affected areas. Ice
more than an inch thick was reported in some locations.
The December 21, 2008, winter ingress chart (inner wheel of Snow 5) had prime indicators
for heavy precipitation, storms, and freezing conditions: Neptune semisquare/sesquisquare
the meridian, Uranus square the horizon, and Mars in a T-square with Saturn and Uranus.

=== Page 158 ===
21
07 n? <Q rr? 10
or.
21 Do
2) cr; lib ID 21 24
27 40 nF
\ \ IB 40' 04
10
11
17 17 7 12
I
cf&Zw 1 19- 19 52' n 0/ 10 00 02 14 VJ
3?8
\ 03
1?2 V-J X 21 05 22 VI 18 cT 51 a 24 29
04 29 7 05 10 06 07
D 23 X
o X
¥ 20 23 00 rr
a 9 31 04
T 06 06
Snow j
Inner Wheel=W/mter Ingress / Natal Chart / December 21, 200S, Sun / 7;03.'46 om EST +j:oo
Louisville, KY/}80Ni^'i^" 08f / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean JVode
Outer Wheel=lMnflr Phase / JVata/ Chart / January 26, 2009, Mon / 2.•55:17 am PST +5:00
Louisville, KY oS^W^'j^." / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean JVode
In the January 26, 2009, lunar phase chart (same date as when the storm began—outer
wheel of Snow 5), retrograde Mercury was conjunct Mars (an aspect of wind and cold that
would become exact during the course of the storm) and semisquare/sesquisquare the merid-
ian. Lunar phase Venus was conjunct Uranus (cold, drizzle), with both planets trine/sextile the
horizon and opposition Saturn (heavy precipitation). As in the ingress chart, Neptune was ac-
tive, this time in a square to the horizon.
Lunar phase Pluto (wind, cold) was square the ingress meridian and semisquare Venus

=== Page 159 ===
(intense precipitation and wind), and lunar phase Venus was square ingress Mars (storm, pre-
cipitation), another aspect that became exact during the course of the storm. The storm per-
sisted as the transiting Moon traveled through Aquarius, aspecting every significant planet in
the ingress and lunar phase charts; three to four inches of snow accumulated on January 28
after the Moon entered Pisces.
A big-picture view of these charts shows a strong contrast of warmer and colder air. Venus,
Mars, and Neptune are warm, while Uranus, Saturn, and retrograde Mercury are cold. Notice
how the cold and warm planets aspected each other, so it was as though the atmosphere
couldn't decide whether there should be snow, sleet, or freezing rain!
FreezingRainandSleet,February 14,1990
An excellent example of the transition from rain, to sleet, to freezing rain, to snow is the weath-
er event of February 14, 1990. On that date, Chicago (latitude 41N52) received nine inches of
snow, while southern Illinois (38N23) was deluged with rain. In between, Champaign, Illinois
(40N07), experienced one of the worst ice (and sleet) storms in its history. Freezing rain
caused an accumulation of an inch and a half of ice on every surface, including power lines,
and most citizens were without electricity for a week. Damage reached $9 million.
Here again there is a significant mixed indication of cold and warm influences, so moisture
could take the form of freezing rain, sleet, and snow.

=== Page 160 ===
Snow 6
Inner Whee^Winter Ingress / Natal Chart / December 21, 1989, Thu / y.23 pm CST +6:00
Chicago, IL / 41°N51' 087° Wjg' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Iunar Phase / Natal Chart / February g, iggo, Fri / 1:17 pm CST +6:00
Chicago, IL / 41°N51' 087° Wjg' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
The planetary aspects, with the exception of those to the angles, are identical for all three
locations. Both the ingress and February 9, 1990, lunar phase charts (Snow 6) show the con-
flicting message of warm and cold aspects. At the ingress, Sun-Mars, Sun-Pluto, Mercury-
Jupiter, and several Venus aspects indicated warmer weather, while the classic cold weather
planets, Saturn and Uranus, were strongly aspected. This mixture was evident at the lunar
phase as well. There, Sun-Venus, Sun-Mars, and Venus-Pluto aspects indicated warmth, while
aspects to Saturn and Uranus promised cold temperatures.
Heavy moisture in combination with falling temperatures was the expectation in the ingress

=== Page 161 ===
chart, with Mercury parallel Uranus, Jupiter contraparallel and opposition Uranus, and Saturn
conjunct and parallel Neptune. Uranus was semisquare Pluto, suggestive of sleet and a storm
emergency centering around power and communication lines.
The lunar phase chart had the key element of stationary direct Venus conjunct Saturn, an
indicator of prolonged, heavy precipitation that can take the form of rain, sleet, or snow. Mars
conjunct and parallel Uranus reinforced the potential for sleet and freezing rain at the appro-
priate latitude. Other factors in the lunar phase chart were Saturn parallel and sextile Pluto,
Jupiter contraparallel Uranus and sesquisquare Pluto, and Mars contraparallel Jupiter. Mer-
cury parallel Saturn and Neptune ensured leaden, overcast skies and precipitation.
There were significant connections between the lunar phase and ingress charts, many of
which repeated and reinforced aspects in the lunar phase chart, intensifying the precipitation.
Ingress Saturn and lunar phase Neptune formed a conjunction, as did ingress Mercury and
lunar phase Saturn, adding fuel to the parallels in the lunar phase chart. In addition to con-
joining lunar phase Uranus, lunar phase Mars made the same aspect to ingress Neptune. Air
flow temperatures varied as ingress Mercury made a conjunction to the lunar phase Venus-
Saturn conjunction. Additional warmth was provided by the ingress Sun-lunar phase Jupiter
opposition and lunar phase Sun-ingress Jupiter sesquisquare.
On February 14, the storm was triggered by the transiting Moon in Libra square the lunar
phase Venus-Saturn conjunction and ingress Mercury. Precipitation (sleet, rain, snow) arrived
with the transiting Sun at 25 Aquarius semisquare ingress Saturn and Neptune. Sleet and
freezing rain were indicated by two "double" February 14 transits to the ingress chart—
transiting Mercury at 4 Aquarius parallel ingress Mars and transiting Mars at n Capricorn par-
allel ingress Mercury—and transiting Mars parallel ingress and lunar phase Uranus. Tran-
siting planetary aspects that day were Sun semisquare Uranus (sleet or snow, cold and damp),
Mars exact contraparallel Jupiter (storm), Mars exact parallel Uranus (sleet), and Jupiter exact
parallel Uranus (intense cold front and high precipitation).
There were numerous lunar phase planetary aspects to the ingress chart that brought this
storm to Chicago, Champaign, and southern Illinois. In all locations, lunar phase Pluto was
square the ingress meridian, lunar phase Mars and Uranus were sesquisquare/semisquare the
ingress meridian, lunar phase Mercury was sesquisquare/semisquare the ingress horizon, and
the lunar phase Sun was conjunct the ingress Midheaven. The predominant transits to all
three ingress charts were transiting Venus and Saturn at 21 Capricorn inconjunct the IC,
bringing the key ingress seventh house Venus-Saturn conjunction (as well as ingress Mercury)
to the meridian. As in other major storms, the ingress Sun contacted an angle, in this case a
conjunction to the lunar phase Descendant.
There is one dominant factor in the lunar phase charts that explains why the storm brought

=== Page 162 ===
snow to Chicago (Ascendant 3 Cancer 42), rain to southern Illinois (Ascendant o Cancer 32),
and sleet and freezing rain to Champaign (Ascendant 1 Cancer 52). Jupiter, a classic indicator
of warmer weather, was conjunct the Ascendant and affected the temperature of the three loca-
tions. In the Chicago chart, it was behind the Ascendant, a placement that has a diminished ef-
fect on the point of observation. In Champaign, it was on the Ascendant, acting as the tran-
sition point between colder (Chicago) and warmer (southern Illinois) temperatures. In south-
ern Illinois, it was in front of the Ascendant, bringing warmer temperatures to that location.
[contents]

=== Page 163 ===
CHAPTER 10
Thunderstorms, Hail, and Tornadoes
One of nature's most spectacular displays of energy is the thunderstorm. These storms differ
from other storms in that they are convective, an atmospheric phenomenon that occurs when
warm air rises, cooling on ascent, and then descends, all within the thunderstorm. As this cycle
is repeated, the thunderstorm increases in size. In order to form, a thunderstorm needs unsta-
ble air: warm air near the earth and cold air in the higher atmosphere.
A thunderstorm begins to form when warm, moist air rises from the earth, creating an up-
draft. As the air cools and condenses, a cloud forms; when the water droplets reach the same
temperature as their higher-altitude environment, they begin falling, creating a downdraft. The
faster the air rises within the storm structure, the more intense the thunderstorm. Updrafts
continue to feed the storm until they are eventually overcome by the cooler downdrafts, and
the storm dissipates.
Unlike a small-scale thunderstorm (about fifteen miles in diameter with a life span of about
thirty minutes), a super cell thunderstorm, which often produces hail and tornadoes, can last
for hours and travel more than 300 miles during its life. Squall lines, such as the derecho, are
also longer-life thunderstorms that can travel great distances.
Thunderstorms are common in spring and summer, but occur less frequently in autumn
and winter. The strongest storms are generally in the spring months, when there is the greatest
contrast of warm surface air and cold upper air, which results in the necessary atmospheric
instability. The requirement for warm surface air also explains the timing of most thunder-
storms during the summer months. During the day, the heat builds, reaching a temperature of
greatest contrast with the upper atmosphere in the late afternoon and early evening.
Squalls, such as the derecho, are a line of longer-life thunderstorms, sometimes more than
100 miles in length, that can travel great distances. They often form ahead of an advancing cold
front, creating strong winds and sometimes hail and tornadoes.
A thunderstorm needs the same planetary moisture components as a snowstorm (Venus,
Neptune, or planets in water signs), and an infusion of cold air from Saturn or Uranus and
warm air from Mars or Jupiter. The wind characteristic of thunderstorms, especially super cells
and squalls, comes from Mercury, Mars, and Pluto. A likely combination of cold and warm air
in a thunderstorm is, for example, Mars (heat) in hard or neutral aspect with Uranus (cold).
The presence of Saturn or Neptune represents the drop in barometric pressure that accom-
panies a thunderstorm, and Mercury-Uranus and Mars-Uranus indicate hail.
Thunderstorm, June 17,2013

=== Page 164 ===
This thunderstorm is typical of those that occur throughout the spring and summer across
North America, generally popping up in the late afternoon or evening. There were no torna-
does reported with this storm, although some areas saw hail and wind gusts as high as 65
mph. Rainfall amounts ranged from half an inch to about two inches, depending on the loca-
tion. Lubbock was at the center of the thunderstorm band that extended northwest to southeast
through that area of Texas.
The March 20, 2013, spring ingress and the June 16, 2013, lunar phase charts (inner and
middle wheels of Thunderstorms 1) are a good example of how an ingress chart with two se-
vere thunderstorm/tornado signatures (Mercury conjunction Neptune and Mars conjunction
Uranus) can indicate a lesser-strength thunderstorm without tornadoes. Despite strong con-
nections between the ingress and lunar phase charts (lunar phase horizon square ingress
meridan), there were no planetary aspects or aspects to the horizon and meridian to trigger the
signatures during this lunar phase.

=== Page 165 ===
Thunderstorms i
Inner Wheel=Sprwg Ingress / Natal Chart / March 20, 2013, Wed / 6:01:55 am CDT +5:00
Lubbock, TX/33^34'40" ioTW5i'iy" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Middle Wheel=Iimflr Phase / Natal Chart / June 16, 2015, Sun / 12:25:41 pm CDT +5:00 Lubbock,
TX/55"N54'4o" 101° Wji'iy" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Thunderstorms / Natal Chart / June 17, 2013, Mon / g.oo pm CDT +5.00 Lubbock,
TX/550N54'4o" ioi0W5i'iy" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Nevertheless, the Mercury-Neptune-Descendant conjunction in water signs was a strong
player in this thunderstorm from a precipitation perspective. Lunar phase Saturn (low pres-
sure, cloudy skies) was trine the conjunction, and the lunar phase Venus-
Mercury conjunction (precipitation) was sesquisquare the same conjunction. All of these

=== Page 166 ===
planets were in water signs. Hail was indicated by lunar phase Mars sextile the lunar phase
Mars-Uranus conjunction, with Mars separating from a conjunction to ingress Jupiter (thun-
derstorm) and in a wide conjunction with the lunar phase Midheaven. Ingress Saturn was acti-
vated through a sesquisquare from the lunar phase Sun-Jupiter conjunction.
The transiting planetary positions (outer wheel of Thunderstorms i) were nearly the same as
the lunar phase because this thunderstorm occurred the next day. But in that time, Venus had
advanced to conjunct lunar phase Mercury, doubling the precipitation indication, and Mercury
had moved into an exact sesquisquare with lunar phase Neptune. All of these aspects were re-
lated to rain, but they weren't strong enough (a sesqui-
square rather than a square, opposition, or conjunction to Mercury-Neptune) to indicate a
tornado-producing super cell. Had lunar phase and transiting Mars been in early Gemini and
square the Mercury-Neptune conjunction, Lubbock would have seen a tornado. That happened
in early June when Mars was at 3 Gemini.
Derecho,May8,2009
A derecho is a fast-moving, straight-line band of thunderstorms with high winds that can trav-
el hundreds of miles; tornadoes often occur with this kind of squall. They are characterized by
a bow echo radar image (the image looks like the fully extended string of a bow).
The derecho of May 8, 2009, which had its genesis in northeastern Colorado/northwestern
Kansas, traveled to western West Virginia before dissipating more than 1,000 miles later. Hun-
dreds of trees toppled, buildings had significant damage, power outages were extensive, flash
flooding occurred in several areas, and among tlie many tornadoes were six that were rated
EF-2 and one rated EF-3. From genesis to dissipation, the storm lived for more than twenty-
five hours, an extremely long time frame for a derecho, which prompted some meteorologists
to call it a Super Derecho. This storm continues to be studied by meteorologists as they strive
to understand its development and intensity; astrometeorology can provide at least some of the
answers.

=== Page 167 ===
22 41
27 29
w nv T 14 03
w
06
-
m. /W /W 03
09° W 18
f\
56
V 24 10 01 16 11 26 25 IB
f ^04-Xif
■ 5 i9^<El 58' I JK 250>C 1312 5( 23°^00- 1 6 --.4 <L AAOT
.W 2r fiyi7* ioo nvzrAs
OS' [1715®
00 31; 11 T T 02 9 11 10 T 07
^ o" :w
11
00
/ ?.r.
a <Q 11
09 o
\ SV
00
19® 29 27 02
Mc CO •15' 14
22° n ■r.
fTF
58'
Thunderstorms 2
Inner Wheel=Spring Ingress / Natal Chart / March 20, 2009, Fri / 6:43:38 am CDT +5.00 j80Noo'
092° Woo' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=lMnor Phase / JVotol Chart / Moy 1, 2009, Fri / 3:44:13 pm CDT +5.00 38"Noo'
092° Woo' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
The chart shows the March 20, 2009, spring ingress and May 1, 2009, lunar phase charts
(Thunderstorms 2) calculated for the longitude and latitude of the area where the bow was
largest, having reached maturity. To better understand the dynamics of this derecbo, here is a
table of the Ascendants and Midheavens of the ingress and lunar phase charts across the area
through which the storm traveled (101W is Colorado/Kansas and 81W is West Virginia).
Longitude 40N 39N 38N
OO
38N 38N
£ OO rr\

=== Page 168 ===
Latitude 101W 101W 98W 95W 90W
OO
81W
Ingress ASC 1 PI 0 PI 5 PI 13 PI 19 PI 29 PI 23 PI
Ingress MC 25 SG 13 SG 16 SG 20 SG 24 SG 29SG 2 CP
Lunar Phase ASC 14 VI 14 VI 16 VI 18 VI 22 VI 26 VI 29 VI
Lunar Phase MC 11 GE 11 GE 14 GE 17 GE 22 GE 26 GE 29 GE
One of the most striking components of these charts is ingress Saturn at 17 Virgo and lunar
phase Saturn at 15 Virgo. Compare these with the listed Ascendants and Midheavens and con-
sider that almost immediately after genesis, the storm began to take a southeasterly direction.
Once the storm had reached a longitude and latitude where lunar phase Saturn was in the
twelfth house instead of the first, the storm switched to an easterly direction, which it main-
tained until dissipation. So the lower pressure represented by Saturn guided the storm's direc-
tion.
The longitude and latitude where Saturn was conjunct the lunar phase Ascendant and
square the lunar phase Midheaven was where the storm reached maximum intensity with a
mature bow. At the same location, Saturn was square the ingress Midheaven. Using longitude
and latitude and one key planet, you can thus identify the strongest point of a large storm.
Now rewind to the point of genesis, which was rather unremarkable given what evolved dur-
ing the twenty-five hours that followed. The key planet here, and one that would alert an as-
trometeorologist that there was far more to come, was lunar phase Mercury—and, by the date
of the event, transiting stationary retrograde Mercury—square the ingress Ascendant at 39-
40N latitude, 101W longitude. This planet of wind is at its worst when stationing, and secon-
darily during its retrograde period. So when it forms a hard aspect to a lunar phase or ingress
horizon or meridian, a weather event is more than likely, as is one that involves high wind
velocity.
The possibility for strong thunderstorms and tornadoes is apparent in the ingress chart, and
at the location of the derecho's greatest intensity. There, the ingress Mercury-Uranus conjunc-
tion opposition Saturn (thunderstorms, tornadoes, low pressure, high pressure, hail, wind) was
conjunct the ingress Ascendant and square the ingress Midheaven. That configuration was
sextile/trine the ingress Moon, linking all four planets. This is an important factor because
Mercury turned retrograde sesquisquare the ingress Moon, providing the necessary link be-
tween the lunar phase and ingress charts at the longitude and latitude of the storm's genesis.
Other active aspects were transiting Mars conjunction ingress Venus (precipitation, storms,
warm and moist air), transiting Mars semisquare ingress and lunar Neptune (tornadoes,
storms, precipitation, warm and moist air), and transiting Sun sesquisquare ingress and lunar
phase Pluto (wind, storms). The declinations were Venus parallel Mars (precipitation, storms)

=== Page 169 ===
and Venus and Mars contraparallel Uranus (cold air, warm air, storms, precipitation, hail).
A close look at the transiting Moon reveals why the storm began and ended when it did. At
the onset, the transiting Moon was at 5 Scorpio, sesquisquare ingress Mercury opposition Sat-
urn conjunct the horizon. This was the triggering aspect. The storm had mostly dissipated in
West Virginia when the Moon was at 17 Scorpio sextile ingress Saturn and sesquisquare 1
Gemini, where Mercury had stationed retrograde the day before. Just before midnight, the
time of the next lunar phase, high winds damaged several buildings near the West Virginia/
North Carolina border.
Hail,September5,1898
Some thunderstorms are accompanied by hail, a condition that results when ice crystals in the
upper atmosphere have no opportunity to melt. The ice crystals continue to grow as the up-
drafts in the thunderstorm keep them aloft and very cool water continues to freeze on them,
adding to their size. The faster the updraft, the bigger the hailstones. Generally, hail forms in
only one part of the storm, which is why only selected smaller areas on Earth are bombarded
with the stones.
Hailstones usually are no more than about one-quarter inch in diameter, although some as
large or larger than baseballs have been recorded; the largest ever recorded was eight inches in
diameter.
Hail generally falls for only a few minutes, during which time it can cause extensive damage
to crops, vehicles, and buildings. In rare cases, hail has fallen for an hour or more, leaving
inches of the icy stones on the ground for extensive periods of time. The largest hailstones
cause much destruction, falling at as much as 100 mph and weighing more than a pound.
The most prevalent aspects during a hailstorm are Mercury in hard or neutral aspect to Mars
or Pluto, Mercury in any aspect to Uranus, and Mars in hard or neutral aspect to Uranus.
These must, of course, be accompanied by traditional thunderstorm aspects.
One of the worst hailstorms on record occurred in Nodaway County in northwest Missouri
on September 5, 1898. Hail remained on the ground in some places for fifty-two days, and ice-
clogged farm fields were unworkable for two weeks.
The June 21, 1898, summer ingress chart (inner wheel of Thunderstorms 3) had the neces-
sary thunderstorm-breeding aspects: Sun square Jupiter (warmer and thunderstorms), Mer-
cury conjunct and parallel Neptune (thunderstorms, tornadoes), Venus trine Uranus (warm
and cold air), Mars semisquare Neptune (rising, warm, moist air), and Saturn parallel Uranus
(atmospheric disturbance). Mercury and Neptune, strongly placed, were conjunct the Ascen-
dant, waiting to be activated by future transits and a lunar phase chart. The Moon, semisextile
the IC, was parallel Venus, contraparallel and sesquisquare Saturn, contraparallel Uranus, and

=== Page 170 ===
semisextile Neptune.
The focus of the August 31, 1898, lunar phase chart (middle wheel of Thunderstorms 3) was
thunderstorms, hail, and wind. Planetary configurations for precipitation were the Sun
semisquare Venus, Venus semisquare Saturn, Venus trine Neptune, and Mars conjunct Nep-
tune. The Sun square Saturn and retrograde Mercury square Pluto signaled thunderstorms
and hail. Windy conditions were indicated by retrograde Mercury square Pluto (also hail),
Mars inconjunct Uranus, and Jupiter semisquare Uranus. Venus represented warm, moist air,
and Jupiter semisquare Uranus, Mars inconjunct Uranus, Sun square Saturn, and Saturn par-
allel Uranus indicated cold air.
o AA/ 07' /w z/
DO 58'
X 25 34
T
As 03 12-
a :<r or-
07 or
D20
8 . 10
1* 11 8
LL
T15-II40' 18 flS'IU? . ly^ie* E 21
II . 1 6 ; ^07 'M ; 02V0^
6 44 1
V 51' 51 ^06 ■h \y2A
18 In'2a 14
■re 24 c/1 or 01 r y ID
50^ -23« ^
^ ^ 01'
05 ^ ^ 4 29* nr 'Tug* c
12, l/c 10' 12'
02 fib CD :y) 17 01 07 OS
12 o 18 54
13 12 00 SS o
34 25
24 Q 27
Thunderstorms 3
Inner Wheel=Spnng Ingress / Natal Chart / June 21, 1898 NS, Tue / 4:08 am CST +6:00 Nodaway
County, MO / 4o0N2T 094° W52' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Middle Wheel=lMnar Phase / Natal Chart / August 31, 1898 NS, Wed / 6:50 am CST +6:00

=== Page 171 ===
Nodaway County, MO / 40°N2i' 094° W52' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Had / Natal Chart / September 5, 1898 NS, Mon / 4:00 pm CST +6:00 Nodaway
County, MO / 40°N2T 094° W521 / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
The lunar phase brought the ingress aspects and others into force. The lunar phase Sun was
square ingress Saturn (storms), lunar phase retrograde Mercury was square ingress Pluto
(heat, high winds, storms, hail), lunar phase Venus was semisquare ingress Saturn (low pres-
sure, heavy precipitation) and trine ingress Neptune (warm, moist air), lunar phase Mars was
inconjunct ingress Uranus (warm and cold air), and Saturn was parallel Uranus. Aspects in
both the ingress and lunar phase charts were repeated between the two with the addition of
lunar phase retrograde Mercury square ingress Mercury conjunct the Ascendant. The ingress
Sun, Mercury, and Neptune were contraparallel the lunar phase IC, lunar phase Jupiter was
semisquare the ingress IC, lunar phase Mars and Neptune were parallel the ingress Ascen-
dant, and lunar phase Pluto was parallel the ingress IC.
On the date of the storm, September 5, 1898 (outer wheel of Thunderstorms 3), the ingress
chart was activated by nearly every transiting planet. Thunderstorms were promised with the
transiting Sun and Mercury at 13 Virgo square ingress Pluto, transiting Venus at 29 Libra
sesquisquare ingress Pluto, transiting Neptune at 24 Gemini semisquare ingress Mars, and
transiting Mars at 1 Cancer square ingress Jupiter and parallel the ingress Sun. One of the
characteristic aspects of hail, Mercury square Pluto, was present, and the transiting Moon in
Taurus served as a trigger with its parallel to the ingress Sun, Mercury, Venus, and Neptune.
Thunderstorms were reflected in the aspects to the lunar phase chart as well: transiting
Venus contraparallel lunar phase Pluto and transiting Mercury contraparallel lunar phase
Jupiter. Mercury, already strong from its placement in the ingress chart, was at o degrees north
declination in the lunar phase chart and retrograde. Transiting Mars and Neptune were par-
allel the lunar phase Ascendant, which was contraparallel transiting Jupiter, and transiting
Venus was contraparallel the lunar phase IC.
Transiting planetary aspects reflected thunderstorm activity with hail. Transiting retrograde
Mercury at 13 Virgo was square transiting Pluto at 15 Gemini and semisextile transiting Jupiter
at 12 Libra. The transiting Sun at 13 Virgo was conjunct transiting retrograde Mercury, semi-
sextile transiting Jupiter, semisquare transiting Venus, and square transiting Pluto. Transiting
Venus was approaching a trine to transiting Mars and semisextile transiting Uranus. Parallels
and contraparallels were numerous: Moon-Neptune, Moon-Mars, Mercury-Jupiter, Venus-
Pluto, and Saturn-Uranus.
Note again that Mercury, Mars, and Pluto, planets associated with hail, all aspected the lunar
phase meridian. This, in effect, brought these planets together to intensify the hailstorm at that

=== Page 172 ===
location. Even more telling were lunar phase Mars and Neptune parallel the ingress Ascendant.
Nodaway County was also highlighted because the lunar phase IC was opposition the ingress
Ascendant and the lunar phase Ascendant was square the ingress Ascendant.
The long-term influence of Saturn aspecting Uranus and Mercury conjunction the Ascen-
dant were the overriding factors that kept temperatures cool enough to hamper quick melting
of the hailstones. Later in the month, Mercury stationed direct in a square to Saturn. As this
aspect separated and Mercury was no longer retrograde, temperatures began to warm. How-
ever, it wasn't until the autumn ingress of September 22, 1898, that the weather pattern
changed. At that time, Mars was approaching a square to Jupiter, which would have accel-
erated the melting of the hailstones during succeeding weeks. Even so, there was enough hail
left a month later for the residents to use it to make ice cream.
Tornadoes
A tornado is one of nature's most frightening and destructive forces. It is defined by one dis-
tinguishing feature: a whirling, tapering column of high-velocity wind that extends down from
a cumulonimbus (thunderstorm) cloud. A funnel cloud, which becomes a tornado when it
touches ground, can range in size and color from one that is thin, rope-like, and grayish white
to a wide, thick, black, whirling mass of dirt and debris. Tornadoes rotate in a counterclockwise
direction.
The destructive power of a tornado comes from its high winds, which damage objects in its
path in several ways: a blast effect from wind speed alone; the explosion of buildings and other
objects because of reduced external atmospheric pressure; the lifting of objects, including
roofs, because of a difference in air pressure; and flying debris. Some tornadoes produce mul-
tiple funnels.
A tornado is initially visible because of the condensation of water vapor around the whirling
cloud. Later, as it gathers dust and debris, the central funnel often is hidden inside a dark col-
umn.
The exact cause of tornadoes is not completely understood, although extensive research is
ongoing and much has been learned by tornado chasers. However, there are two known condi-
tions necessary for a tornado to form; instability and wind shear. Instability results when there
is warm, moist air in the lower atmosphere/surface and much colder air in the upper atmos-
phere; these are the same conditions necessary for a thunderstorm. Wind shear is defined as
wind direction changing and increasing with height; for example, a 10 mph southerly wind at
the surface could become a westerly or southwesterly wind of 60 mph at 5,000 feet. These
conditions generally exist only ahead of a cold front and low-pressure system.
Certain areas of the United States are prone to tornadoes at various times of the year,

=== Page 173 ===
primarily because of temperature contrast. The Gulf states can experience tornadoes in the
winter months. As temperatures warm in March and April, tornadoes form farther northward
across the Plains states, eventually moving into the Upper Midwest and Great Lakes states in
May and June and remaining active through September. In November and December when
the Plains states experience weather too cold for thunderstorms, tornadoes again move south.
Oklahoma sees the most tornadoes per square mile, and more than half the tornadoes each
year occur in the central and southern Plains states. An area often referred to as Tornado Alley
runs from Texas across Oklahoma, Kansas, and Nebraska to the Dakotas. Greatest activity oc-
curs along the 97W and 98W meridians. Increased tornado activity also occurs in a curving
line from west Texas, to Missouri, to Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, and Ohio. Dixie Alley extends
from southeast Texas across the southeastern United States. Tornadoes also are occasionally
seen in central New England.
Because tornadoes most often occur in the warmer part of the day when conditions are
favorable for thunderstorm development, tornado activity is more prevalent in the afternoon
and early evening, especially in the Midwest and Plains states. But they can occur at any time
of day.
Most tornadoes move in a southwest to northeast direction at varying speeds, with some fol-
lowing a more west to east path. Tornado strength is measured according to the Enhanced Fu-
ita scale (EF scale):
Scale Wind Speed
EFo 65-85 mph
EFi 86-110 mph
EFz 111-135 mph
EF3 136-165 mph
EF4 166-200 mph
EF5 greater than 200 mph
For a tornado to form, classic thunderstorm aspects are a must, including, for example, Mars
opposition Saturn (cold and warm fronts colliding) and a strong presence of Venus and/or
Neptune (moisture). With the chief component of tornadoes being wind, Mercury, Mars, or
Pluto must be prominent in the chart, along with at least one other planet to amplify it. A tor-
nado rarely, if ever, results without Mercury or Mars in hard aspect to Uranus or Neptune, a
necessity for the characteristic counterclockwise winds. It also is rare for a tornado of any size,
especially an EF 3, 4, or 5, to form without a hard aspect to Pluto, planet of high wind.
May20,2013,Moore,Oklahoma

=== Page 174 ===
An EF-5 tornado was created within a super cell thunderstorm that formed over the Plains on
May 20, 2013. At 2:45 pm, an EF-o tornado touched down near Newcastle, Oklahoma, and
then tracked northeast, quickly intensifying to EF-4 status. It then switched to an eastward
path, and traveled through Moore, an Oklahoma City suburb, attaining winds estimated at
200-210 mph.
Twenty-four people, including ten children, died as a result of the storm, and more than 350
were injured. About 1,500 buildings were severely damaged or destroyed, with another 4,000
receiving varying levels of damage. An elementary school was destroyed, and a medical facility
was heavily damaged. There were more than 61,500 power outages, and many overturned
vehicles and trailers, some of them on two interstate highways, parts of which were shut down.
The Moore tornado begins with the March 20, 2013, spring ingress chart (inner wheel of
Thunderstorms 4). Note that the ingress chart is identical to the one for Lubbock, Texas,
shown at the beginning of this chapter (Thunderstorms 1), except for the horizon and merid-
ian. The Moore ingress chart has approximately the same Midheaven degree and sign as the
one for Lubbock, Texas, because the two cities are at about the same longitude. However, the
Moore ingress chart has 24 Aquarius on the Ascendant, which appears benign in comparison
with the Lubbock ingress chart. The Lubbock ingress and lunar phase charts had nearly the
same angles by degree and sign, with the Mercury-Neptune conjunction aspecting all four of
them. In the Moore chart, none of the four angles was the same, and Mercury-Neptune as-
pected only the ingress meridian.
Timing is the reason the EF-5 tornado occurred in Moore instead of Lubbock. There were
few planetary contacts to the two tornado signatures in the Lubbock ingress chart—Mercury-
Nep-tune and Mars-Uranus—and the Lubbock longitude and latitude. The Moore ingress
chart, however, had many significant contacts.

=== Page 175 ===
Thunderstorms 4
Inner Wheel=S]jring Ingress / Natal Chart / March 20, 2013, Wed / 6.03 am CDT +5:00 Moore,
OK/350N20,22" ogj0W2g'ii" / Geocentric /Tropical / Placidus/Mean Node
Middle Wheel=LMnor Phase / Natal Chart / May 17, 2013, Fri / 11:36 pm CDT +5:00 Moore, OK /
35°N20,22" ogy°W2g'ii" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=rornado / Natal Chart / May 20, 2013, Mon / 2:56 pm CDT +j;oo Moore, OK /
35°N20,22" ogy0W2g'ii" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
A key factor in the Moore chart is that the Mercury-Neptune conjunction was square the
meridian and the Mars-Uranus conjunction was trine the same point. The latitude was in-
volved through Mars-Uranus and Pluto semisquare/sesquisquare the horizon. Uranus and
Pluto were square at the ingress, and because Mars was conjunct Uranus, Mars was pulled
into the square with Pluto even though it was out of orb with Pluto. On its own, the Uranus-
Pluto square is indicative of powerful storms, and Mars increases the intensity. In the Moore

=== Page 176 ===
chart, Jupiter (high pressure) was conjunct the IC, a much stronger placement than in the Lub-
bock chart, which drew in Saturn through an inconjunct and the Uranus-Pluto square through
a sextile and inconjunct. All of these planetary contacts and others were activated by both the
May 17, 2013, lunar phase and the transits.
Before looking at the lunar phase chart and the interaction between it and the ingress chart,
there's another significant factor that indicated 2013 would be a strong year for tornadoes; the
dry line. This meteorological condition can be found in both the ingress and lunar phase
charts. That's not always true, so when you see it, you know there is likely to be a high number
of tornadoes.
The dry line is an imaginary line that, when active, runs from southern Kansas south
through western Oklahoma and western Texas. It acts as a sort of barrier to keep the warm, dry
air from the west from reaching the Plains and allows a strong flow of warm, moist air to move
northward from the Gulf. In the summer, the dry line can stretch into Canada. The dry line
also represents the approximate location of a low-pressure that is often behind a cold front in
severe thunderstorm and tornado weather.
Look at the spring ingress chart and mentally turn it counterclockwise. When you do that,
the degrees of the Aquarius Ascendant become smaller, and reach 10 Aquarius, where ingress
Saturn will be square the Ascendant. This location, in Colorado at about 105W, marks the dry
line. (The dry line generally retreats west at night and moves east during the day; the ingress
occurred at 11:36 pm, so the dry line was at or near its farthest west point.) Now look at Nep-
tune in the spring ingress chart. It is square the Midheaven at about 102W and represents a
strong flow of warm, moist air rising from the Gulf. This is a perfect setup for a year with
many tornadoes, especially when considered along with the two tornado signature conjunc-
tions (Mercury-Neptune and Mars-Uranus). Note also that with Mercury conjunction Neptune,
a strong wind would be in force to carry the air north from the Gulf.
The planetary influence that immediately jumps out of the lunar phase chart (middle wheel
of Thunderstorms 4) is Pluto (high winds) conjunction the Ascendant and in a nearly exact
square with Uranus (cold air); this is an aspect of extreme weather (EF-5 tornado). The lunar
phase Sun was semisquare/sesquisquare Uranus-Pluto, an important aspect because the Sun
was inconjunct the Midheaven and sesquisquare the Ascendant. Lunar phase Mercury was
sextile Uranus and contraparallel the Ascendant (a strong cold front moved through the area).
Lunar phase Venus and Mercury conjunct the ingress IC indicated warm and cold air con-
verging in Moore. Saturn was also trine ingress Mercury in water signs (cold, moist air), and
both planets aspected the ingress meridian.
There were many connections between the lunar phase and ingress charts. Lunar phase
Mars was square the ingress Ascendant and semisquare the ingress Mars-Uranus conjunction.

=== Page 177 ===
Lunar phase Mercury was approaching a conjunction with the ingress IC and with Jupiter
(high winds), the latter of which was exact on the date of the tornado, to activate the Moore
longitude; from that point, lunar phase and transiting Mercury were square the ingress Mer-
cury-Nep-tune conjunction and sextile the ingress Mars-Uranus conjunction. Both tornado
signatures were activated by lunar phase Saturn through a trine and an inconjunct.
The important points to remember here are the many lunar phase and transit planetary con-
tacts to the ingress chart longitude and latitude and the ingress tornado signatures. When you
see this many, there can be no question that the area will experience not just a tornado but a
stronger and highly destructive one.
May6,2009,Madison,Alabama
Not all tornadoes cause the kind of devastation that was seen in Moore, Oklahoma. More typ-
ical are tornadoes much lower on the scale: EF-o, EF-i, and EF-2.
The Madison, Alabama, tornado illustrated here was an EF-2, with winds between in and
135 mph. Trees were downed, windows blown out, and roofs damaged. There were no injuries
or fatalities.
The March 20, 2009, spring ingress chart (inner wheel of Thunderstorms 5) had a tornado
signature: Mercury conjunction Uranus. In Madison, Alabama, this signature was conjunct
the Ascendant and square the meridian. So a seasonal forecast would have included a strong
possibility for tornadoes in this location.

=== Page 178 ===
03
nt «>•
00
/*»■-"/\ s
IfcWKjj ^•1"VmV„ K'
jf25*.r5(T 10 11
Wrw-vw __. 519*^17. •<-> ■
.^14'D
9
25 yzs-xas ^,3' ^|g;i2.
Q02^T4rTQ T36- • 1
47, ^OS'TOS'\ ".n7.Tl0' 9 ..•■•< J
fTF 6 ' 2r(ip17.* oe-fi?25^s
06-rir15 47'
d"0 15* I"* 46*
CP
T iii'
o 06 24
t>8' » 00'
16 CO 17 o 24 47 Mc
04 15' XI
E CD 24 20
27° H 31'
Thunderstorms 5
Inner Wheel=Sprmg Ingress / Natol Chart / March 20, 2009, Fri / 6:43:38 am CDT +5:00
Madison, AL / 086° W44'j4" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Middle Wheel=Iimor Pfiase / Natal Chart / May 1, 2009, fri / 3:44:13 pm CDT +5.00 Madison,
AL /34°^I'sy" o86°W44'34" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus/Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Tornfldo / Natal Chart / May 6, 2009, Wed / 7:59 om CDT +5:0 Madison, AL /
34°N4i'57" o86°W44'34" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
There were only two indications in the lunar phase chart (middle wheel of Thunderstorms 5)
and the lunar phase-ingress comparison that indicated a tornado the week of May 1, 2009.
Lunar phase Mars was semisquare the ingress Mercury-Uranus conjunction. The other and
far more important indication was the horizon and meridian of the lunar phase chart. Notice
that the lunar phase Ascendant was conjunct the ingress Descendant (opposition the ingress
Ascendant) and that the lunar phase Midheaven was conjunct the ingress IC (opposition the

=== Page 179 ===
ingress Midheaven). As in the ingress chart, the lunar phase meridian was square the lunar
phase horizon.
This angular connection between the ingress and lunar phase charts almost always indicates
a significant weather event. In this case, a tornado was the obvious event because the ingress
Mercury-Uranus conjunction was in aspect to both horizons and meridians. Compare this
with the many aspects in the Moore chart; more aspects equate to a stronger thunderstorm,
with a tornado in many cases.
TornadoOutbreak,February5-6,2008
Eighty-seven tornadoes touched down during the course of this outbreak, which lasted more
than fifteen hours from the afternoon of February 5 until the early morning of February 6. The
majority of the tornadoes occurred in Tennessee, Mississippi, Alabama, Kentucky, and Arkan-
sas, with one or two in each of the states of Louisiana, Indiana, Illinois, Missouri, and Texas.
All but ten tornadoes were rated from EF-o to EF-2, five were rated EF-3, and five rated EF-4.
Fifty-six people died.
Winter tornadoes are unusual because even southern states usually lack the warm air neces-
sary for a super cell to develop. However, there was an almost never-ending supply of warm,
moist air, along with strong tornado signatures in the ingress and lunar phase charts, and with
two stationing planets the week of the outbreak. Temperatures were unseasonably warm in the
70s and 80s.
The charts for Castalian Springs, Tennessee, are representative of the December 22, 2007,
winter ingress and January 29, 2008, lunar phase charts (inner and middle wheels of Thun-
derstorms 6) for the region that experienced the highest number of tornadoes. Degrees on the
horizons and meridians were similar for the states involved.

=== Page 180 ===
W-V
08° ^ 1
05° S 34
19 02 cf Mc IT 19 44 08
igr :iv-
O" Mc oC. 35- 02 26
07
3"
04
Mi'
10
05
12 /
T i
00' 00' ds 5
14 00 •;g 2-7 ir As 23 As 4&aQ5 • 16 19 63 16 2^ai2 ■V7 fIV 09 16 33 02 35
¥ 31 13-31 m. or X DB' 0/' G 08 ¥ 37* 09- 44 00 1tt
4 ¥ ■i;;- 16
o 4r 19 c-:J'
\
(H
02 19 (>;r /W
V 44 08
05 34
Thunderstorms 6
Inner Wheel=Winter Ingress / Natal Chart / December 22, 2007, Sot / 0:07:49 om CST +6:00
Castalian Springs, TN / j60N2j'jy" o86°Wi8'2g" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Middle Wheel=Lunor Phase / JVotoi Ciiort / January 29, 2008, Tue / 31:02:53 pm CST +6:00
Castalian Springs, TN /36°N2j'jy" o86°Wi8'2q" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=7'omodo / Notoi Ciiort / February 3, 2008, Tue / 10:05 Tm CST +6:00 Castalian
Springs, TN /360/V2j '37" o860Wi8'2g" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
In the ingress chart, Mercury was opposition Mars (tornado). Also drawn in were the Sun
and Jupiter conjunction Mercury (opposition Mars); Mars opposition Jupiter is a thunderstorm
aspect, and Jupiter conjunction Mercury indicates high winds, as does out-of-sign Pluto con-
junction all three planets. Mercury represents the squall line that was part of the outbreak. This
configuration of five planets aspected both the meridian and the horizon. Warm, moist air is

=== Page 181 ===
indicated by Venus square Neptune, with both planets semisquare/sesquisquare the IC/
Midheaven.
The lunar phase chart had three very telling factors: Mercury stationing retrograde, Mars sta-
tioning direct, and retrograde Mercury conjunction Neptune (tornado). Stationary planets al-
most always indicate a major weather event. The Mercury-Neptune conjunction was trine
Mars, and all three planets were trine the lunar phase Ascendant and semisextile the meridian.
As strong as all these indicators were of a strong regional super cell with tornado potential, it
was the connections between the lunar phase and ingress charts, and transits, that reflect the
magnitude of the event.
Pluto had advanced to an exact conjunction with the ingress Sun (high winds), lunar phase
Saturn was sesquisquare ingress Mercury (low pressure and wind), and stationary retrograde
Mercury conjunction ingress and lunar phase Neptune (tornado) was trine lunar phase sta-
tionary direct Mars.
Some areas experienced heavy rain and subsequent flooding. This is indicated by Neptune
trine the lunar phase Ascendant and inconjunct the lunar phase Midheaven, lunar phase
Venus conjunct the ingress IC and square the ingress horizon, and stationary direct Mars trine
Neptune.
Tri-StateTornado,Marchl8,1925
The most destructive single tornado to hit the United States in recorded history was the Tri-
State Tornado, a name aptly given because it traveled through Missouri, Illinois, and Indiana.
Its path of 21 y miles ranged from one-quarter to one-half mile wide, with periodic expansion
to one mile. In the three and a half hours it moved across three states at an average speed of 67
mph, it killed 689 people, injured 3,000, and destroyed 15,000 homes. It was located close to
the point where a warm front and a dryline intersected, both of which then moved eastward,
maintaining a favorable super cell environment that sustained the tornado's energy. It is noted
for having the longest continuous track on the ground and for being the third fastest tornado
in ground speed.

=== Page 182 ===
Thunderstorms 7
Inner Wheel=Winter Ingress / Natal Chart / December 21, 1924, Sun / 8:46 pm CST +6:00
Annapolis, MO /47"N2T47" 090° W^i'ji" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Meon Node
Middle Wheel=LMnor Phase / Natal Chart / March 17, 1925, Tue / 11:22 am CST +6:00 Annapolis,
MO /37°N2i,37" 090° W41 '51" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Tornodo Forms / Natal Chart / March 18, 1925, Wed / 1:00 pm CST +6.00
Redford, MO / ^"Nig'ii" 090°W53,54" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
The tornado began at Redford in southeastern Missouri about 1:00 pm and moved from
southwest to northeast, the direction of travel of most tornadoes. It then hit Annapolis, Mis-
souri, at 1:10 pm before moving on to Biehle in the same state. At 2:20 pm, it crossed the Mis-
sissippi River about seventy-five miles southeast of St. Louis, continuing into Illinois and strik-
ing Gorham, Murphysboro, DeSoto, and West Frankfort. Griffin and Princeton, Indiana, were
its final victims.

=== Page 183 ===
The aspects involved in this massive tornado are seemingly endless. Thus, although only the
highlights are mentioned here, these charts are excellent ones for study because they show all
the necessary thunderstorm and tornado factors.
The December 21, 1924, winter ingress chart for Annapolis, Missouri (inner wheel of Thun-
derstorms 7), has two indicators for excessively wet and stormy weather, and tornado activity:
Neptune conjunct the Ascendant (representing potential for a flow of warm, moist air—the
warm front) and Saturn conjunct the IC (this aspect also indicates potential for a dryline to de-
velop in the area). The telltale aspect for tornado potential is Mercury retrograde in nearly exact
opposition to Pluto, indicative of very high winds, and which was sextile/trine the meridian.
The lunar eclipse of February 8, 1924, at 19 Leo was conjunct the horizon.
The March 17, 1924, lunar phase chart (middle wheel of Thunderstorms 7) has a multitude
of aspects that indicate a tornado like no one had ever seen before. In addition to Mercury
forming a sesquisquare aspect to Mars, which in itself is indicative of thunderstorms and
spurts of whipping winds, it also formed a parallel with Uranus and a sesqui-
square with Neptune, two indicators of tornado. Mercury in aspect to both Mars and Uranus
promised high winds. Additional indicators of high winds were Mars semisquare and parallel
Pluto. And by the lunar phase, Uranus was inconjunct Neptune, an aspect of unusual weather.
In the lunar phase chart, Venus was opposite and contraparallel the IC, Saturn and Pluto were
sextile/trine the meridian, and Neptune was semisquare/sesqui-
square the horizon.
Lunar phase Saturn was semisquare the Sun-Jupiter conjunction in the ingress chart, an
important contact because the conjunction was square ingress Mars (wind). Lunar phase
Venus and Jupiter aspected ingress Uranus by conjunction and sextile, respectively, and lunar
phase Mercury was sesquisquare ingress Neptune, all indicators of potential tornado activity.
Another tornado indicator was lunar phase Mars square ingress Neptune. The ingress Sun,
Mercury, and Jupiter were contraparallel the lunar phase Ascendant, and ingress Uranus was
contraparallel the lunar phase Midheaven. Lunar phase Saturn (low pressure) was contra-
parallel the ingress Ascendant.
On March 18 (outer wheel of Thunderstorms 7), the potential shown in the ingress and
lunar phase charts was realized when both were triggered. Of major significance was tran-
siting Mercury at ro Aries performing double duty as it formed a square to lunar phase Pluto
and the Mercury-Pluto opposition in the ingress chart, which was sextile/trine the lunar phase
meridian. To add even more fuel, transiting Pluto at n Cancer had retrograded to exactly op-
pose ingress Mercury.
Transiting Jupiter was parallel ingress Mercury, expanding the latter planet's windy tenden-
cies. Transiting Venus at 18 Pisces was conjunct and parallel ingress Uranus, bringing warm,

=== Page 184 ===
moist air together with cold, dry air and activating the all-important Uranus influence neces-
sary for the formation of a tornado. The transiting Moon triggered critical planets and points
by parallel: ingress Pluto, and lunar phase Mars and Pluto.
Shortly before noon on March 18, the transiting Moon in Capricorn was sesquisquare lunar
phase Mars, and at 12:06 pm it was sextile ingress Saturn. About 12:30 pm, two triggering as-
pects occurred: the transiting Moon was conjunct ingress Mercury and opposition lunar phase
Pluto. The tornado began to form at that time, touching down in Redford thirty minutes later.
When the tornado hit, the transiting Moon was sesquisquare transiting Mars at 26 Taurus,
both of which were in hard aspect to the ingress Ascendant and IC.
The intense low pressure, as well as moisture and a dryline, necessary for a super cell thun-
derstorm and the creation of a tornado of this magnitude is indicated by two aspects: transiting
Neptune at 20 Leo was conjunct within four minutes the ingress Ascendant, having retro-
graded to that point in the several months since the ingress, and transiting Saturn at 13 Scorpio
had moved forward to form a conjunction with the ingress IC within ten minutes of exac-
titude.
The meridians in the ingress and lunar phase charts were sextile/trine each other, and the
horizons were sesquisquare/semisquare, and the Sun and Moon in the lunar phase chart were
sesquisquare/semisquare the ingress meridian.
Of special interest in the study of the Tri-State Tornado are the horizons and meridians of
some of the other towns it visited:
Location Horizon Meridian
Redford, Missouri
(ingress)
20 Leo/Aquarius 34 13 Scorpio/Taurus 57
Redford, Missouri
(lunar phase)
3 Cancer/Capricorn 20 13 Virgo/Pisces 02
Annapolis, Missouri
(ingress)
20 Leo/Aquarius 21 13 Scorpio/Taurus 39
Annapolis, Missouri
(lunar phase)
3 Cancer/Capricorn 33 13 Virgo/Pisces 15
DeSoto, Illinois
(ingress)
22 Leo/Aquarius 05 15 Scorpio/Taurus 37
DeSoto, Illinois
(lunar phase)
5 Cancer/Capricorn 09 14 Virgo/Pisces 50
Princeton, Indiana
(ingress)
23 Leo/Aquarius 35 17 Scorpio/Taurus 17

=== Page 185 ===
Princeton, Indiana 6 Cancer/Capricorn 58 16 Virgo/Pisces 38
(lunar phase)
The southwest to northeast path of the tornado can be seen through the changing degrees of
the horizon and meridian. Of particular importance is the effect of Neptune's (counter-
clockwise movement) conjunction to the ingress Ascendant in all the charts. The tornado died
out after hitting Princeton, where Neptune in the ingress chart was just above the horizon.
This indicates that the storm changed direction just enough in its eastward movement so that
Neptune was no longer below the horizon of the cities it passed through. A similar pattern is
apparent in Saturn's conjunction with the IC in various locations.
Xenia,Ohio, AprilS ,1974
Tornado sirens sounded across eleven states on two consecutive days in April 1974, warning
residents of the potential for major destruction. On April 3 and 4, 1974, there were 127 torna-
does, known as the Super Outbreak. Six of the tornadoes had winds faster than 261 mph, cat-
egorizing them as Category 5 storms on the Enhanced Fujita scale. More than 300 people were
killed and 6,142 were injured. Total damage was more than $600 million.
The town hardest hit was Xenia, Ohio, where the half-mile-wide tornado destroyed homes,
businesses, and the high school. It even lifted freight cars and tossed them across streets. Thir-
ty-four people were killed.
Key planets of this tornado were Pluto, Jupiter, and Mercury. On April 3, 1974, the timing
was right, each planet was aspected, and severe weather arrived.

=== Page 186 ===
GQ 27 CD
01 45
O" n 28 20 5 0 08
50.
At o Mc OS" 01 5G IB ,-b 17' 0 (IF 03 50 40' 02' ■•.2' 25 21 08
o" 28' 12
o Tl3 ■10
04 04 o 12 TOO o--
T 00' :■ TOO ^05 o 46' 46
55
25 10'
ft IB' 26 55' 14* 5-5' IS1 05 09 05 25 As 3/'
\
if 5 5 66 01 23 05
rro
zr 21 OS y
285
LO
01 45 y
08
05 27
Thunderstorms 8
Inner Wheel=Sprmg Ingress / JVotaf Chart / March 20, 1974, Wed / 8:07 pm EDT +4:00 Xenia,
OH/390JV4il05" 083° W55'47" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Middle Wheel=Lunflr PAose / JVatal Chart / March 30, 1974, Sat / 9:44 pm £DT -i-4.-oo Xenia, OH
/39°N4i'05" 083° W55'47" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Tornado / Natal Chart / .April 3, 1974, Wed / 3.-40 pm EDT +4:00 Xenia, OH /
jg°N4i'oj" 083° W55'47" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
With Pluto conjunct the Ascendant and square the meridian, the March 20, 1974, spring
ingress chart (inner wheel of Thunderstorms 8) foreshadowed the disaster that would strike
Xenia sometime in the succeeding three months. The December 24, 1973, solar eclipse at 3
Capricorn was conjunct the ingress IC and square the ingress horizon.
Uranus and Neptune, either or both of which are active when a tornado strikes, were both
aspected by Mars, the first in a sesquisquare and the second in an opposition. Neptune sextile

=== Page 187 ===
Pluto enhanced the Mars-Neptune aspect, adding moist air and additional counterclockwise
wind movement and the high wind promised by Pluto conjunct the Ascendant and square the
meridian. More wind is reflected in the Mercury-Pluto inconjunct, a configuration that was
transformed into one of excessive wind because of Mercury's conjunction and parallel with
Jupiter. The Uranus-Neptune semisquare set the stage for unusual weather.
The March 30, 1974, lunar phase chart (middle wheel of Thunderstorms 8) activated the
Uranus and Neptune aspects in the ingress chart. The Sun was trine Neptune, bringing warm,
moist air. Mercury sesquisquare Uranus and square Neptune, tornado aspects on their own,
activated the Mars aspects to those planets in the ingress chart. Jupiter expanded the same as-
pects with its parallel to Uranus, delivered an intense cold front, and provided high wind. The
long-term Uranus-Neptune semisquare was still in aspect.
The ingress aspects were further activated by lunar phase Mercury square Mars and
sesquisquare Uranus. Lunar phase Saturn was sesquisquare ingress Venus, an aspect of heavy
precipitation. Ingress Mercury was parallel the lunar phase Ascendant.
On April 3 (outer wheel of Thunderstorms 8), the transiting Sun at 13 Aries triggered ingress
Mars, Venus, Mercury, and Jupiter aspects. The Jupiter-Pluto inconjunct was exact that day.
When the tornado hit at 3:40 pm, the transiting Moon in Virgo was separating from an oppo-
sition to the ingress Mercury-Jupiter conjunction, having activated the inconjunct those plan-
ets made to Pluto (conjunct the Ascendant) in the ingress chart. The transiting Sun was also
semisquare lunar phase Jupiter, again setting off that aspect, and transiting Mercury at 18
Pisces was square lunar phase Mars.
Note also the many aspects that day involving transiting Venus at 27 Aquarius, which in-
creased precipitation and kept the warm, moist air flowing into the eleven-state tornado area.
Venus was situated in the fourth house in many of the lunar phase charts of cities hit by torna-
does. Saturn trine Uranus, in combination with Neptune and Saturn in aspect with other plan-
ets, represented the low pressure in the region.
Transiting Jupiter was sextile/trine the ingress meridian that day, transiting Mercury was
sesquisquare/semisquare the lunar phase horizon, and transiting Mars was sesquisquare/
semisquare the lunar phase meridian. Transiting Venus was parallel the lunar phase Ascen-
dant. Ingress chart aspects that showed potential for a tornado roaring through Xenia were
Mars and Saturn (major thunderstorm) contraparallel the IC.
[contgntg]

=== Page 188 ===
CHAPTER 11
Example Forecasts
Although there are quite a few steps involved in preparing a weather forecast for a given loca-
tion, with practice you can do this fairly quickly. In the beginning, though, it's best to take the
time to list all the various factors for both the ingress and lunar phase charts, along with key-
words for each. Doing this is a good way to learn, and the notes will be helpful in hindsight as
you compare your forecast to the actual weather.
If you're not interested in a specific date, calculate an ingress chart for your (or another) loca-
tion. Then flip through the ephemeris to spot dates during that season when one or preferably
two inner transiting planets will aspect the ingress longitude or both longitude and latitude.
Look for hard aspects from Venus for precipitation, or Mercury and Mars for significant wind.
Use those dates for your forecast.
A notable weather event is more likely, of course, when an outer planet is involved and in as-
pect to the ingress longitude or longitude and latitude. If this isn't the case in your location,
use Solar Maps to find, for example, a location where ingress Saturn is square the ingress
meridian. Then look for inner planet transits that will trigger Saturn, and use those dates for
your forecast.
Following are the steps used in creating a weather forecast:
1. Select a forecast date.
2. Calculate a chart for the cardinal ingress immediately preceding the date.
3. Calculate a chart for the lunar phase immediately preceding the date.
4. List all planetary aspects in the ingress chart, including those to the angles. Write key-
words for each planetary configuration, and include all possibilities appropriate to the season
and location. After studying which planetary confi gurations contact the angles, write a brief de-
scription or keyword list of the overall weather conditions for the season.
5. List all planetary aspects in the lunar phase chart, including those to the angles. Write key-
words for each planetary configuration, and include all the possibilities appropriate to the sea-
son and location. After studying which planetary configurations contact the angles, write a
brief description or use keywords to describe the overall weather conditions for the week.
6. List all planetary aspects between the ingress and lunar phase charts. Write keywords for
each planetary configuration, and note which contacts are activating significant planetary con-
figurations in each of the charts.
7. Using the selected forecast date, list all transiting aspects to the ingress and lunar phase
charts, including those to the angles. If the forecast period is for the entire lunar phase, list the

=== Page 189 ===
aspects by date. Write keywords for each planetary configuration, including all possibilities
appropriate to the season and location.
8. List all aspects made by transiting planets to each other on the forecast date. Write key-
words for each planetary configuration, including all possibilities appropriate to the season and
location. Or, if you're not forecasting for a specific date, look for fast-moving transiting planets
that will aspect the lunar phase and ingress charts that week. By doing this, you can spot the
dates when there will be precipitation, temperature anomalies, storms, etc.
9. Identify eclipses, if any, that aspect the angles of the forecast location and that have oc-
curred or will occur in the preceding or succeeding six to twelve months.
10. Then formulate a forecast for the selected date or week.
Each of the following three forecast examples represent a different weather event; heat,
hurricane, and winter storm. All three were selected using the method explained here, begin-
ning with an ingress map and then scanning the ephemeris for dates when transiting planets
would aspect the ingress longitude and/or latitude and outer planets.
2019Summer Heat,Phoenix, Arizona
Overall, summer 2019 in Phoenix will be remembered as a season with excessively high tem-
peratures. Temperatures during a cool summer in Phoenix are about 105 F; normal is about
no F. In 2019, though, summer temperatures will be generally above average, with more days
in the 115 F or higher range and more nights when the thermometer never drops below the
high 90s.

=== Page 190 ===
Example Forecasts i
Inner Wheel=Summer Ingress / Natal Chart / June 21, 20ig, Fri / 8:54:08 am MST +7.00
Phoenix, AZ / jfN26'54" 1120 V/04'24" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Iunflr Phase / Natal Chart / July g, 2019, Tue / j.jj am MST +7.00 Phoenix,
AZ /55"N26'54" 1120W04'24"/ Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Ingress Chart
Before looking more closely at all the factors in the summer ingress chart (inner wheel of
Example Forecasts 1), note that Uranus is conjunct the Midheaven. This alone indicates the
excessive heat that accompanies the high-pressure systems that often influence the region dur-
ing the summer months. Because this is the ingress chart, these systems will be prevalent
throughout the summer.
There are many aspects in the ingress chart, as there are in the lunar phase chart. Although

=== Page 191 ===
not all of these involve the Phoenix ingress horizon and meridian, it's a good idea to list each
one. Doing this will help you as you work with lunar phase charts during the seasons, because
weather conditions represented by the ingress aspects can occur when ingress planets aspect
the horizon and meridian in a lunar phase chart and vice versa. Remember, weather phe-
nomena will occur where the planets aspect the ingress or lunar phase horizon and/or merid-
ian.
IngressPlanetaryAspects
Five planets in northern declination, five planets in southern declination: average temper-
atures
Seven planets in high declination, including Mars, Jupiter, and Pluto: high heat
Sun parallel Mars: warmer, storms
Mercury parallel Venus: warmer, partly cloudy, southerly air flow
Mercury conjunct and parallel Mars: windy, hot, dry, thunderstorms
Mercury contraparallel Jupiter: warmer, fair, northerly winds
Mercury contraparallel Saturn: cloudy, low pressure, cooler, precipitation
Mercury opposition Pluto; high winds, hot
Venus parallel Mars: precipitation, heat
Venus opposition and contraparallel Jupiter: cloudy, precipitation, heat
Venus inconjunct Saturn: partly cloudy, cooler
Venus contraparallel Saturn: cloudy, cooler, precipitation, low pressure, humid
Venus square Neptune: abundant precipitation, warmer
Venus contraparallel Pluto: precipitation, windy, warmer
Mars contraparallel Jupiter: heat, thunderstorms
Mars contraparallel Saturn: high wind, storms
Mars opposition and contraparallel Pluto: hot, windy
Jupiter semisextile Saturn: cooler, precipitation
Jupiter parallel Saturn: low pressure, cooler, precipitation
Jupiter sesquisquare Uranus: cooler, storms, windy, precipitation
Jupiter sesquisquare Neptune: abundant precipitation, cloudy, humid
Jupiter parallel Pluto: hot, windy, storms
Uranus semisquare Neptune; cooler, cloudy, humid, storms
Neptune sextile Pluto: hot, humid
IngressAspectstoAngles
Uranus conjunct/opposition meridian
Sun semisquare/sesquisquare horizon

=== Page 192 ===
Venus sextile/trine horizon
Jupiter trine/sextile horizon
Saturn inconjunct/semisextile horizon
Neptune inconjunct/semisextile horizon
On its own, Uranus prominent in the chart indicates a summer with temperatures above
average. This is compounded by four other planets that represent heat (Sun, Venus, Jupiter,
Neptune) and, by extension, two other planets of heat, Mars and Pluto. Mars is drawn in be-
cause it is parallel the Sun and Venus, and Jupiter is parallel Pluto, in addition to other aspects.
So even though a specific planet in aspect to another planet does not aspect the horizon and/or
meridian, it still has influence because it intensifies the meaning of the planet that does aspect
the angle. The inclusion of planetary aspects by extension is best used as a confirmation of
what the chart already indicates, because these aspects aren't as strong as those that do contact
the angles. Otherwise you could find yourself going around and around in circles, creating a
long chain of links!
The only ingress aspect that indicates cooler temperatures is Saturn. Considered along with
Taurus/Scorpio on the meridian and the Neptune aspects, this indicates that the area will re-
ceive some monsoon storms and cloudy days with higher humidity.
Now let's look at the aspects in the lunar phase chart for July 9 (outer wheel of Example
Forecasts 1).
Lunar Phase Planetary Aspects
Sun inconjunct Jupiter: warmer
Sun contraparallel Jupiter: warmer
Sun opposition and contraparallel Saturn: low pressure, cooler, cloudy, abundant
precipitation, storms
Sun trine Neptune: warmer, humid
Sun contraparallel Pluto: warmer
Mercury semisextile Venus: warmer, partly cloudy
Mercury conjunct Mars: windy, thunderstorms, hot, dry
Mercury sesquisquare Jupiter: warmer, fair to partly cloudy
Mercury square Uranus: thunderstorms, windy, high pressure
Mercury sesquisquare Neptune; warmer, humid, cloudy, precipitation
Venus semisextile Mars: warmer, fair
Venus sextile Uranus: cooler, fair
Mars sesquisquare Jupiter: hot, thunderstorms
Mars square Uranus: thunderstorms, windy

=== Page 193 ===
Mars sesquisquare Neptune: humid, warmer, precipitation
Jupiter semisextile Saturn: cooler, precipitation
Jupiter parallel Saturn: low pressure, cooler, precipitation, storms
Jupiter square Neptune: abundant precipitation, cloudy, humid
Jupiter parallel Pluto: hot, windy, storms
Saturn sextile Neptune: precipitation, cooler
Saturn contraparallel Pluto: storms, windy, cloudy
Uranus semisquare Neptune: cool, cloudy, humid, storms
Neptune sextile Pluto: hot, humid
Lunar PhaseAspectsto Angles
Mercury inconjunct/semisextile meridian
Venus trine/sextile meridian
Mars inconjunct/semisextile meridian
Uranus sextile/trine meridian
Venus parallel/contraparallel horizon
Pluto inconjunct/semisextile horizon
The lunar phase chart mirrors what the ingress chart forecast: above-normal temperatures.
All of the planets that contact the angles, except Mercury, are associated with heat, and Mer-
cury has a similar characteristic because it's in Leo and in aspect to planets that represent high-
er temperatures. Note also that Mercury is retrograde, which reinforces the hard aspects. Mer-
cury and its aspects also indicate a high probability for dust storms, which are common in
monsoon season and often precede thunderstorms.
Lunar Phase-Ingress Aspects
Aspects involving the outer planets repeat in a comparison of the two charts. This isn't always
true and varies according to the time between the ingress and the lunar phase and the move-
ment of the outer planets. In this case, since there will be only about three weeks between the
two dates, the aspects are nearly identical. The inner planets, however, will advance far enough
to make new aspects between the charts, with some of the planets changing signs. Thus, the
aspects listed here are only those that involve the faster-moving planets and aren't present in
either the ingress or lunar phase chart (I = ingress, LP = lunar phase). Equally, and sometimes
more, important are interchart aspects from planets to the horizon and/or meridian.
LP Sun semisextile I Venus: warmer, fair
LP Mercury semisquare Venus: warmer, some humidity, partly cloudy
LP Mars semisquare I Venus: precipitation, storms

=== Page 194 ===
LP Sun semisextile/inconjunct I horizon
LP Mercury square I meridian
LP Venus sextile/trine I meridian
LP Mars square I meridian
LP Jupiter trine/sextile I horizon
LP Saturn inconjunct/semisextile I horizon
LP Neptune inconjunct/semisextile I horizon
LP Pluto inconjunct/semisextile LP horizon
LP meridian sextile/trine I meridian
LP horizon semisquare/sesquisquare I meridian
Here, again, planets of heat are emphasized, along with a lesser emphasis on wind and
thunderstorms.
Eclipses
There are three eclipse contacts, one to the ingress chart and two to the lunar phase chart, and
only one of these is a hard aspect. Overall, because two of the three eclipse contacts are easy as-
pects, this is a weaker influence, and although it indicates the potential for a significant weath-
er event, it is unlikely to be on the scale of a hurricane or an EF-5 tornado.
Solar eclipse, 15 Capricorn 25, January 6, 2019, inconjunct/semisextile ingress horizon
Solar eclipse, 10 Cancer 38, July 2, 2019, trine/sextile lunar phase meridian
Lunar eclipse, 24 Capricorn 04, July 16, 2019, inconjunct/semisextile lunar phase horizon,
sesquisquare/semisquare lunar phase meridian
Transits
Mars will form an exact square with the ingress meridian on July 15, 2019, the day before the
next lunar phase. The high temperature will increase each day and reach the highest for the
week on this date. As Mars does this, it will activate all the aspects to the ingress meridian,
most of which also indicate above-average temperatures. On the same date, the transiting
Moon will be in Capricorn, where it will oppose lunar phase Venus trine/sextile lunar phase
meridian, and retrograde Mercury at 2 Leo will aspect the ingress Jupiter-
Neptune square (both of those planets aspect the ingress horizon). So in addition to excessively
high temperatures and humidity on the 15th, Phoenix could experience a dust storm followed
by thunderstorms.
20 ISGulfHurricane
The National Hurricane Center issues a hurricane probability forecast each year, citing a

=== Page 195 ===
probable number of named storms and other data. You can do the same using the summer
and autumn ingress charts, the two seasons when nearly all hurricanes occur. The first step is,
of course, to look for hurricane signatures in the ingress chart and then to see which ingress
longitudes and latitudes they aspect.
Autumn 2018 (inner wheel of Example Forecasts 2) has potential for a Gulf hurricane or
tropical storm because of these aspects: Mercury inconjunct Uranus, Mars square Uranus, and
Mars semisquare Neptune; Mercury square Saturn, although not a hurricane aspect, is asso-
ciated with low-pressure systems.
Since we're looking for a location with hurricane potential, we'll begin with a map that
shows where these hurricane signatures aspect the ingress longitude and latitude.
The map (Example Forecasts 3) shows Mars conjunct/opposition the meridian in the central
area of the Florida Panhandle, with Uranus square the meridian in the western area of the
Florida Panhandle and to the east of Mobile, Alabama. So this part of the Gulf has hurricane
potential.
Just west of Mobile, Neptune is sextile/trine the horizon and also semisquare/sesquisquare
the meridian. East of Mobile (within orb), Mercury is trine/sextile the meridian and
semisquare/sesquisquare the horizon. Neptune doesn't aspect the horizon or meridian in the
Florida Panhandle. Saturn aspects the horizon or meridian both near Mobile and in the Pan-
handle. But because both Mercury and Neptune aspect Mobile, along with the Mars-Uranus
square (within orb), that location is more likely than the Florida Panhandle to experience a
hurricane landfall—at least from the perspective of the ingress chart. Both locations, however,
will be affected by any hurricane in the area, with severe thunderstorms with tornado poten-
tial.
Next, scan an ephemeris for dates when transiting planets have the potential to trigger the
hurricane signatures. The lunar phase of October 8 (outer wheel of Example Forecasts 2) has
potential because Mercury will advance into Scorpio that week and square the ingress merid-
ian, and because Venus will have turned retrograde at 10 Scorpio on October 5. Not a perfect fit
but one with enough potential to calculate the lunar phase chart.
Before looking further into this possibility, we'll backtrack and list the aspects in the ingress
and lunar phase charts for Mobile, as well as those between the charts.

=== Page 196 ===
Example Forecasts 2
Inner Wheel^wtwmn Ingress / Natal Chart / September 22, 2018, Sat / 8:55 pm CDT +5:00
Mobile, AL / jo0N^i'jg" o880Wo2'jj" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus /Mean Node
Outer Wheel=LMnflr Phase / Natal Chart / October 8, 2018, Mon / 10:46:45 pm CDT +5:00
Mobile, AL /50°N4T3C)" o88°Wo2'}5" / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node

=== Page 197 ===
51
&
Lu
On o
I
3- ra
M O
Oo
R t-C R
I
EnnK
1>K.
• Danas 1
Waco TX
cT .□.Oi
ca
in TX
Sl-.D,
Utea . Fayoitomtto AR
• Wusiiogee OK
• Fort Smith AR
littlo fjock AR.
i Chmti TX
TX
UUb
; AR- A Hoi Springj AR / - Pin# B*W i
Greenville M:
■ Shroveporl LA
n(TX- Lafayette
w
> - <
Beach VA
r Cw Davxfson Kno NC Ashev; le NC
Crjrlci NG
Greeftvtie Huntsv AL
XR :r>gtcn Co MMM nL NHfila G •*-
th Aog /L
GA Macon
i GA
SC O-ifS'C-
Jackson
r^-a1-.
y GA
AL
Tana " L aonvite
V-
ampir
0 ~N vj^r--
■.%
Miarm FL
l\
k, 0.0.
□ A ^ ^ A
V 9

=== Page 198 ===
IngressPlnnetmryAspects
Sun conjunct and parallel Mercury: precipitation, wind
Sun trine Mars: warm, dry
Sun square Saturn: low pressure, cooler, cloudy, storms
Sun inconjunct Uranus: cooler, fair
Mercury trine Mars: warm, dry
Mercury semisquare Jupiter: warm, fair to partly cloudy
Mercury square Saturn: precipitation, cloudy, low pressure, humid, cooler
Mercury inconjunct Uranus: cloudy, storms, hurricanes, tornadoes
Mars semisextile and parallel Saturn: cloudy, windy, storms
Mars square Uranus: hurricanes, windy, storms, tornadoes
Mars semisquare Neptune: hurricanes, humid, precipitation, tornadoes
Jupiter semisquare Saturn: storms, cloudy, low pressure, cooler
Jupiter sextile Pluto: warm or cool, dry, windy
Saturn trine Uranus: cool, precipitation
Saturn parallel Pluto: storms, wind
Uranus semisquare Neptune: cool, cloudy, humid, storms, wind
Aspectstolngress Angles
Sun trine/sextile meridian
Sun sesquisquare/semisquare horizon
Mercury trine/sextile meridian
Mercury sesquisquare/semisquare horizon
Venus parallel/contraparallel meridian
Mars conjunct/opposition meridian
Jupiter contraparallel/parallel horizon
Saturn semisextile/inconjunct meridian
Saturn sesquisquare/semisquare horizon
Uranus square meridian
Neptune semisquare/sesquisquare meridian
Neptune sextile/trine horizon
With eight of ten planets aspecting the horizon and meridian at Mobile, the overall trend is
for temperatures ranging from average to below and wind, and potential for considerable pre-
cipitation associated with a tropical storm or hurricane as well as other severe thunderstorms
with tornado potential.

=== Page 199 ===
LunarPhase P lanetaiyAspects
Sun inconjunct and parallel Neptune: warm, humid
Sun square Pluto: warm, high winds, storms
Mercury opposition and contraparallel Uranus: hurricanes, tornadoes, storms,
wind
Mercury sesquisquare Neptune: hurricanes, tornadoes, humid, warm, cloudy,
precipitation
Venus square and parallel Mars: precipitation, storms
Venus parallel Saturn: precipitation, cooler, low pressure, humid
Venus trine Neptune: warm, humid, cloudy, precipitation
Venus parallel Pluto: precipitation, wind
Mars parallel Pluto: high wind, storms
Saturn trine Uranus: cool, precipitation
Saturn parallel Pluto: storms, wind
Uranus semisquare Neptune: cool, cloudy, humid, storms, wind
Lunar Phase Aspect st oAngles
Suninconjunct/semisextile and parallel/contraparallel meridian
Mercury sesquisquare/semisquare meridian
Mercury trine/sextile horizon
Saturn opposition/conjunct and contraparallel horizon
Uranus semisquare/sesquisquare meridian
Uranus sextile/trine horizon
Neptune conjunct/opposition meridian
Pluto sextile/trine meridian
The lunar phase chart indicates abundant precipitation, low pressure, and humidity along
with high potential for a storm, possibly a hurricane. Temperature is a mix of warm and cool,
which likely reflects conditions before (warm) and after (cool) a storm. Whenever you see Nep-
tune in aspect to the meridian, heavy precipitation is nearly guaranteed, and in this case it
could be a major storm.
Lunar Phase-In press Aspects
Following are the inner planet aspects from the lunar phase chart to the ingress chart (LP =
lunar phase, I = ingress):
LP Sun inconjunct/semisextile I horizon
LP Venus conjunction/opposition ingress horizon (approaching aspect)

=== Page 200 ===
LP Mercury square ingress meridian (approaching aspect)
LP horizon inconjunct/semisextile I meridian
LP horizon semisquare/sesquisquare I horizon
LP meridian sextile/trine I horizon
LP meridian semisquare/sesquisquare I meridian
The four aspects that link the horizon and the meridian in the two charts offer confirmation
that Mobile will be the site of a hurricane or major storm. Note the approaching aspects; these
aspects will become exact during the week of the lunar phase.
Eclipses
The eclipses offer more confirmation for stormy conditions in Mobile. Note that two of the
contacts are strong hard aspects, both involving the ingress chart and thus indicating a sea-
sonal trend for one or several major weather events.
Lunar eclipse, 4 Aquarius 45, July 27, 2018, conjunct/opposition ingress meridian, incon-
junct/semi-sex-tile lunar phase horizon, sesquisquare/semisquare lunar phase meridian
Solar eclipse, 18 Leo 42, August n, 2018, square ingress horizon, inconjunct/semisextile lunar
phase meridian, sesquisquare/semisquare lunar phase horizon
Transits
On October 10, 2018, the transiting Scorpio Moon will square the ingress meridian as Mer-
cury, which will also be in Scorpio, will square the ingress meridian. Both of these planets will
form a trine/sextile with the lunar phase Ascendant.
Venus and Mars will form a square on the same date at 10 Scorpio-Aquarius, which indi-
cates stormy conditions and heavy precipitation. Although this square is within orb of the
ingress horizon, it's a bit wide; however, it's also a stronger aspect because Venus will be retro-
grade, having made its station only five days earlier.
The many aspects in both charts and between them, along with the eclipses and transits,
indicate that conditions will be stormy with abundant precipitation in Mobile. The question is
whether it will be a hurricane or tropical storm. Despite the strong presence of Saturn, Uranus,
and Neptune, and aspects to these planets, I would forecast a tropical storm. For a hurricane, I
would expect to see Mars square Neptune in the ingress chart, rather than a semisquare, as
well as stronger hard aspects between these planets at the lunar phase, rather than a Mercury-
Neptune sesquisquare. This forecast is also more logical from a meteorology perspective. By
early to mid October, the Gulf will not have the very warm sea surface temperatures necessary
to support a hurricane.

=== Page 201 ===
Winter2017-2018,Chicago, Illinois
Chicago's location lends itself to weather anomalies and widely varying weather conditions. Its
proximity to Lake Michigan can result in warmer temperatures but also higher levels of precip-
itation. Storms and weather systems, both low and high pressure, move through the area be-
cause the jet stream is often near or over Illinois, especially in fall, winter, and spring.
With ingress Neptune square the meridian and retrograde Mercury also aspecting the
meridian (inner wheel of Example Forecasts 4), snowfall amounts could set a new record dur-
ing winter 2017-2018. The winters of 1977-1978 and 1978-1979, two of the snowiest on
record, also had a strong Neptune influence: square the meridian in 1977-1978 and conjunct/
opposition the meridian and square the horizon in 1978-1979.

=== Page 202 ===
Example Forecasts 4
Inner Wheel=Winter Ingress / Natal Chart / December 21, 2017, Thu / 10:27:53 om CST
+6:00 Chicago, IL / 4i°Nji' 087° Wjg' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Outer Wheel=Lunflr Phase / JVatol Chart / February 23, 201S, Fri / 2:09 om CST +6:00
Chicago, IL / ^TNji' o8y°Wjg' / Geocentric / Tropical / Placidus / Mean Node
Ingress Planetary Aspects-
Sun parallel Venus: cool, heavy precipitation
Sun semisquare Jupiter: warm, windy, thunderstorms
Sun conjunct and parallel Saturn: excessive precipitation, low pressure, cool, cloudy, storms
Mercury retrograde semisextile Jupiter: seasonal to cool, partly cloudy
Mercury retrograde sesquisquare Uranus: storms, tornadoes, high pressure, cloudy
Mercury retrograde square Neptune: cloudy, abundant precipitation, cool, humid/damp

=== Page 203 ===
Venus semisquare Mars: precipitation, storms
Venus parallel Saturn: cloudy, heavy precipitation, sleet, snow
Venus trine Uranus: fair, cold
Mars trine Neptune: warm, humid/damp
Jupiter semisquare Saturn: storms, cloudy, low pressure, below-average temperatures
Jupiter trine Neptune: above-average temperatures, fair to partly cloudy, thaw
Jupiter sextile Pluto: above-average temperatures, dry
Saturn parallel Pluto: storms, windy
Uranus semisquare and contraparallel Neptune: below-average temperatures, cloudy, humid/
damp, storms, windy
IngressAspectstoAngles
Eight planets aspect the ingress angles. This seldom occurs, and when it does, it's an indi-
cation that the location will see not one or two or a few notable weather events, but many.
Mercury conjunct/opposition meridian
Venus sextile/trine horizon
Mars semisextile/inconjunct meridian
Mars parallel/contraparallel horizon
Jupiter semisextile/inconjunct meridian
Saturn parallel/contraparallel meridian
Uranus sesquisquare/semisquare meridian
Uranus sextile/trine horizon
Neptune square meridian
Pluto parallel/contraparallel meridian
The ingress chart indicates a winter with abundant precipitation. Temperatures will vary
from below to above normal, with the latter associated with winter storms. However, with so
many indicators for warmer temperatures, warm, moist air is likely to move northward from
the Gulf (Neptune square the meridian) and mix with colder jet stream air (Mercury-Uranus)
to produce record-setting snow levels. A blizzard is possible with Mercury retrograde in the
ingress chart, and the odds increase because Mercury, almost at a standstill, will station direct
two days later.
Lunar Phase Aspects
A scan of the ephemeris reveals that the February 23, 2018, lunar phase (outer wheel of Exam-
ple Forecasts 4) has potential to trigger a major storm with abundant precipitation. Three plan-
ets—Mer-cury, Venus, and Mars—will be in aspect to Neptune either at the ingress or during

=== Page 204 ===
that week. Note also that the these three planets are in the third house: weather approaching
from the west.
Sun parallel Mercury: precipitation
Sun sextile Saturn: cooler, partly cloudy
Sun contraparallel Uranus: fair, sudden cold wave
Sun semisquare Pluto: warmer, precipitation
Mercury sextile Saturn: partly cloudy, cooler
Mercury semisquare and contraparallel Uranus: storms, high wind
Venus square Mars: precipitation, storms
Venus conjunct and parallel Neptune; warmer, abundant precipitation
Mars parallel Saturn: storms, high wind
Mars square Neptune; humid/damp, precipitation, warm, moist air flow
Mars semisextile and parallel Pluto: warm, windy, storms
Jupiter semisquare Saturn: storms, cloudy, low pressure, below-average temperatures
Jupiter trine Neptune: above-average temperatures, fair to partly cloudy, thaw
Jupiter sextile Pluto: above-average temperatures, dry
Saturn parallel Pluto: storms, windy
Uranus semisquare and contraparallel Neptune: below-average temperatures, cloudy, humid/
damp, storms, windy
Lunar PhaseAspectsto Angles
As in the ingress chart, eight planets aspect the angles at the lunar phase, indicating potential
for a major weather event. Of these, precipitation planets Venus and Neptune are particularly
strong, increasing the odds for abundant snowfall. Saturn (also strong with its square to the
meridian) and Neptune are planets associated with low-pressure, major storm systems.
Sun inconjunct/semisextile meridian
Mercury inconjunct/semisextile meridian
Venus square horizon
Mars conjunct and parallel horizon
Jupiter semisquare/sesquisquare meridian
Saturn square meridian
Saturn parallel/contraparallel horizon
Neptune square horizon
Pluto semisextile/inconjunct horizon
The lunar phase chart mirrors the ingress chart forecast: heavy precipitation, stormy condi-
tions, and a southerly flow of warm, moist air from the Gulf to increase snowfall totals. There

=== Page 205 ===
is also a mix of cold and warm indicators, as well as potential for high winds because of Mars
conjunct the Ascendant.
LunarPhase—Ingress Aspects
Here are the lunar phase-ingress aspects (LP = lunar phase, I = ingress), other than those in-
volving only the outer planets. Note especially that the lunar phase chart activates the ingress
retrograde Mercury-Neptune square of heavy precipitation, and that Mercury advanced about
90 degrees since the ingress to form a conjunction at the lunar phase.
Although lunar phase Mars is separating from a conjunction/opposition to the ingress
meridian and Mercury, I would consider this a valid aspect for these reasons: Mars is strongly
placed in the lunar phase chart; and Mars, a planet of wind and warm air, will form a square
with Neptune and Venus (also warm planets) prior to the lunar phase, representing the warm,
moist air flow from the Gulf prior to the storm. Temperatures will drop under the February 23
lunar phase as Mercury interacts with Mercury and Uranus.
LP Sun trine I Mars
LP Sun semisquare I Uranus (approaching)
LP Mercury conjunct I Neptune
LP Mercury square I Mercury
LP Mercury semisquare I Uranus
LP Venus square I Mercury
LP Venus trine I Jupiter
LP Venus sextile I Pluto
LP Mars conjunct I Mercury (separating)
LP Mars semisextile I Jupiter
LP Jupiter semisextile I Venus
LP meridian sextile I meridian
LP Mercury square I meridian
LP Neptune square I meridian
LP Venus square I meridian
LP Uranus sextile/trine I horizon
LP Jupiter square I horizon
Eclipses
Lunar eclipse, 15 Aquarius 25, August 7, 2017, sextile/trine ingress meridian and lunar phase
horizon
Solar eclipse, 28 Leo 53, August 21, 2017, conjunct/opposition ingress horizon
Lunar eclipse, n Leo 37, January 31, 2018, trine/sextile ingress meridian, sextile/trine lunar

=== Page 206 ===
phase meridian
Solar eclipse, 27 Aquarius 08, February 15, 2018, conjunct/opposition ingress horizon
Temperatures will be mostly seasonal in Chicago during the winter but cold when major
winter storms (cyclones) develop in the region, bringing considerable precipitation. Warmer
days and weeks could lead to fast snowmelt, which in turn will make the area prone to flood-
ing. Days with temperatures well above average are likely to precede the most major of the
storms.
[contents]

=== Page 207 ===
CHAPTER 12
Climate Change
What, if anything, can astrometeorology contribute to the ongoing debate about climate
change? Something, certainly, but probably not more than atmospheric science and history
can. Astrometeorology can, however, provide information regarding historical records for par-
ticularly cold, dry, wet, or warm years.
The European Great Famine of 1315-1317 had lasting consequences, including a population
decline that is estimated at between 10 and 25 percent. Thousands starved because crop yields
were small to nonexistent as a result of cold, wet weather. The famine occurred during a twen-
ty-year period (1310-1330) when winters were severe and summers were cold and wet. Some
scientists and historians identify 1300 as the end of the Medieval Warm Period and the onset
of the Little Ice Age. Although there is not complete agreement about the dates of the Little Ice
Age, many scientists say it lasted until about the mid-i8oos, with a warmer period in the
15 00s, followed by the coldest temperatures of the Little Ice Age.
From 1315 to 1317, all four of the outermost planets were in southern declination and Saturn
was sextile Uranus; Jupiter was square Neptune from the fall of 1315 until the summer of 1316.
Jupiter was square Neptune from the autumn of 1315 through the spring of 1316. In the sum-
mer of 1315, Jupiter was contraparallel Saturn and Neptune, and in the autumn of 1315, Saturn
was parallel Neptune. All of these aspects confirm the information in the historical records.
The winter of January 1186-1187 was reportedly a very warm winter, with trees blooming in
Strasbourg, France, in January. This is unlikely. No doubt there were some unseasonably
warm days and weeks, because Mars was conjunct the IC at the ingress. But Jupiter conjunct
Saturn, which was square Mercury trine Uranus, indicate otherwise. Three of the five outer-
most planets were in southern declination.
Records indicate that Hungary was cold and snowy during the winter of 1342, a seasonal
trend confirmed by Mars conjunct Pluto square Saturn. New York Harbor froze in the winter
of 1780, allowing people to walk across it from Manhattan to Staten island; four of the five
outermost planets were in southern declination and Saturn was sextile Pluto. During the win-
ter of 1794-1795, the Dutch fleet was stranded in Den Helder harbor, frozen in ice; Saturn was
square Pluto in cold Aquarius and Uranus, which was square Pluto; three of the five outer-
most planets were in southern declination.
And then there is the well-documented severe weather of the 1930s in the United States,
which included very hot and very cold temperatures, flooding, and drought—and which is
being repeated in the early decades of the twenty-fi rst century.
All of these examples and many of those in this book can be characterized as extreme

=== Page 208 ===
weather, a phenomenon that is definitely not something new to this century, as some propo-
nents of climate change would have the public believe.
Weather, like everything else in life, is cyclical. When extreme weather events are few, we
consider the weather to be "normal." When extreme weather events are many, especially dur-
ing a series of years, we tend to think that the climate is undergoing a permanent change.
The Uranus-Pluto square of the 1930s returned in the late 2000s for a lengthy stay; extreme
weather repeats. Notice how prominent Uranus and Pluto are in the examples just cited; ex-
treme weather repeats. If people had been more aware of the environment in the 1930s, talk of
climate change would have been prevalent. Same with the Medieval Warm Period and the
onset of the Little Ice Age. During the twentieth century, global temperatures have risen be-
tween 1 F and 1.4 F, which is comparable to the Medieval Warm Period.
Climate change became a hot topic during the time that Pluto entered Capricorn (cold sign),
Uranus entered Aries (hot sign), and Neptune entered Pisces (cool sign). Uranus square Pluto
represents both extreme cold and extreme heat. Neptune in Pisces is extreme wetness. All three
planets are associated with extreme weather: extratropical cyclones, hurricanes, tornadoes, heat
waves, cold waves. Proponents of climate change relate rising greenhouse gases to increased
intensity and frequency of hurricanes; planetary alignments reflect this, but not necessarily be-
cause of greenhouse gases. The same applies to extreme cold and heat. Watch the outer plan-
ets; when they form aspects to each other during a succession of years, weather becomes a hot
topic because of many major storms and other weather extremes. When these aspects are few,
weather is more or less "normal," with little that classifies as extreme.
On the other hand, this is not to say that humans are friends of the environment. They're
definitely not. But humans, like the climate, are slow to change, and reluctant to pay a little
more to own a hybrid or electric vehicle, install solar panels on their homes, take the bus to
work, or reduce the consumption of hundreds of thousands of everyday items created from
petroleum. Everyone needs to take a role in reducing greenhouse gases.
[COTtgntg]

=== Page 209 ===
Conclusion
Success in weather forecasting requires practice and a basic knowledge of meteorology and
local climatology. This can be achieved with time and effort. One of the best ways to begin is to
choose a city, your own or another, and start writing forecasts.
Begin by learning the climatology of the location, and then work with the ingress and lunar
phase charts. Check your results on the Weather Underground site (www.wunder-
ground.com), where you can also research climatology and read the blogs to gain meteorology
knowledge as it relates to the current weather. On the same site you can find a scientific fore-
caster discussion for most locations, which you can then correlate to the charts and aspects.
These discussions are posted at least daily and sometimes more often, depending on current
weather conditions.
Remember, the planets do not cause the weather; they reflect weather conditions and phe-
nomena. Also remember that one aspect does not equate to a weather event and that a weather
event is unlikely unless the potential is in an ingress or a lunar phase chart. Look for three or
more factors in these charts and then watch the transiting Moon, which will often trigger the
event. For example, rain showers could begin as the transiting Moon aspects the meridian or
horizon of a chart that shows strong potential for rain because Venus in the chart aspects one
of these angles.
Keep good notes of both your successes and challenges. As you gain knowledge, you can re-
view these notes and determine why your forecast was off and probably find other factors that
will help you refine future forecasts. The bonus; you'll be doing astrometeorology research and
along the way will undoubtedly develop new techniques.
The information in this book covers the method I use, but there is still much to learn.
Through your own study and practice, you will surely find other viable techniques to advance
the collective knowledge.
Finally, don't be surprised if you at least somewhat revise your definition of "good" and
"bad" weather. A cloudy day, a rain shower, or above- or below-average temperatures might
flip over into the good category, just because your forecast was 100 percent accurate.
Most of all, have fun and enjoy the lovely Saturn days!
[contents]

=== Page 210 ===
Glossary
declination: The angular distance north or south of the celestial equator.
horizon: The latitude of a location; the horizontal axis; the east/west axis traditionally referred
to as the Ascendant/Descendant in a chart.
ingress: One of the four annual ingresses of the Sun into a cardinal sign that represent the
beginning of a season; spring begins when the Sun enters Aries, summer begins when the
Sun enters Cancer, autumn begins when the Sun enters Libra, and winter begins when the
Sun enters Capricorn.
ingress chart: Used to forecast seasonal trends.
latitude: The degrees north or south of the equator: i degree of latitude equals about i degree of
a sign, or about 50 miles.
longitude: The degrees west or east of Greenwich; 1 degree of longitude equals about 1 degree of
a sign, or about 50 miles.
lunar phase: One of the four monthly phases of the Moon (new Moon, full Moon, and two
quarter Moons).
lunar phase chart: Used to forecast for weekly and daily forecasts.
meridian: The longitude of a location; the vertical axis; the north/south axis traditionally re-
ferred to as the Midheaven/IC in a chart.
[contents]

=== Page 211 ===
Resources
Weather Underground, www.wunderground.com. This extensive and outstanding website for
weather also has many articles and blogs about meteorology, along with historical weather
records, links to current meteorology data, and radar and satellite images.
WeatherGeek Pro, www.weathergeekpro.com. This mobile application provides easy access to
meteorology sites.
Penn State e-Wall, www.meteo.psu.edu/~fxgi/ewall.html. This electronic map wall from the
Department of Meteorology at Pennsylvania State University provides
current data from numerous meteorology models used in forecasting.
National Hurricane Center, www.nhc.noaa.gov. Source for hurricane data and
information.
Weather Prediction Center, www.hpc.ncep.noaa.gov. Provides current and archival data, and
meteorology information.
Storm Prediction Center, www.spc.noaa.gov. Source for current storm and convective outlooks.
National Centers for Environmental Prediction, http://mag.ncep.noaa.gov. Source for meteo-
rology tools.
Climate Prediction Center, www.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov/products/forecasts. Issues seasonal, long-
range weather forecasts.
Grenci, Lee M., and John M. Nese. A World of Weather: Fundamentals of Meteorology. 5th ed.
Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt Pub. Co., 2012. This is an excellent book from which to learn
the basics of meteorology.
[contents]
