===== PAGE 1 =====

ASTROLOGIA GALLICA 
BOOK TWENTY-SIX 
ASTROLOGICAL INTERROGATIONS 
AND ELECTIONS 

===== PAGE 2 =====

Jean-Baptiste Morin 
Astrologia Gallica 
Book Twenty-Six 
Astrological Interrogations 
and Elections 
Translated from the Latin 
by 
James Herschel Holden, M.A. 
Fellow of the American Federation of 
Astrologers 

===== PAGE 3 =====

This book is dedicated to the memory of 
Douglas Alexander Kidd, 
whose book has helped me much. 

===== PAGE 4 =====

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Translator's Preface 
Book Twenty-Six 
Section I. Astrological Interrogations 
Chapter 1. What the Doctrine of Interrogations Involves 
and what the Limits of its Truth are 
Chapter 2. Whether the celestial bodies are Causes per se 
of all Man's Actions and Motions 
Chapter 3. Whether the Beginnings of all things are like 
the Birth of a Man 
Chapter 4. The Doctrine of the Arabs on Interrogations 
Depends upon many vain Assumptions 
Chapter 5. The Doctrine of the Arabs on Interrogations is 
Plainly False 
Chapter 6. The Doctrine of the Arabs on Questions is 
Fraudulent 
Chapter 7. The Doctrine of the Arabs on Interrogations is 
Diabolical 
Chapter 8. The Falsity of the Responses to Interrogations 
from the Ruler of the Planetary Hour 
Chapter 9. Containing Cardan's Errors in his Tract on 
Interrogations 
Chapter 10. To how many General Categories can all the 
Questions put to an Astrologer be Reduced 
Chapter 11. In what General Way should Judgment be made 
on the Questions Pertaining to those Six Categories 
vn 
5 
6 
9 
14 
20 
30 
31 
32 
38 
43 
45 
v 

===== PAGE 5 =====

Section II. Astrological elections 
Chapter 1. What the Doctrine of Astrological Elections 51 
Involves and what the Limits of its Truth are 
Chapter 2. Some things to be Generally Noted Concern- 52 
ing Elections 
Chapter 3. How Great the Utility of the Doctrine of 55 
Elections is 
Chapter 4. How Vain the Arguments of Alexander de 61 
Angelis Against Elections are 
Chapter 5. What Cardan Thought about Elections 66 
Chapter 6. General Rules Necessary for Elections. And 69 
in what Way an Election Should be Made for any 
Particular Thing 
Chapter 7. In which the Use of Elections is Shown and 78 
Proved by two Notable Examples 
Appendix 1. The Equation of Time 95 
Index of Persons 97 
Bibliography 101 
VI 

===== PAGE 6 =====

Translator's Preface 
In this, the last Book of the Astrologia Gallica, Morin takes up 
the subject of Interrogations and Elections. Section I deals with 
Interrogations, which are the subject of what is now called Horary 
Astrology, i.e. the art of judging a chart set for the moment when 
someone (technically called the Querent) proposes a Question and 
asks an astrologer to give him information about the present state 
of the matter and its likely outcome. This is an ancient part of as- 
trology, but Morin did not know that. He had read Ptolemy's 
Tetrabiblos and Firmicus Maternus's Ma thesis, neither of which 
says anything about Interrogations; consequently, he assumed that 
Horary Astrology was something that the Arabs had invented dur- 
ing the Middle Ages. 
And since from his point of view the Arabs were infidels and 
followers of a false religion, their invention was obviously worth- 
less and ungodly (in fact he ascribes it to the Devil). He therefore 
devotes the first 9 Chapters of Section I to proving (to his own sat- 
isfaction) that Horary Astrology is merely a silly business based 
on a foolish notion of the Arabs. He even devotes an entire Chapter 
to denouncing the validity and use of Planetary Hours as a particu- 
larly egregious example of Arabian foolishness—being unaware 
that they were a part of Greek astrology from its earliest days. 
And he repeatedly levies the charge that all astrologers who 
erect and read Horary charts for Clients are practicing a valueless 
and fraudulent art merely for profit.1 
'Some modem English astrologers have expressed the same opinion, among 
them A. J. Pearce (1840-1923) and Alan Leo (1860-1917). But most astrologers 
today either practice Horary Astrology or have no quarrel with it. 
vn 

===== PAGE 7 =====

But what Morin did not know was that Horary Astrology under 
the original name Catarchic Astrology (which included both Hora- 
ry and Elections) goes back at least to the first century A.D. and 
probably to the Alexandrian inventors of Horoscopic Astrology 
before that. It was certainly a Greek science, not one invented by 
the Arabs. And even if it had been an Arab invention, Morin is in- 
consistent in dismissing it for that reason, for elsewhere in the 
Astrologia Gallic a he makes constant use of Solar and Lunar Rev- 
olutions (Returns), which were also inventions of the Arabs. But 
he may have supposed that they were invented by some Western 
astrologer. 
He also seems to think that Horary Astrology is somehow in 
conflict with Free Will. And since he was a devout Catholic, he 
was obliged in all his theoretical considerations to maintain that 
astrology was not inconsistent with Free Will. 
And it does not seem to have occurred to him that a Natal Horo- 
scope can also be considered to be a Horary chart set for a time cer- 
tain (the birth time), for which the question is, "What are the char- 
acteristics of this person, and what will befall him in the future." 
And while (in Section II) he looks with restricted favor on Elec- 
tions, again it does not seem to have occurred to him that an Elec- 
tion chart is a Horary chart set for a time certain in the future, for 
which the question is, "What will the attendant circumstances be at 
that time, and what will be the outcome?" 
To make matters worse, Morin's other favorite types of chart, 
the Solar Revolution and the Lunar Revolution, are also Horary 
charts set for times certain, for which the question is, "How will 
things be for this person during this time period, and what signifi- 
cant events will happen to him?" 
Curiously too, the "Morin method" of interpreting a chart fol- 
lows the standard Horary method of accidental significators rather 
than the Ptolemaic method of general significators. But Morin 
does not seem to have recognized that fact. 
Vlll 

===== PAGE 8 =====

However, in the last two chapters of Section I, Morin first lists 
six different types of Questions that may occur, and then gives 
rules for judging them by using natal charts and their directions 
and revolutions, and even extracted charts.1 And for Mundane 
Questions he recommends being guided by the natal charts of the 
prominent persons involved and by universal constitutions and 
their directions, etc. But once or twice he mentions setting a chart 
for a time certain just as a Horary chart would have been set, but he 
instructs the reader to interpret it with careful regard to the natal 
charts, etc. 
Aside from all this, it is plain that Morin's objections to Horary 
Astrology are based on various theoretical considerations, not on 
personal experience! For example in Section I, Chapter 5, he as- 
serts that if the same question is asked several times, the several 
charts will differ, so that no true answer can be forthcoming. This 
immediately betrays a lack of experience. For if a question is asked 
when the Querent is seriously motivated to ask the question, As- 
trologers have found that the chart will give a true indication, 
whether it is the first and only time the question is asked or one of 
several subsequent times.2 
It is a pity that Morin was unable to read English, for in 1647 his 
younger contemporary across the Channel, the great English As- 
trologer William Lilly (1602-1681) published an elaborate treatise 
on Horary Astrology as the second section of his book Christian 
Astrology (London: Partridge and Blunden, 1647). Lilly not only 
sets forth rules for judging various types of Horary questions, but 
he illustrates the application of the rules with two dozen example 
charts and commentaries, thus proving the efficacy of Horary As- 
trology by actual experimentation. This contrasts strongly with 
'He accepted these because they are mentioned by Ptolemy in his Tetrabiblos. 
2I speak from personal experience. Many years ago, over a period of nearly a de- 
cade, perhaps thirty times or more a question arose in my mind as to whether a 
certain event would ever take place. Each time, I erected a Horary chart. There 
are four basic ways that a Horary chart can return a "No" answer. In every in- 
stance, one or the other of those negatives appeared in the chart. And the often re- 
peated "No" answer was correct, for the questioned event never occurred! 
IX 

===== PAGE 9 =====

Morin's Book 26, in which he gives no examples to prove that Ho- 
rary Astrology doesn't work, but merely presents a long-winded 
denunciation of it based solely on theoretical assumptions and an 
incorrect view of astrological history. 
In the Second Part of Book 26, the Section on Elections, Morin 
discusses an important theoretical restriction for Elections. Since 
he assumes that the major circumstances and events of a person's 
life are signified by his natal chart, and its primary directions and 
revolutions, then obviously an Election cannot override or signifi- 
cantly alter those indications. Hence, if an Election is chosen for 
an action and a time that does not conform to those fundamental 
indications, it cannot give the desired result. That is, the chosen 
Election cannot indicate an outcome that does not conform to the 
fundamental indications in force at that time. This would seem to 
restrict the use of Elections to choosing a particular time within a 
time period already indicative of a particular type of event. And 
this would be a definite limitation on the use of Elections! How- 
ever in Chapter 6 he gives an extensive set of rules for making 
Elections, taking those restrictions into account. 
Further on, however, as practical examples of properly chosen 
Elections, Morin inserts several charts in this section of the book 
that are set for the times at which important incidents occurred in 
the life of a prominent French government official. He begins with 
an Election he made for the start of a lengthy journey planned by 
the Client for the spring of 1646; and another Election that he 
made later to select the time for starting the return from that jour- 
ney. Finally, he made an Election to select a favorable time for a 
meeting between his Client and the French Prime Minister. In the 
associated discussions, reference is constantly made to natal horo- 
scopes and to solar and lunar revolutions (returns) in the Client's 
nativity and also (for the journey) in Morin's own nativity since 
Morin accompanied the Client on the journey. And Morin explains 
how things turned out after each Election. After which, Morin con- 
cludes Book 26 by saying that he could include many more charts 
of Elections from his own practice, but he thinks that the ones he 
x 

===== PAGE 10 =====

has shown are sufficient to demonstrate the utility of Elections 
when they are made according to his rules. 
The Reader who takes up this book without having read the 
translations of the earlier Books of the Astrologia Gallica (and 
particularly Book 21), will no doubt find it hard reading. He may 
then wonder if the translation was properly made. I can assure him 
that the Latin text is more difficult to understand than the transla- 
tion, and that without resorting to unrestricted paraphrase it would 
be difficult to render it into easy English. Morin had a thorough 
command of Latin and had learned to write what are called "peri- 
odic sentences." These are sentences that go on and on with many 
clauses and sometimes with the main verb in the middle or at the 
end. (Those who have struggled to decipher Cicero's speeches to 
the Senate in Third Year Latin will know what I mean.) 
I have occasionally broken those long sentences up into two or 
more parts, but usually I have kept them together with a liberal use 
of commas, semi-colons and dashes. I have also added words in 
brackets here and there, and I have added some explanatory foot- 
notes to make the translation more understandable. Still, the result 
is not always easy to read, and the Reader who wants to understand 
what Morin is trying to impart to him will occasionally find some 
sentences that he will have to re-read and think about. I believe that 
if he does that, he will understand them, and he will be glad that he 
took the trouble to do so. 
The charts shown in this translation are facsimiles of the charts 
in Book 26 of the Astrologia Gallica and are therefore in the old 
square form. The Reader should note that in the center of the charts 
the day of the month and the time in hours are given, both reck- 
oned from the preceding noon. I have given the date and time reck- 
oned from the previous midnight below some of the charts. The 
times are all stated in Local Apparent Time. If the Reader wishes 
to recalculate the charts with a modem computer, he may need to 
convert the time in LAT to the equivalent time in Local Mean 
Time. This can easily be done by reference to the Equation of Time 
XI 

===== PAGE 11 =====

table in Appendix 1. 
Finally, I would like to emphasize what I said earlier: The basic 
outline of Morin's method of interpretation is set forth in 
Astrologia Gallica, Book 21, but the amplifying details and many 
examples are in Books 13-20 and 22-25 of \hQ Astrologia Gallica. 
The Reader who tries to learn the Morin method by reading only 
one or two of those books will not acquire the whole method but 
only pieces of it. The method itself is straightforward in theory but 
complicated in details. Admittedly, reading thirteen books to learn 
how to interpret one chart or predict one event may seem to be both 
daunting and excessively demanding. But the diligent Reader's 
patience will be rewarded. 
James H. Holden 
Phoenix, Arizona 
18 July 2010 
XI i 

===== PAGE 12 =====

PREFACE 
Not without reason, this Book deserves to have the last place in 
our Natal Astrology, for it adds something astrological to the prior 
Books; and especially to the erections of Radix Charts and those of 
Revolutions, and their Directions and the Transits of the planets 
through the conformable places of the Charts, without the inspec- 
tion of which the Astrologer will only by chance respond with the 
truth to Questions asked or elect a suitable time for undertaking a 
thing because he would certainly be ignorant of both. Moreover, it 
cannot be expressed in a few words of how great a moment these 
things are, but it can be proved by very frequent experiments. But 
actually no one has hitherto expunged this doctrine from figments 
and errors and handed down its true foundations. But almost all the 
astrologers, and especially the Arabs and the Indians1 have abused 
them for the sake of their own profit in a notable disgrace to As- 
trology and the frequent ruin of those who have consulted Astrolo- 
gers of that sort. Since, moreover, it is very necessary in directing 
one's life to avoid evils and to procure particular good things at 
appropriate times, it is therefore very useful; indeed, almost all the 
fruit of Astrology can be collected from it; therefore, in this Book 
we have taken particular care to hand down in their purity both 
doctrines, namely that of Interrogations and of Elections. Whether 
we have done that, the fair-minded Reader will judge. 
'Unfortunately, Morin was under the false impression that Horary Astrology was 
something invented by the Arabs because there is no mention of it in Ptolemy's 
Tetrabiblos, nor does Firmicus say anything about it in the Mathesis. And since 
the Arabs, from Morin's point of view were followers of a false religion, there 
were two reasons to discount their treatises on Horary Astrology. 
3 

===== PAGE 13 =====

SECTION I. 
Astrological Interrogations. 
Chapter 1. Concerning the Doctrine of Interrogations 
and what are the Limits of its Truth. 
The doctrine of astrological interrogations is concerned with 
true responses made by an astrologer to questions propounded to 
him about past, present, or future things. Moreover, Haly1 says, in 
the first part of his Judgments of the Stars, Chapter 5, that Ptolemy 
has dismissed this doctrine as a false one, which Cardan also states 
at the end of his Quadripartite, Book 4, Chapter 10, where he says, 
that this doctrine is one of fortune-telling; but afterwards, he com- 
posed a Treatise on Interrogations, which he mentioned at the end 
of his Commentary on the Quadripartite. 
But Haly, along with Vuellius,2 and other Arabs, embraced it as 
true, and he handed down in the first, second, and third part of his 
Judgments of the Stars, to which he added the Book of the Nine 
Judges? where astrology regarding questions of whatever kind is 
treated with a hitherto unrestrained license, no consideration being 
had of the natal figure, as with a question made about a thief, not 
only in particular what was stolen, where [the thief] has fled, 
where in fact he is, but also of his appearance, age, and religion, 
how many letters his name consists of, which ones they are, and 
how the thief s name is compounded of them, such things the as- 
'''Ali ibn abi 'r-Rijal (11th century). His extensive manual of astrology is called 
Liber completus de iudiciis astrorum 'The Complete Book on the Judgments of 
the Stars' (Venice: Erhard Ratdolt, 1485). 
2This is actually the second century Greek astrologer Vettius Valens, who is 
quoted in some of the Arabic astrology books. Morin evidently thought that he 
was an Arab. 
'According to Francis Carmody, Arabic Astronomical and Astrological Sciences 
in Latin Translation (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 
1956), the Basel edition of 1571 has The Book of Nine Judges II at the end of 
Haly's book; but it was not part of Haly's book. There are two books entitled 
Liber novem iudicum 'The Book of Nine Judges'. The second of these was 
printed at Venice by Peter Liechtenstein in 1509, and reprinted with Haly's book. 
5 

===== PAGE 14 =====

trologers stupidly presume to define, asserting that either there is 
truth in all these, or it is not in the figures of the nativities; indeed, 
because they want not only the nativities of men, but also all their 
actions, thoughts, and questions to be due to celestial causes. 
But I, having avoided both the last opinions, namely [those] of 
Ptolemy and those Arabs, think that I should walk in the middle, 
and that I should speak, not to anything at all, but only to other 
questions, [that is, to whether] the astrologers are able to give true 
responses, namely to those which are made for persons whose fig- 
ure of nativity is had, and from the things signified in that figure, 
from the consideration of which those same responses are de- 
duced. 
Chapter 2. Whether the Celestial Bodies are Causes 
per se of all the Actions and Motions of Man. 
This to be sure is not only supposed, but also asserted by the 
Arabs and the other astrologers, who undertake to judge about 
anything asked, solely from a celestial chart erected for the mo- 
ment of the question. For Omar1 speaks about this in [his Book] Of 
Judgments, Chapter 9: 
"That the divine force and motion of the celestial cir- 
cle at the hour of that question compels the querent to 
ask. For the human condition does not cease to imitate 
the effects of both the celestial circles and those of the 
stars, [and] their order and progress, due to some as it 
were bond of love." 
Therefore, they will have it that the stars move the Querent un- 
der the celestial constitution, which is conformable to the desired 
truth. 
'The reference is to Omar Tiberiades (d. c. 815/816), who wrote a book entitled 
De nativitatibus 'Nativities' (Venice: Sessa, 1503) and another entitled De 
iudiciis astrorum 'The Judgments of the Stars'. There are also citations from his 
books in Liber novum iudicum (Venice: Peter Lichtenstein, 1509). 
6 

===== PAGE 15 =====

Besides, that is said by the astrologers of that sect, but it is nei- 
ther proved, nor can it be proved; for in fact, because this opinion 
introduces fated necessity, which also Ptolemy himself, a heathen 
man, in Quadripartite, Book 1, Chapter 2, disproves very nicely. 
And we, in Book 23, Chapter 16, have proved that of those things 
that happen to the native from natural causes, some are effectively 
from the stars alone, others solely from his own will; some solely 
from other sublunar causes, but some from the common course of 
these causes; and it is false to assert that everything that naturally 
happens to a man [arises] from celestial causes alone. 
And that is clearly confirmed by this: because if the present 
constitution of the Caelum should move me to anger or extrava- 
gance, since, by the common consensus of all those who grant 
free will to man, this motion is not inevitable, to be sure it is cer- 
tain that through my free will I can resist the celestial motion; and 
if I resist, that it is not from the present celestial constitution, 
which if from predominance may move the passions of the mind 
to wrath or extravagance, will it not also at the same time move 
[me] to resist those same passions, or move [me] to opposite vir- 
tues; but it is from my own will, which is per se not subject to the 
stars, since it is of a superior nature, because of its being spiritual. 
For that reason therefore, it is entirely false to assert that the ce- 
lestial bodies per se are the causes of all the actions, thoughts, and 
motions of man. 
Besides, when Omar says "that the force of the circle is divine 
and its motion at the hour of the question compels the Querent to 
ask," he calls forth against himself the Indians and those of Ferith1 
and Babylon, who assert that the questions propounded are by the 
will of the Querent. And this, therefore, is true, because since man 
is free in his own nature, he cannot be compelled by the stars to 
propound a question; and although he might conceive it, he will 
nevertheless not propound it unless he wants to. And it is this that 
greatly disturbs those who profess this vanity, who cannot agree 
' Probably Persia. 
7 

===== PAGE 16 =====

among themselves, at what moment the figure ought to be erected 
by the astrologer [to obtain] a response. 
For Hermes and Vuellius1 in Haly, Part 10, Chapter 7, will not 
have it: 
"that the hour of taking the ASC is that moment in 
which the Querent comes to the master or the astrologer. 
Haly himself will have it that the hour of taking the ASC 
of the question is that moment in which the Querent bids 
the astrologer to take the ASC, that is to erect the figure: 
for (he says) if he comes and does not say that he should 
take the ASC, that is not the ASC, unless he says when 
[to take it]." 
From which it is plain that Haly agrees with the Indians and the 
Babylonians in this, because the question and its ASC are put 
within the will of the Querent. And consequently, the stars do not 
move and determine the question, but on the contrary it determines 
the celestial figure at its own pleasure. 
But if some quibbler says that in that moment in which the 
Querent asks the astrologer, in that same moment the figure of the 
Caelum, containing the truth of the thing quesited, moves that 
same Querent to ask his question, as Omar would have it, I respond 
first: here the beginning is to be sought, and it must be proved that 
the figure of the Caelum always contains the truth of the thing 
quesited at the moment in which the Querent asks the astrologer. I 
reply second: either the querent can retard the question or he can- 
not; if the latter is the case, he is compelled and his freedom is 
taken away, which it is wicked to assert; if the former is the case, 
then either there will be no truth in the response or it will be only 
hypothetical. Certainly, because if he now propounds a question, 
this will be the truth of the response, but if after one or two hours, 
there will be another truth of the response, whence the vanity of 
this art is manifestly plain. 
1 Vettius Valens, as noted above. 
8 

===== PAGE 17 =====

It can be said more subtly, because at the moment in which he 
thinks of something concerning any truth that is to be sought from 
an astrologer, then the figure containing the truth of the Caelum 
moves him, and therefore the figure ought to be erected at that mo- 
ment. True, except that the astrologers do not accept that, lest they 
may seem unsure about the true figure, on account of the uncer- 
tainty [of the time] of that moment. It does not suffice to think 
about propounding a question, for a casual thought quickly van- 
ishes; but in the case of anxiety, a man will reflect for a long time 
on whether he should approach an astrologer or not before he de- 
cides on one or the other [course]; and if he decides to go to an as- 
trologer, at the moment of his decision the figure should rather be 
erected; but always, as I said previously, he could either delay his 
decision or not, and either way, it would be absurd. 
Chapter 3. Whether the Beginnings of all Things 
are like the Birth of a Man. 
Haly, in Part 1, chapter 5, along with Hermes, Vuellius, and the 
other Arabs, in order to establish their own art of questions, assert that 
the beginnings of all things, either [those that are] natural, such as a 
man, a horse; or something artificial, such as a house, a statue; or 
something corporeal, such as a battle; or something spiritual, such as a 
thought, a question, a speech, etc., are like the birth of a man, and 
since they are caused by the Caelum, consequently a judgment can be 
made about them individually as about the birth of a man. 
And because it cannot be done, as if his own nativity and its an- 
nual revolution signified marriage to anyone, or misfortune on a 
journey, that same thing would not appear in a question, because 
no hour can have a signification unless it is in accord with the na- 
tivity and the revolution of the year, and because if anything of 
these is false, they are all false. These things that are asserted no 
less falsely than imprudently—in short without any reason or 
proof—are removed from the true science of astrology for the fol- 
lowing reasons. 
9 

===== PAGE 18 =====

First. Only the seminal spirit of things in general is the proper 
subject for the infusion of the influx of the celestial bodies, as was 
shown by us in Book 12, Chapters 11 and 29, and in Book 20, Sec- 
tion 4. But all artifacts are lacking in seed; and therefore the celes- 
tial bodies do not act influentially on them, as was abundantly 
proved in Book 20, Section 4, Chapter 8. Much less do battles, 
thoughts, questions, speeches, and things similar to them have any 
seed by which they are physically generated; therefore, none of 
those are subject per se to celestial influences. 
Second. When anyone proposes a question to an astrologer, the 
celestial influx is imprinted either upon the Querent, or the astrolo- 
ger, or on the question itself, or upon the thing asked about; but 
none of these can be affected. For it is not imprinted on the Querent 
himself at the moment of the question; otherwise, it would follow 
that the Caelum in its own influx or action would depend upon the 
will of the Querent, namely in whose will it is to propose the ques- 
tion, or not to propose it, or to delay it by choice; and so the 
Caelum is not acting naturally, namely because it cannot by itself 
restrain its own effect; but it always acts according to its proper 
force due to the necessity of nature; or it at least follows the will to 
assign to the Caelum by choice the force of signifying the quesited 
truth—which things are plainly absurd! 
The same logic is appropriate for the astrologer, then for the 
question itself, about which it can truly be said that it does not have 
its beginning or its existence per se from the Caelum, but only 
from the free will of the Querent. And finally it is true for the thing 
about which the question is made, which generally will not be 
more ample, as when it is a question about a man, whether he is 
alive, who nevertheless is [already] dead. Therefore, from these 
things it is plain how great the difference is between a man being 
bom, on whom the Caelum necessarily acts, and independently of 
the will of any man, and a question that is made, and the other 
things mentioned above; and in consequence, how great is the 
foolishness of this art! 
10 

===== PAGE 19 =====

Third. If in the instant when a question is proposed, there 
would be any impression from the Caelum, this would be upon the 
question which then begins to be in existence, not otherwise, and 
they will have the house in which moment it begins to receive an 
influential impression from the Caelum] and consequently it 
would be necessary to judge, not about the thing quesited, but 
about the question itself, examining it by the signification of the 12 
houses, just as Haly, in that same Part 1, chapter 6, tried to accom- 
modate those things to all the things whose beginnings are pro- 
posed for the astrologer to look at. He says; 
"that the ASC or the first house is the significator of 
the property of the thing. The second [house] is the 
significator of the price of the thing. The third, what 
happens in the thing, and what is adjoined to itself in 
one kind. The fourth signifies the offspring of the thing 
and its roots. The fifth signifies the condition of the 
thing and that which is generated by it. The sixth signi- 
fies the durability of the things and that which serves it. 
The seventh signifies the contrary of the thing in that 
same strength existing from its offspring. The eighth 
signifies the vile estimation of the things, its end and 
diminution. The ninth signifies the removal of the 
thing, and the causes that are attached to it. The tenth 
signifies the nobility and the excellence of the thing 
and its peculiarity in things done. The eleventh signi- 
fies the complement of the thing, its beauty and conve- 
nience. The twelfth signifies the diversity of things and 
the bad accidents that happen to it. Whence, [if] the 
ruler of that house of those already mentioned is in a 
good state, the nature of that thing is directed according 
to the amount of reason and the advancement of the 
ruler of that one." 
These things of Haly, and neither [anything else from] Haly, 
nor from the rest of the Arabs, answer any of the above said things 
about that question, on which they cannot even agree, as is plain 
11 

===== PAGE 20 =====

per se; but they respond with those same things concerning the 
thing about which there is a question, why occasionally those 
things also agree to some small degree, and in which that celestial 
impression does not fall, since very often it doesn't - as when there 
is a question about some past matter, or about some future matter, 
or about a man, whether he may live, who is already dead. 
Some will perhaps say that the celestial influx is not indeed im- 
printed upon any of the 4 things mentioned above—namely the 
Querent, the astrologer, the question, or the thing about which the 
there is a question—as was proved above, but rather upon the ce- 
lestial figure, or its state at the moment of the question, to contain 
in its own signification the truth of that question. 
But I respond first. The Caelum, therefore, does not move the 
Querent, as is commonly stated, for that motion cannot be con- 
ceived by the Querent without a received influx. And then I should 
say that the state of the Caelum either has that signification always, 
or only when there is a question. If the former [is true], there will 
consequently be no need to bother about the time, nor about one 
[particular] figure or another For from any one of them the same 
truth of the question can be elicited against the opinion of the 
Arabs and the principles of this art. If the second [is true], it will, 
therefore, only have that signification from the will of the Querent, 
which has already been very often rejected. Therefore, it is plain in 
all ways that this doctrine of the Arabs is entirely false. 
But if anyone will object to the erection of celestial figures at 
the beginning of illnesses with the approval of the Church of 
Rome, which it has never abandoned for [use in] medicine, I reply: 
illnesses arise through natural generation from their own seeds, 
and they have their own symptoms, motion, and periods, as well as 
natural beginnings; but questions lack seeds and have only arbi- 
trary beginnings, which is a great disparity; therefore, illnesses are 
produced by the stars, but questions are not, and the figures of ill- 
nesses contain truth, but the figures of questions do not. 
12 

===== PAGE 21 =====

Much more seriously it will follow that if anyone will object 
that by our reasons the doctrine of nativities can be overturned, for 
if the native receives from the stars an influx for an ambition [to 
achieve] dignities. When he seeks or buys a dignity (which is go- 
ing to be offered for sale in France, Oh horror and shame!), either 
he is moved by the Caelum, or he is not. If he is not moved, then it 
is said in vain that an influx from the stars for a desire for dignities 
has been received in the nativity; [but] if he is moved, then either 
the Caelum always has the strength to move the native thus, or 
only when he himself seeks or buys a dignity. 
If you say this, since it is a fact that to seek or to buy depends on 
the native's free will; therefore, the Caelum will not have that 
force on its part, but it will be from the native's will; consequently, 
the native will not be moved by the Caelum—contrary to the hy- 
pothesis—when he does not want to move, unless it should first 
have the strength to move him. If you said that it was on the part of 
the Caelum, then no reason will be given why the native seeks to- 
day rather than previously or later. 
But I reply that when the native seeks or buys a dignity on ac- 
count of an influx for the ambition [for] dignities received from 
the stars in his nativity, then he is moved by the Caelum through its 
radical influx, a conformable radical direction, and conformable 
revolutions of the Sun and the Moon and their directions, as well 
as by conformable transits, all of which—or the greater part of 
them—occur together, at which time he is moved for the act, but 
not always; therefore, the Caelum does not always have such a 
power of moving, as has been explained by us more fully in its 
own places. 
And he does not receive the power of moving from his own will, 
in which to be sure there is neither the power to be moved or not to 
be moved—at least naturally—but only to seek or not to seek, see- 
ing that from the doctrine repeated by us in many places, the will in 
its own proper actions is not subject to the stars, but it can only re- 
sist their motion, so that it is not allotted their own [full] effect, not 
13 

===== PAGE 22 =====

only at one hour or one day, but also altogether; although it cannot 
escape that motion—at least naturally—because that motion is a 
natural one. 
Besides, the time of seeking also has some latitude through the 
transits, which are the causes of all things, especially particular 
ones, and those things of shorter duration for actually moving 
[the event]. For the search or the purchase can by common con- 
sensus be known not only on the very day of a partile transit, but 
on the day before, or the day after, unless it was a transit of the 
Moon; indeed, the whole time of application and separation, 
which in all the planets (with the exception of the Moon) is [a 
time] of several days, pertains to the actual motion of seeking, 
which ceases, when those causes have ceased and their strength 
has elapsed, during the time while they were in force the native is 
seeking—if he wants to, and when he wants to. But when it has 
left off, he has no further interest in seeking or purchasing a dig- 
nity. And the same is the cause of motion toward revenge, extrav- 
agance, robbery, murder, etc. 
But in the case of questions, the matter is quite otherwise. For if 
the Caelum contains the truth of a question only at that moment in 
which the question is made, which is arbitrary, it cannot have it 
any other way than from [the native's] will. And if it contains that 
at any particular moment, then any celestial figure will also con- 
tain that truth, and other absurd things will follow, which was said 
above and will be said [again] below. 
Chapter 4. The Doctrine of the Arabs Depends 
upon many Vain Assumptions. 
Strangely, the Arabs, the Indians, and the other Oriental Peo- 
ples take great care, and all the rest of those who follow them, so 
that they might persuade [everyone] that their own art of Interroga- 
tions is true. And if their responses do not succeed, they have many 
pretexts of excuses by which they console their own honor. 
14 

===== PAGE 23 =====

For they say firstly that someone is not capable of forming or 
proposing the question. Moreover, Hermes says in Aphorism 16,1 
You should not define anything before you know the intention of 
the querent. Many people indeed do not know how to ask, and they 
cannot express what they have in mind. 
But truly, this escape is of no moment, since it is sufficient for 
the Astrologer, that he conceives the intention of the Querent, and 
he is able to reshape that question by saying, "Alas, he is foolish 
who comes to me questioning and does not know how to ask 
whether it is this or that that he wants to ask me about?" But if per- 
chance the Astrologer were to speak, and the entire intent would be 
only in hearing, then the celestial influx would be changed or dis- 
torted, and that sought after truth would vanish, which would nev- 
ertheless be a foolishness to be feared. 
They say secondly that there should be no response to a ques- 
tion proposed by way of testing or deriding. But how could the As- 
trologer know whether the Querent only intends to test or deride? 
Haly, Part. 1, Chapter 11, teaches how the Querent's thought may 
be found according to [the method of] Alkindi2 and according to 
himself. For Alkindi, a celebrated Professor of this foolishness 
[says]: 
" That if you want to know the thought of the Querent, 
count the degrees that are from the ruler of the [planetary] 
hour up to the degree of the Sun, and cast what results from 
the beginning of Aries, and in the house where the number 
leaves off, there will be the thought; which you will judge 
by its own signs according to the nature of its ruler." 
'A Centiloquium is attributed to Hermes in the medieval MSS. It is probably a 
medieval composition, but its author is unknown. There is an English translation 
by Henry Coley in his Clavis Astrologiae Elimata (London: Tooke & Sawbridge, 
1676), Chapter XXI. "Hermes Trismegistus, his Centiloquium in English," pp. 
329-339. See now my book Five Medieval Astrologers (Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 
2008), which contains a new translation of that Centiloquy. 
2Probably the reference is to al-Kindi, De iudiciis astrorum 'The Judgments of 
the Stars' (Venice: Peter Liechtenstein, 1509). He is also cited in The Book of 
Nine Judges. 
15 

===== PAGE 24 =====

But truly, because the ruler of the [planetary] hour is [itself] 
merely fictitious, as we shall show below, this method of detecting 
the Querent's thought collapses. But Haly himself is little content 
with so brief a secret, and along with the other Arabs, he will have 
it that the significators of the thought are in the ninth from the ASC 
and the third from the ASC: 
"Those that are in the ASC (he says) are called ruler 
of the house, ruler of the exaltation, ruler of the terms, 
ruler of the face, ruler of the novena. Their own 
Almuten, the planet toward which the ASC degree is 
moving, and the planet that is found in the ASC. But 
those that are beyond the ASC are the Part of Fortune 
and its ruler, the ruler of the [planetary] hour and the 
ruler of the Sun by day or of the Moon by night. Con- 
sider, therefore (he says) which one of all these has more 
and stronger dignities and more rulership in the figure, 
because that one will be the significator of the thought." 
Truly, Haly does something else by multiplying the fictitious 
rulers, especially those of the terms, the face, the novena, the hour 
(which are mere nonsense, as we have taught elsewhere), by which 
the mind of the Astrologer can conjecture in greater ignorance of 
the Querent's thought. Besides, Haly did not teach how the 
significator of the Querent's thought is to be used, so that this can 
become known. Indeed, because he himself didn't know how to 
use it, or (what is more probable) he had discovered that it does not 
correspond to experience. Whence, it is no wonder that the 
Chaldeans or the Babylonian Astrologers would not dare to say to 
King Nebuchadnezzar what they had thought about his dream, and 
only by a divine revelation was that judgment made to Daniel, who 
asserted to the King that the Magi and the Babylonian wise men 
could not judge that. 
Then if someone, in order to put the science of astrology to the 
test, should ask whether his own brother is alive, whom he knows 
to be dead, knowledge which he has of the truth, doesn't it disturb 
16 

===== PAGE 25 =====

the face of the Caelum that it does not signify that truth, or the 
mind of the Astrologer that he does not recognize it? That certainly 
cannot be said, just as neither the same thing is caused by the will 
of the Querent, for proving the science of astrology;. But it should 
rather be said that astrologers of that ilk are already rejecting the 
science for no other cause that it seeks, than because they are un- 
able to deceive it. But they are able to beguile something unknown 
& credulous; and they therefore want this to be a property of their 
own science, that it is only proper to give true responses about 
things that are unknown to the Querent, but not about things that 
are already known. 
But if they say that questions that are propounded for the sake of 
testing are not caused by the stars, but solely by the will of man, 
then consequently no reply should be given except to serious ques- 
tions, or to someone who with the greatest care and anxiety for 
himself, or for another person about whom he is much concerned; 
comes by himself or [send his message] by another messenger, as 
Messahala1 says in The Book of the Nine Judges "namely, that he 
will have it that such questions are only impelled by the stars" 
Nevertheless, they cannot escape in that way, seeing that by know- 
ing the truth of the question propounded he can propose it to the 
astrologer with serious and great care and anxiety for himself or 
for another, so that he may prove whether they are able to consider 
in other things that are also of great moment, because surely it is [a 
matter] of no little interest to that Querent and especially to Mag- 
nates. 
To these things, add from Chapter 3 that they want the begin- 
nings of all things to be like the birth of a man, and consequently to 
be caused by the Caelum-, given which (but not conceded), they are 
required to respond to any question from their own principles, es- 
pecially since there is no question for which some true response 
might not be suitable, either affirmative or negative: according to 
these axioms, whatever is or is not, and concerning whatever, 
'The famous Mashjfallah (d.c. 815). 
17 

===== PAGE 26 =====

there is a true affirmation or negation. From every side, therefore, 
it is plain how frivolous this second means of escape is. 
Messahalla along with others says third. The question ought to 
be simple, and it is not proper to add another question to it, and ev- 
eryone strongly commends this [rule]. And besides that, they do 
not want a question about the same thing to be made to two [differ- 
ent] astrologers, neither at the same time, nor in succession, nor 
twice to one of them. Which precaution is surely the principle one 
of all those for concealing the worthlessness of their own art. For 
from the responses of two or more astrologers on the same ques- 
tion, either at the same time or successively, it would be too evi- 
dent that there would be as many main points as there are opin- 
ions—but no science—since science as a whole is uniform and 
certain with regard to its conclusions about the same thing if how- 
ever it depends upon principles that are certain. 
For the third, it is proved that this evasion is the most worth- 
less. At whatever moment of time a question about any matter can 
be propounded to an astrologer, who will give a response for the 
truth to that same question. Therefore, if a question about that 
same matter is propounded to two astrologers, either at the same 
time or in succession, or to both of them together, nothing prevents 
their true responses from always being given regarding the truth of 
that question. The preceding is proved, then from the practice of 
these astrologers, who do not dismiss any Querent, whatever he se- 
riously inquires about, by saying that at such a moment, there can- 
not be a response to such a question: but for any Querent they erect 
a figure and respond, unless one of them who is very scrupulous 
sees that the 7th house and its ruler are badly afflicted, in which 
case the astrologer sees that he is likely to give a false response, as 
Pontanus1 explains in Aphorism 14 of his Centiloquium, which 
has this: "in how many errors is the astrologer involved, when the 
seventh house and its ruler will be afflicted. " 
'Giovanni Gioviano Pontano (1426-1503), Centiloquium (Venice, 1503). 
18 

===== PAGE 27 =====

And therefore he is afraid to respond, lest in his own foolish art 
he might make too obvious an error and then be criticized. Then, 
because children, when they are men, are not compelled by the 
stars to propound a question, but they may either delay it at their 
pleasure or propose it. Thence it follows that they can propound a 
question at any moment, and it is not possible to show an impossi- 
bility, either by one or by many Querents. The consequences are 
proved. For if at any moment in which any sort of question is pro- 
pounded—at least, a serious one—they erect the figure and re- 
spond; and they suppose that at any moment the Caelum is dis- 
posed to giving responses to any sort of question. 
Therefore, if a question is proposed about the same thing to two 
astrologers, either together, or in succession, or twice to one of 
them, there is nothing to prevent responses to be given always with 
regard to the truth of that question. But from that doctrine, what 
absurdities follow is stated in the following chapter. But this fol- 
lows immediately, that if the question propounded is not a single 
one, as Messahala and the other will have it, but it has another dif- 
ferent question adjoined to it, but from that same figure a response 
can be made to both. Add to these what Dorotheus [says] in Haly, 
Part 1, Chapter 11, contrary to Messahala: 
"If when you have many questions" (which under- 
stand to be at the same time from the same Querent), 
"take the first from the ASC, the 2nd from the MC, the 
3rd from the 11th house, the 4th from the 5th, the 5th 
from the 7th, the 6th & 7th from the IMC, and the 8th 
from the 9th house." But others say "you will take the 
first question from the ASC, the 2nd from the second 
house, the 3rd from the third, and so on." Still others, 
"take the first question from the first application that the 
Moon has, the second from the second, and so on." Fi- 
nally, others assert the succession: "if you take the first 
question from the ruler of the first hour, the second from 
the ruler of the second hour, etc., and so on successively 
down to the end of a few questions or of many; for you 
19 

===== PAGE 28 =====

ought to inquire" says Haly "and take note if, with God 
as a guide, you want to find [the ruler]." 
But I say that it is absurd to think that God Himself will offer a 
guide to an astrologer running through these 4 different modes that 
are indeed incongruous and alien to a natural foundation, so that 
rather by prophesying than by studying them diligently, the truth 
of any question can be enunciated; and I marvel that those with the 
name of astrologer have not been ashamed to have expounded so 
much nonsense to wiser intellects. And so it remains to state how 
vain and indeed ridiculous the aforesaid precautions or evasions of 
the Arabs are, by which they try to defend their own art of ques- 
tions. 
Chapter 5. The Doctrine of the Arabs 
on Interrogations is plainly False. 
Although from the fundamentals of this doctrine set forth above 
it is plain that it is false, yet lest there remain any doubt about that 
matter, the same things must be confirmed by an astrological dem- 
onstration thus. 
A chart erected at the hour of a question according to the Arabs 
is of no truth per se with regard to the thing about which the query 
is made. Therefore, the doctrine of the Arabs about interrogations 
is plainly false. The preceding is proved, for when anyone queries 
an Astrologer for himself whether he will have wealth or dignities 
which the natal figure denies to him, certainly in whatever way the 
figure of the question is signifying such things, it will be foolish to 
suppose anything by that figure, or else the particular constitution 
of the Caelum—the character of the Caelum—impressed on the 
nativity and denying wealth or dignities would be destroyed, and a 
new impression would be made on the Querent, which would dis- 
pose him to wealth or dignities. 
Otherwise no faith can be had in natal figures. For these 
two—the native will never have wealth (as is testified by the figure 
20 

===== PAGE 29 =====

of the nativity), and someday he will have wealth (as is testified by 
the figure of the question)—are contradictory, which, if this one is 
true, then that one is false. But by the common consent of all As- 
trologers, also the Arabs themselves, the greatest and principal 
faith must be had in natal figures per se; therefore, no faith can be 
had in the figures of questions per se; and consequently, a chart 
erected at the hour of a question in the manner of the Arabs is per 
se of no truth, whence it is plain that the consequence is true, and 
vice versa, that if the nativity signifies wealth for the native, and 
especially strongly, it will be absurd to assert from the figure of a 
question that he will not have it. 
The same thing must be said about someone querying for an- 
other person. Moreover, this demonstration is confirmed. For dur- 
ing the life of the native a thousand questions can be made, either 
by him, or by others, whether he is going to be rich from Chapter 4, 
and if the same question is proposed to many Astrologers, either at 
the same time, or successively, none of them asks the Querent 
whether the same question has already been proposed before, but 
immediately he will erect the figure and give a response. 
None of the Arabs, moreover, asserts that so many different fig- 
ures, are conformable to the radical figure and to each other with re- 
gard to the signification of wealth, when indeed they do not want the 
same question to be proposed twice by the same man, for fear of a 
diversity of figures, and from that a contrariety of judgment. And 
therefore, when from those same figures some of them signifying 
wealth, but others not, it can certainly be said that looked at in them- 
selves they signify wealth or poverty, indeed they signify the same 
things or they forecast them, then to those who are being bom in the 
places of those same figures, who are subject to those same figures, 
on which they depend, so that the effect comes from its own cause. 
But with respect to the Querent, who from these figures neither de- 
pends on being nor on interrogating, since his interrogation depends 
upon his will, unless by chance and by accident they can exhibit a 
tme response—namely, on the hypothesis that a figure occurs that is 
similar to the radical in the signification of wealth. 
21 

===== PAGE 30 =====

But what if there are taken neither a thousand questions, nor 
even two, but once only there is proposed a legitimate question 
about the same thing, at that moment namely in which the Querent 
first asks, impelled by the Caelum, because then it contains in its 
signification the truth of the question. 
I reply first, that this indeed is said by others, but not proved by 
them. I reply second, that impulse and signification of the Caelum 
at the moment of the interrogation have already been rejected 
above. I reply finally, the Querent asking for another whether he is 
going to marry a wife, can in no way hinder this, and not in his own 
case can he himself ask the same thing, since that thing pertains 
more to this person than to that one; for they offer a reason or a 
contrary procedure, namely one by which they ask from the 
Querent, whether he is the first or the only one who has made this 
interrogation? To which question very often and almost always the 
Querent will answer that he doesn't know; nevertheless, the Arab 
bears the opinion of the prophet. 
For Hermes, Aphorism 98, says that the Moon in the 4th, 7th, 
9th, or 12th indicates that that cause has already been asked^ and 
it indicates the same thing if it is separated from Mercury; and it 
can be confirmed neither by reason nor by experience, and it is not 
approved by any Arab. 
The falsity of this same doctrine is proved thus secondly, since 
from Chapter 2 [we have said that] the Arabs suppose, or from 
their doctrine and practice it is deduced that they suppose, that at 
any moment the Caelum is disposed to giving responses on what- 
ever is asked; therefore, whatever the present status of the Caelum, 
it contains the true responses to all questions that can be made 
about any kind of subject, whether it is present or past or future; 
and therefore, from the figure of the nativity of any man, or even of 
'Aph. 98. "The Moon in the 4th, 7th, 9th, or 12th house shows the true cause of 
the question that has been propounded: the same thing is shown by her separation 
from Mercury. And if the Ascendant and the Moon are in double-bodied signs, 
the cause of the question is confirmed." 
22 

===== PAGE 31 =====

a dog, or whatever kind of figure of the question, everything can be 
said that to individual men, or animals, or plants, or artifacts about 
which a question can be made, has happened, is happening, or will 
happen; which silliness everyone cannot [fail to] see. Indeed, it 
would follow that all celestial figures are of the same significa- 
tion,1 and not anything is signified by one that is not signified by 
some other one, by which nothing can be thought to be more alien 
and insane from astrological knowledge. 
It is proved thirdly from their practice. For if it is sought from 
an Arab, whether someone has married, or is now marrying, or is 
going to marry; he only perceives whether the figure signifies mat- 
rimony, so that he can respond about any time, past, present, or fu- 
ture; for he does not have legitimate considerations by means of 
which he can discern these [different] times. For if perchance he 
wants to say of the rulers of the signification in the angles, they 
signify present time; in succedents, future time; in cadents, past 
time; or in the case of their conjunction or aspect, partile signifies 
the present; application, the future; and separation, the past. 
From that it could be concluded, in the figures of nativities, that 
the native has married and has held dignities before he was bom, 
and he has no [such] disposition while he is being bora, which 
things are declared to be ridiculous. Therefore, if the question is 
about the past, he will reply that he has married; if it is about the 
present, that he is marrying; and if about the future, that he will 
marry; namely, because the figure signifies marriage. 
Indeed, if three persons were at the same time asking about mar- 
riage, one about the past, another about the present, and another 
about the future, the Arab, from the same figure, will reply to each 
'This not true! Each question that is asked has its own set of significators in the 
chart. For example, one question might be about money, so the 2nd house and its 
ruler and planets in that house would be significators. While at the same time 
someone might ask a question about marriage, which would require an investiga- 
tion of the 7th house, etc. So, as many as 12 different questions might be asked si- 
multaneously that could be investigated by the same chart with different results in 
each case. 
23 

===== PAGE 32 =====

of them in the same way. Why not if 1,000 all together were ask- 
ing, either for themselves, or for another, about matrimony, con- 
tracted in the past, the present, or the future. But he would reply, 
not affirmative to some of them, but negative to others, but affir- 
mative to all or negative to all from the same figure, also contrary 
to the celestial decree of the nativity. The same thing will have to 
be said about any other sort of thing asked about at the same mo- 
ment of time. 
These things, moreover, are very absurd and alien to the manner 
of action of the stars; then, since the true principles of astrology 
have been set forth by us, there is no need here to show [it] more 
fully, since the doctrine of nativities given by us has proved that 
celestial figures are not significators, but rather they are effectors; 
or they are not signs, but rather they are causes. But that the same 
cause [acting] in so many men from their own natal figures that are 
very different, indeed having been contrarily disposed, could pro- 
duce the same effect simultaneously, is utterly alien to the nature 
of causes; for the agent follows the disposition of the patient, and 
whatever is received is received according to the nature of the pa- 
tient, as is known to philosophers; consequently, the Sun's heat at 
the same time hardens mud and melts wax.1 
It is proved fourthly from their manner of predicting. For they 
do not even agree among themselves on the first principles of mak- 
ing a judgment; and however much they do agree would be an ab- 
surd agreement, just like their mode of making a judgment. First of 
all, it is plain that all of them allot the first house of the figure to the 
Querent; and yet about the house for the astrologer (whom they 
make to be the judge of the question), they quarrel among them- 
selves, and not yet have they been able to ascertain for themselves 
a definite house [for the astrologer]; and that is as it should be, 
lA favorite saying of Morin. I don't know its origin. An early citation is found in 
the Book Explaining the Elemental Figures of the Demonstrative Art by Ramon 
Lull (c. 1235-c. 1315), which was written around 1283. In astrology, it means that 
the nature and status of the person receiving a particular influx from the Caelum 
will affect the result thatthe influx has on him. Ptolemy points this out in the early 
chapters of Tetrabiblos, Book 1. 
24 

===== PAGE 33 =====

since they are only false judges, trying to persuade themselves in 
that moment when they erect the figures ofthe questions, that they 
are inspired by heaven, like those who once upon a time gave ora- 
cles from a tripod,1 when nevertheless the Caelum does not 
breathe inspiration into them with regard to a propounded ques- 
tion, as was said in Chapter 3. 
Many astrologers agree on the 10th house, which is [the house] 
of dignity and honor. Moreover, an astrologer is a judge worthy of 
honor. Others cast him down from the tenth to the seventh, since 
they say that that is more fitting for him, as Pontano will have it in 
his Commentary on the 14th aphorism of the Centiloquy. Its rea- 
son is that the first house is commonly given to the Querent; more- 
over, he comes to the astrologer as being ignorant of the thing that 
he wants to know. Ignorance, moreover, and knowledge are dia- 
metrically opposed; therefore, if the first [house] is destined for the 
Querent, the seventh, diametrically opposed to the first, is destined 
for the astrologer. 
And therefore Ptolemy says in that Aphorism, In so many er- 
rors the astrologer is involved, when the seventh house and its 
ruler will be afflicted? Namely, because if malefics were in the 
seventh or rule it when badly afflicted, some misfortune will hap- 
pen to the astrologer (as they will have it) because they cannot 
think otherwise than that he will pronounce something false for the 
truth. Truly, the tenth house is only [the house] of actions and dig- 
nities of the native himself, or in the sense of the vigor of the thing 
to which the first house is attributed, but the seventh is [the house] 
of the spouse or the enemies of the native, or in the sense of the de- 
cline of the thing to which the first house is attributed, as we have 
said elsewhere. 
'A reference to the famous Oracle at Delphi in Greece. 
2I do not have Pontano's Commentary, but the text of the Aphorism is given be- 
low. 
3Actually, it reads (as translated from the Greek version), "Oh, how many things 
baffle the learned one, when the 7th house and its ruler are afflicted." But the 
Latin versions substitute astrologer for learned one. 
25 

===== PAGE 34 =====

But these are plainly alien to the judge of the question. I, there- 
fore, am surprised that they have not rather given the fourth to the 
astrologer, which is [the house] of secret things to be revealed by 
him, or to the ninth, which is [the house] of sciences and prophe- 
cies, or at least to the first, because when the question has been 
proposed he begins to be the judge, and then the tenth could be 
given to his action, which is to judge, or to his dignity; but the sev- 
enth could be given to the querent or to his question, like a lawsuit 
that is terminated by a judge, and this conception would be more 
reasonable than the previously mentioned doctrine of the Arabs. 
Whatever is done, I would counsel the judge that if in his figure 
of the houses one of them is not pleasing to him on account of its 
misfortune that he betake himself to another more fortunate, and 
from there, free from malefics, he bring forth his opinion, since the 
sum of the whole matter consists of this—that the astrologer re- 
sponds truthfully, and the Aphorism can be applied to any house 
which is assigned to the astrologer, to whom, nevertheless, from 
what was said above no [house] should be assigned. 
But we should let all agree on two determined houses—one for 
the Querent, and another for the astrologer; and we may see how 
absurd the agreement is. In whatever kind of question that is pro- 
pounded, four things occur—the person making the query, the 
question itself, the thing that is quesited, and the judge or astrolo- 
ger. The first house of the figure is given to the Querent, since he is 
making the query, the tenth or the seventh to the astrologer. The 
thing that is quesited belongs to the house which has its essential 
signification, as if the question is about friends, it belongs to the 
eleventh, about a wife to the seventh, about dignities to the tenth; 
which, understand that from their mind [these are] the houses of 
the figure of the question, but not of the figure of the nativity of 
him for whom the question is made—to which figure they pay no 
notice—and very often they do not have it.1 
'Since in the old times most people did not know their birth time (or often even 
their birth date), the only thing an astrologer could do to answer a question would 
be to erect a Horary chart. This is why Horary astrology was so prevalent. 
26 

===== PAGE 35 =====

Moreover, they assign no house to the question, although it 
should nevertheless belong to the first, since that question begins 
to exist, which previously did not, and so the house of the Querent 
and the question will be the same. But already the celestial consti- 
tution makes its influx into none of those four at the moment of the 
question, since it is supposed that those are related to the question 
according to Chapter 3. And so it does nothing with regard to any 
of them, since it cannot act without an influx. And consequently it 
has no signification with regard to any of them, since it does not 
signify any thing that it does not do. Where then will the whole 
question depart from? Or from whence will its true response come 
forth? Let them answer this question with a true response if they 
are able. 
Besides the significations of the houses, which in Chapter 3 we 
reported from Haly, ought to agree with the thing to which the first 
house is attributed, for it is plain from the doctrine of nativities that 
the first house is of course that of the man who is being bom, the 
second of his wealth, the third of his brothers, and so on with the 
others. But already in this doctrine of questions the first house is 
attributed to the Querent or to the question; therefore the second 
house according to Haly will be the significator of the worth of the 
Querent or of the question; the third of that which happens to the 
Querent or the question, and that which is joined to it of the same 
sort; the fourth will signify the offspring of the Querent or of the 
question and their roots, and so on with the rest. 
But these do not concern the thing which is quesited, nor should 
they refer to it, certainly because the first house is not attributed to 
that thing, which house is only that of beginning things, but the 
thing that is quesited, if it is [something that] is going to be, has not 
yet begun to be, as if it is quesited about a future marriage, or about a 
future dignity. Perchance they would say that the Querent asking for 
himself about that is the thing itself about which it is being quesited, 
whether it is for example that he is going to marry, or that he is going 
to acquire a dignity; and at the moment that he asks the question, 
then he begins to be the Querent, which before that he was not. 
27 

===== PAGE 36 =====

But except that in this case the appellations of the houses of the 
natal figure ought to be retained, and moreover not altered, as Haly 
did: when the Querent does not ask for himself but for another per- 
son, as if he asks whether his brother may be alive, who is never- 
theless dead and has ceased to be; or if he asks about any other 
kinds of things not pertaining to himself, which are either no more, 
or are in the future, but at least they have not already begun to be, 
the futility of a superior evasion is detected, and all the more be- 
cause when he only asks this about his brother—whether he is 
alive or dead—what conformity have the significations of the 
houses with this particular question? If you exempt the third 
house, which is said to be [the house] of brothers? Should the sig- 
nifications of the other houses necessarily be examined, as 
whether this is [the house of] the brother, or whether he was or will 
be rich, whether he may marry or has married or is going to marry, 
etc.? Before it is determined that the brother is alive or dead, be- 
cause a single response is expected, with the other things not even 
acknowledged. 
But let us see at last how they might judge on illness, or the ill- 
ness of the brother of him who asks. Since the question is about 
brothers, they consider the third house of the figure, which is [the 
house] of brothers; and if they see malefics in the third or ruling 
the third, or the ruler of the twelfth in the third, or the ruler of the 
third in the twelfth or conjunct the ruler of the twelfth, the Arabs 
judge the brother of the Querent to be ill. But the question is [re- 
ally] about death, and not merely about illness; if, therefore, they 
see the third badly afflicted by malefics, or the ruler of the third, 
especially if a malefic is in the eighth, or its malefic ruler is in the 
third. Or the ruler of the third conjunct, square, or opposite the 
ruler of the eighth, especially [if it is] a malefic badly afflicted, 
they assert that the Querent's brother is dead; and by the same 
kind of reasoning, they judge all other questions of the twelve 
houses. 
But I ask the Arab whether the twelfth house and the eighth of 
the figure of the question are the houses of the illnesses and death 
28 

===== PAGE 37 =====

of the Querent or whether [they are those] of the brother about 
whom he asks1? It cannot be said that they are those of the Querent; 
otherwise, there cannot be concluded from them the illness or the 
death of the brother, but rather of the Querent [himself]; nor can it 
also be said that they are [the houses] of the illnesses and death of 
the brother himself, for since the twelfth and the eight are such 
[only] with respect to the first [house], which is given to the 
Querent, not to the brother, they will [only] be the houses of ill- 
nesses and death with respect to the Querent, but not to the brother, 
to whom is given the third [house]. Let them, therefore, resolve 
this argument if they are able. For I do not see how they can re- 
solve it. For these things, brothers, parents, the wife, and children 
depend less for their own accidents on the natal figure of the na- 
tive, than on their own nativity. For on the former they depend 
only generally, although it is a natural figure; but they depend par- 
ticularly on their own nativity. How much less, therefore, do they 
depend on the figure of a question, which is not even natural, but 
only arbitrary? 
Whence, it is plain that the whole doctrine of questions of the 
Arabs has no natural foundation but only an arbitrary one. Finally, 
every celestial figure ought to be the cause of those things that it 
signifies; and that is plain in figures, either in universal constitu- 
tions, or in the particular figures of nativities; otherwise the stars 
would have no active powers; but the Arabian figures of questions 
are not causes, but only signs of those things that they signify, 
[based] on the hypothesis that they signify those things. For when 
it is asked whether someone is alive or dead, a pauper or rich, etc., 
the figure erected for the question confers nothing effectively 
about his death, his life, his wealth, his poverty, etc., which often 
are [things that existed] a long time before that figure; therefore, 
the erection of that figure and the judgment following from it are 
'Here Morin points out the difference between what might be called the "univer- 
sal meaning" of houses and their "derived" meaning. The use of derived houses 
goes back to the Classical Period. They are mentioned by Vettius Valens, Anthol- 
ogy, ix. 3. 6. See my book, A History of Horoscopic Astrology (Tempe, Az.: 
A.F.A., Inc., 1996), pp. 55-56; 2nd ed. (2006), pp. 57-58, for an example. 
29 

===== PAGE 38 =====

mere stupidities, lacking any natural foundation; and this reason- 
ing is very true. 
From the above said reasons, it is therefore sufficient, and more 
so most evident that the whole doctrine of the Arabs on questions 
is plainly false, which we had undertaken to show. 
Chapter 6. The Doctrine of the Arabs 
on Questions is Fraudulent. 
That doctrine can be proven to be fraudulent in many ways. 
First. Because, since Chapter 5 has shown it to be false, it nec- 
essarily follows that it is fraudulent. Therefore, [so are] all those 
who consult it about any thing whatever. 
Second. Because if at any moment it can respond to any sort of 
question, the Arabs are deceived by their own precautions, saying 
that two astrologers, either at the same time or successively cannot 
render a true opinion about the same question. But if a response 
cannot be rendered, then the Arabs are wrong, when at whatever 
moment a question is proposed to them they erect a figure and re- 
spond from it. For first it must be considered whether that moment 
is appropriate for a true response. And if it is not, the questioning 
should be set aside, which, nevertheless, they do not do, let they 
lose the profit offered to them; for they are more concerned with 
profit than with truth or fame; for when they are apprehended to be 
liars, they have their own precautions and false refuges, which 
they set before the deceived Querents for the protection of their 
own doctrine and fame. 
Third. Because in order to embellish their entirely false art with 
some pretense, they also use in their practice selected aphorisms of 
true astrology or of the doctrine of nativities, which they apply to 
their own figures. Since, however, there is a great disparity be- 
tween the figures of nativities, which are natural, and the figures of 
questions, which are only arbitrary, depending on no true founda- 
30 

===== PAGE 39 =====

tion, [their action is] plainly similar to [that of] superstitious 
geomanticists, which to their own figures of merely fortuitous 
points (unless they occur by the will of the Master Devil, the ruler 
of the hands of the Geomanticist, who is not obliged to pay atten- 
tion to the number of points that he notes in his chart; and conse- 
quently, their number is merely fortuitous, or it is at the will of the 
Devil) they falsely attribute the signs and the planets, and the 
strengths of these, so that before the inexperienced they set off the 
art of their superstition to advantage, and they conceal its diaboli- 
cal falsity. 
Chapter 7. The Doctrine of the Arabs on 
Interrogations is Diabolical. 
It is proved first because from Chapter 5 it is false, and from 
Chapter 6 it is fraudulent. Moreover, the Devil was the first liar 
and deceiver; consequently, he is the prime author of every falsity 
and fraud. 
Second, because when the Arabs say that the Querent is com- 
pelled by the stars at the moment of the question or of access to an 
astrologer, they overturn the freedom of choice of the Querent and 
they introduce fatal necessity; and they cannot induce it from the 
principles of their own art because it is heretical, contrary to the 
true religion, and consequently diabolical. Whence, it is no won- 
der that the Turks, Arabs, and all the other Mohammedans and Ori- 
ental Pagans are alien to the true religion, so firmly do they believe 
in the fatal necessity [produced] by the stars, and on account of that 
doctrine of the Arabs, astrological science was almost always con- 
demned by the Roman Popes. 
Third, because the Devil introduced it into the true astrology, 
so that he might defame and deprave it, lest men acknowledge the 
proper and genuine powers of the stars, and then return due praises 
to God, but rather that they might be blinded, but blinded, so that 
they might be converted to [belief in] the figments of terms, faces, 
31 

===== PAGE 40 =====

novenas, decans, pitted degrees, light degrees, smoky degrees, 
etc.1 And so they are deceived, and they deceive others, not only in 
regard to astrological responses, but also in regard to works of 
Magic, towards which the Devil also distorted and propagated su- 
perstition from the stars. 
Chapter 8. The Falsity of Responses to Interrogations 
from the Ruler of the Planetary Hour. 
The Arabs, in their own doctrine of interrogations attribute 
much virtue to the rulers of the planetary hours.2 No one should 
marvel at how varied and vain those same Arabs, Chaldeans, Egyp- 
tians, and Indians make games with the seven-fold number of the 
planets with regard to the years of the native, by Alfridanes, and 
with regard to single days through the planetary hours. For, seduced 
by the Devil by means of these, they have converted those offering 
worship to the true God to idolatry; also, in the natural sciences, 
and especially in astrology the most divine of all of them, instead 
of truth they have chosen to graze on fictions. Among which, the 
doctrine they have handed down about planetary hours, or with the 
planet said to be ruling4 a particular hour of the day (which some 
call the ruler of the cycle), claims not the least place for itself. But 
all should marvel that at this time also no few astrologers, nor 
"in the earlier books of the Astrologia Gallica, Morin stated his belief that those 
subdivisions of the zodiac were entirely valueless. His main reason was that (at 
least in his opinion) they had no relation to astronomy, but were entirely arbitrary. 
2The Arabs learned about planetary hours from Greek astrology books that they 
had translated into Arabic. It was the Greek-speaking astrologers of Alexandria 
who invented the planetary hours and named the days of the week after the plan- 
ets. The fourth century astrologer Paul of Alexandria, Introduction to Astrology, 
explains the whole thing in Chapters 20 & 21. But Morin did not know this, and 
he supposed that planetary hours were a wicked Arabian invention. 
3Alfridaries (their name is derived from the Persian fardar 'time period') are 
profections using arbitrarily defined time-periods that are said to be ruled by the 
planets. They were commonly used by the Greek astrologers, and after them by 
the Persian and Arabian astrologers. The Hindu astrologers also make much use 
of an elaborate group of them. But even Ptolemy has a simple scheme of them, 
since he assigns various years of a person's life to the planets. 
4Reading dominante 'dominating' instead of dimanante 'spreading abroad'. 
32 

===== PAGE 41 =====

those of little reputation among Christians, mention that falsehood 
for a great secret; and those also especially rely upon [them] for 
predicting the accidents of the individual hours of any particular 
day from the present state of the ruler of whichever planetary hour. 
Since, moreover, that doctrine is entirely false, and, unless I am 
mistaken, introduced by the Devil along with the other figments of 
the Arabs, it seems good to show its falsity here, lest with regard to 
it minds should any longer be seduced. 
First, therefore, they make both the artificial day and the artifi- 
cial night to be divided into twelve hours, which they call plane- 
tary; and most of them make these equal by dividing the arc of the 
equator that ascends by day into twelve equal parts for the twelve 
diurnal hours, and the one that ascends by night similarly into 
twelve equal parts for the twelve nocturnal hours. But many make 
these unequal, having divided the mean of the zodiac ascending by 
day or by night into twelve equal parts, whose ascensions will be 
unequal both by day and by night. 
With regard to which supposition, I say first, the division of the 
day and night into twenty-four hours is not natural, but arbitrary, 
as is the division of the hour into 60 minutes; consequently, there 
cannot be any natural foundation for any planetary virtue; and this 
reason is a very strong one. 
Second, it must previously be agreed whether in truth the eclip- 
tic ought to be divided, and a valid natural scheme for one division 
rather than another offered, which nevertheless is offered by no as- 
trologer that I have seen. 
Third, that division of the artificial day and night cannot be 
made in the arctic regions turned towards the poles of the world, 
where the Sun does not rise and set during 24 hours; but the day, or 
the not artificial day lasts many days, or even natural months. Con- 
sequently, the doctrine of planetary hours is not scientific, since it 
is not universal, but only particular. 
33 

===== PAGE 42 =====

Second. They propose to assign individual planets to individual 
hours for rulers of those hours, having taken the origin from the 
rising of the Sun; and that planet from which the day has its name, 
with the other planets in their own order and circularly distributed 
through the individual 24 hours; for example, if it is the day of Ju- 
piter, which is named after Jupiter, Jupiter will rule in that day the 
first hour of that day from the rising of the Sun, Mars will preside 
over the second, the Sun over the third, and so on, up to the 24 
hours of the day and night. By which order, Venus will be found to 
rule the first hour of the day of Venus named after it. And because 
the same thing follows in the individual days, these astrologers 
think some great and divine mystery exists in this, by which the in- 
dividual planets are tmly made powerful in succession for ruling 
the individual hours. 
But this game is very nicely shown in the following figure [see 
page 35], in which the circumference of the circle is divided into 7 
equal parts; and having put Saturn in one point of the division, the 
other planets, that is Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, and the 
Moon, successively to the left in accordance with its order, in the 
other points; from any planet to those second removed are drawn 
lines, which form 7 isosceles triangles, and there is the mystery: 
from the planet Saturn, which is called the Saturn-day, by the 
Christians the Sabbath, and rules over its first hour, follow the line 
that leads to the left and it will indicate the Sun, which calls the fol- 
lowing day Sun-day, by the Christians Dominican, and it rules the 
first hour of it. Another line drawn from the Sun indicates the 
Moon, which gives its name to the following day Moon-day, and it 
rules the first hour of it. another line that is drawn from the Moon 
indicates Mars, which gives its name to the following day 
Mars-day, and it rules the first hour after sunrise of it, and so with 
the rest according to the order of the days. 
If, moreover, the first hour of the day of the Sabbath is given 
Saturn for its ruler, the second Jupiter, the third Mars, etc. in se- 
quence according to their own order, or if the one that those plan- 
ets have in the Ether descending from the Caelum to the Earth, up 
34 

===== PAGE 43 =====

to 24 hours; it will happen that the Sun will in order be the ruler of 
the first hour of Sun-day, or Dominican, and so with the others. 
Which—and certainly a mystery if it contained the truth attributed 
to it by the Arabs—cannot be accommodated by the Copemican 
Hypothesis, which indeed does not admit such an order of the 
planets.1 
But these three assumptions about the individual planets assigned 
to the individual hours, having taken the beginning from the rising of 
the Sun rather than from its setting, or noon, or midnight, and from the 
planet for which the day is named, are mere fictions without any 
logic—that things have themselves thus—and so it should not be 
done otherwise, and without constant experience which the promot- 
ers of this doctrine can offer, even though they propose something 
fortuitous. But what consists of a mystery in this, as with the hours of 
each day distributed thus to the individual planets, is that it always 
happens that the planet that is ruler of the first hour of any day would 
be the one giving its name to that same day. 
'Here Morin challenges the order of the planets: Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Ve- 
nus, Mercury, Moon, and says that it is wrong. But he thereby contradicts himself 
because he accepts the traditional rulership of the signs by the planets, which is 
established based on exactly that same order. And it is Greek, rather than Arabic. 
35 

===== PAGE 44 =====

I say first. That would also be done if the first hour were taken 
from noon, as is more pleasing to some, or even any other hour; 
consequently, for the naming of the day, it doesn't matter which 
planet rules any particular hour of the day, namely because any 
hour of the day can be attributed to the planet that gives its name to 
the day. 
I say second. From this, therefore, it is plain that the naming of 
the days is less important than the above said distribution of the 
planets through the individual hours, and the naming of those days 
was taken from the planets ruling the first or whatever hour of the 
day thus occurring. Which is proved from this, because the order 
of the days has no conformity with the natural order of the planets, 
yet the order of the hours still observes it.1 
I say third. That even if the rulership of the planets over the in- 
dividual hours of the day from the rising of the Sun or from noon 
would be natural and not fictitious, yet nothing would concern 
how any particular day was named, since the planet that rules the 
hour receives no virtue from that naming. Which reason is stronger 
from this, because the usual beginning of the day to which that 
naming pertains is diverse among various nations. For the old 
Egyptians began their day at the middle of the night, and they 
ended it at the middle of the following night,2 which custom the 
Gauls, the Spanish, the Germans, and many other nations follow, 
along with the Roman Church. The Babylonians began the day 
with the rising of the Sun3; the Jews, and now the Italians, from the 
setting of the Sun, and so with the other nations. 
'Not so! The order of the planetary hours is the so-called heptaone, Saturn, Jupi- 
ter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, and Moon. And this is a natural order of the plan- 
ets because it lists them in the order of their observed motion in the Caelum, from 
slowest, Saturn, to the fastest, the Moon. 
2This is wrong! The old Egyptians began the day at sunrise. It was the Romans 
who began it at midnight. The Catholic Church followed the Roman custom, so it 
eventually spread to most of Europe. 
3Wrong again! Actually, the Babylonians began the day at sunset, so that night 
came first, followed by day, but the portion of the 24-hour period called "day" be- 
gan at the following sunrise. 
36 

===== PAGE 45 =====

How, therefore, will this naming of the days be established with 
these diverse customs, even in the same Kingdom, since many 
[peoples] can be subjugated, and the mode of beginning the day so 
often changed? Finally, let the promoters of this foolishness ex- 
plain, if they can, how and by which it is conferred on each planet 
three or four in a day, and the ruler ship of the hours is taken away, 
especially since Mercury, Venus, the Sun, and Mars, and particu- 
larly Jupiter and Saturn, in 7 hours vary their celestial state among 
themselves incessantly. 
But from what was said above more sufficiently the foolishness 
and folly of those, who to resolve whatever question is offered, ei- 
ther something for himself, or for another, undertake to predict 
what is going to be at any particular hour of the day from the pres- 
ent celestial state of the ruler of the planetary hour. Add to this, that 
if anyone has asked at the first hour of the day, he will obtain one 
response from the ruler of that hour, if the interrogation is made at 
the second hour, he will obtain another and perhaps contrary re- 
sponse, and so on with the other hours; from which, the silliness of 
this doctrine is evident. 
How greatly, moreover, important it is to overturn the universal 
doctrine of questions placed above and to exclude it from the sci- 
ence of true astrology, is well known from this [fact]—that it keeps 
its professors entangled in the obscurities of ignorance, it occupies 
them in [making] illegitimate profit from deceiving too credulous 
Querents; as many of those as those it delivers to the Devil, its au- 
thor; and it defames the true science. Which evils in the world are 
not small, and not unfruitful of others; consequently, such astrolo- 
gers ought to be punished. 
37 

===== PAGE 46 =====

Chapter 9. Containing Cardan's Errors 
in his Short Treatise on Questions. 
Cardan, finally made wiser with regard to astrological ques- 
tions, composed a short treatise on them,1 in the preface of which 
he forewarns that even though he has often condemned other ques- 
tions, he was still necessarily led to write about them, because 
many want to know a question (namely about the significators of 
the nativity), but not everything; and he says that this part [of as- 
trology] is as equally natural and conjectural as the other one about 
nativities, to which he himself pays attention, at least for the most 
part. And in the truth of the matter, that doctrine of interrogations 
should only be admitted that is subordinated to the doctrine of na- 
tivities; and he resolved questions from the natal horoscope of the 
Querent or of him for whom the question [is propounded]. Never- 
theless, Cardan committed errors about that doctrine that were not 
minor, some of which at least will be pointed out by us here, lest 
[those who are] too much devoted to Cardan may follow him fur- 
ther in this part [of astrology]. 
First, therefore, to the primary question. How much will the 
King conquer? He decided to judge according to the nativity of the 
King: and that was indeed correct. But he added "that if you do not 
have the nativity, you will find the moment in which he began to 
reign, for if he is a legitimate heir [to the throne], you will take the 
moment in which the previous King, either his father or his 
brother, died; but if it came about by election, the moment in 
which he was elected. And then you ought to erect the figure. And 
you will select, as in nativities, the aphetic place, and you will di- 
rect, and you will also make the progressions and the ingresses for 
the individual years." 
In these also Cardan errs. For on whatever day or hour the King 
of France or Spain, etc. may die, in those places in which the King- 
dom is hereditary, in whatever manner the Caelum is disposed at 
'Jerome Cardan, Opera omnia, vol. 5, De Interrogationibus Libellus, pp. 
553-560. 
38 

===== PAGE 47 =====

that moment, his legitimate successor is recognized as King by the 
law of the land, which has the procedure of the secondary fate, as 
Ptolemy says1: by the first and superior fate, that is by the celestial 
bodies, then by those not even supporting the new King, unless 
that happens by chance; indeed, not even in his own nativity by 
those things supporting a Kingdom for him, but rather by those de- 
nying it. Therefore, he has the Kingdom by the law of the land and 
not by the stars, unless the law were to be such that the son would 
not be King on the death of his father, as happens in Poland, Ven- 
ice, and elsewhere, where the Kingdom is given to someone 
elected; and this is accustomed to be done in the German Empire. 
If, therefore, the succeeding son does not have the Kingdom from 
[the influence of] the stars, it is certainly absurd to erect a celestial 
figure for the moment when he succeeds, so that it may be known 
how many years the King is going to survive. For if that figure 
does not give the Kingdom, all the less will it give his duration in 
the Kingdom or the life of the King as King. Add [to that] that in 
the same way from a figure erected at the moment of the death of 
whoever's father, there would be a judgment on the length of life 
of his heir—indeed, of each individual heir—if there were more 
involved, as when it happens to rulers, who when dying divide 
their own Kingdoms among their children, who, from a figure 
erected at the moment of the death of their father, should all die on 
the same day; but these things are alien to reason and experience, 
and the practice of astrologers should not be concerned with these 
things. 
But that which pertains to Kingdoms and to other dignities that 
are conferred by elections, although the hour of the election can be 
accelerated or retarded by the choice of the electors, and likewise 
the hour of the coronation of a King, which for that reason Cardan 
rejected as being not at all natural, but rather arbitrary: Neverthe- 
less, it is certain that in the case of elections to dignities the celes- 
tial influxes assume for themselves no little jurisdiction. For no 
one is elected to honors and dignities, for whom the stars in his na- 
1 Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos, Book 1, Chapter 1. 
39 

===== PAGE 48 =====

tivity do not presage dignities, also at the very time of the election, 
by directions, revolutions, and transits; indeed, the figure erected 
at the moment of the election by its own influx supports the elec- 
tion, and in away is similar in its signification to the radical influx, 
which reduces [it] from potential to an act. And from this a judg- 
ment can be made as to whether the election is fortunate or unfor- 
tunate, but all these influxes are only determined with respect to 
that dignity, but not to [the native's] life, in order to indicate its 
length. Which is more evidently plain from this, because for what- 
ever dignity is conferred through election by a King, it would have 
to be judged as it would be for a Kingdom [obtained] by election. 
But the King can successively confer very many dignities on the 
same man [who is] dear to him or famous, the various figures of 
which would display a great confusion with regard to the term of 
life. Whence, I judge this method to be fallacious and alien to rea- 
son for [judging] the term of life of a King, or of any other person, 
who attains a dignity [either] by gift or by payment; and I judge 
that a true opinion [on this matter] can only be brought forth from 
the figure of the nativity. And yet I would not deny that from a fig- 
ure erected at the moment of the election of a King, a Pope, a 
Chancellor, etc., it might be conjectured whether the elected per- 
son, having been granted or having purchased a dignity, will re- 
main in it for a long time; but this conjecture will be a weak one un- 
less it is confirmed by the natal figure. 
For the second question, "What sort of administration will the 
King have?" Cardan wants to make the judgment not from the 
King's own nativity or some other one, but entirely from the be- 
ginning of his reign, that is from the moment in which he became 
the sovereign, as is plain from the fourth question, namely from a 
celestial figure erected at that moment. 
But this doctrine is evidently false for this reason: because, 
aside from the fact that no one knows that beginning, it is contrary 
to the truth of the nativity, which is either null or else it must state 
what sort of administration the King will have, what will be his 
habits and his ability; and the natal influx of the Caelum with re- 
40 

===== PAGE 49 =====

gard to his actions and dignities, to which are added the annual 
revolutions, and then the directions. Moreover, Cardan's rules 
with regard to this question are mere nonsense clashing with prin- 
ciple, which whoever wants to can see. 
For the third question. "Whether Kings are friends?" He 
wants to conjecture this from their nativities and from the begin- 
nings of their reigns; even if the closest places agree in principles, 
he pronounces the Kings to be friends to friendly Kingdoms. But if 
not, he judges either the Kings to be enemies and also their King- 
doms, or the King to be a friend and the Kingdom an enemy, or the 
other way around. 
But if Cardan were alive, I would ask him whether he had ever 
known [the actual time of] the beginning of any Kingdom to be 
conformable to the figure erected [for it]? Or whether he had seen 
an astrologer among the ancients or the modems who boasted of 
such knowledge? Or who at least had erected the figure of such a 
beginning? Nonsense! Therefore, from nativities alone must the 
question be resolved, since neither the Kingdom nor the State is a 
proper subject and per se the influx of the stars, which is only re- 
ceived from them by those things that are naturally generated, as 
has been set forth by us fully elsewhere. 
For the fourth question. "Of Kingdoms warring mutually, 
which will be the winner?" says Cardan. "If you have the begin- 
nings of the Kingdoms, that is best; and if you don't have them, 
you have the beginnings in which such Kings began to reign. In the 
third place, it is that you have the beginning of another delibera- 
tion of the waging their war. Fourth, if all of these are lacking, you 
have the nativities of those and of the leading generals. Finally, if 
you have none of these, you will take the testimony from Mars." 
Moreover, it is plain that Cardan wants these five to succeed 
each other in the order of their power, and the figure of the nativity 
is therefore less certain than the three preceding it for solving the 
question, which nevertheless is the most false. For in the first place 
41 

===== PAGE 50 =====

it is ignored by all, and even if it should be known, it is useless, as 
was made plain above. For the second, even if the King began to 
reign at that fortunate moment, yet if from his own nativity he is un- 
fortunate in dignity, undertakings, and wars, he will certainly fail in 
the presence of another King with a nativity fortunate in those same 
things, especially if at the time of the conflict there is a fortunate di- 
rection and revolution. And to doubt this is to ignore the principles 
of astrology or to overturn its more certain doctrine, which is that of 
nativities. Moreover, of the third it cannot be known whether the 
moment of decision to wage war is lucky, or an unlucky one for the 
one making a decision, unless when his natal figure is compared, in 
which the Sun, or the Moon, or Jupiter himself, or Venus, or Mars, 
can be the significators of death, who would falsely trust the sup- 
porters of life in the figure of the deliberation. 
Finally, the fifth is plainly absurd, since Mars in a very general 
signification does not signify anything in particular, as we have 
very often stated. And therefore the truth can only be given from 
the nativities of Kings and their generals, [but] not having rejected 
the figure of the decision for war, from which it can be seen 
whether the aggressor who decided to wage war decided to do so at 
a lucky or an unlucky moment; and usually too a figure that is 
erected for the conflict of Princes is valid, compared with the fig- 
ures of the nativities. For it is certain that at that time in which great 
things, either good, or evil are done, the Caelum is disposed to 
them with respect to the particular men to whom they primarily 
and per se pertain. 
For question Six. Who will be the victor in a single combat? He 
wants, if their nativities are not known (to which he has generally 
conceded the trustworthiness), a figure should be erected for the 
moment in which the firm and irrevocable decision was made, 
from which judgment is made, giving the first house to the aggres- 
sor, the seventh to his adversary, and the tenth to the judge. 
Truly in the case of single combat there is the decision of the ag- 
gressor and the agreement of both [the participants], which is the 
42 

===== PAGE 51 =====

principal and firm moment. For without the agreement of both, 
there will not be a single combat or a duel. Moreover, in the figure 
erected for this moment (common for both of the enemies), why 
will the first house be given to the aggressor rather than to his ad- 
versary? And when a duel takes place, an action belonging to the 
tenth house, why is it not given to the other one of the contenders, 
or divided between both of them, but [instead] is given to the 
judge, who does nothing in connection with that duel? Whether a 
judge is ignorant from [the nature of] his own nativity, stupid, or 
sycophantic, by the celestial state of the tenth house in the figures 
of the questions, he is made to be learned, wise, and fair,1 since it 
cannot be said that in such figures the Caelum influences the as- 
trologer against one rather than against the other, since the choice 
of an astrologer is free, and in the truth of the matter it influences 
against neither science nor wisdom; and no house can be assigned 
to the judge [as is stated] in Chapter 5. 
From these things, therefore, the futility of such a doctrine is 
plain; and because an opinion must only be rendered from the fig- 
ures of nativities, from the moment of the agreement to have a duel 
and from the hour of the conflict, as was said about [judgments in- 
volving] Kings. For these three contain the truth of the question. 
But these [remarks] concerning Cardan's error regarding ques- 
tions is sufficient. 
Chapter 10. General Categories to which all 
Questions Propounded to Astrologers can be Reduced. 
Since we are only involved in the theory of Astrology here, 
therefore the doctrine of questions is only discussed by us here in 
general terms. We are going to treat of particular questions more 
fully in our Astrological Practice if God, the Best and Greatest, 
grants us life for it.2 
1 Not necessarily true! The condition of the 10th house would indicate the nature 
of the judge and the quality of his judgment. 
2Which, alas, He did not. The reference is to another book that Morin had in mind 
43 

===== PAGE 52 =====

Moreover, we may call those questions legitimate that pertain 
either to constitutions naturally particular to natives, as to Peter1 or 
to his horse, or to the universal constitutions of the planets, namely 
their revolutions, either periodic or synodic. But we judge all the 
rest to be illegitimate and incapable [of giving] a scientific re- 
sponse. As if it might be questioned how long this house will last, 
or this ship, or this state. Or what the appearance of a wolf signi- 
fies, or the conflict of a falcon and a kite seen in the air, or who has 
stolen his money from Peter, etc. 
Furthermore, it seems to me that legitimate questions can gener- 
ally be reduced to six categories: namely, 
1. To accidents that are peculiar to the native in his life, his 
habits, his understanding, his wealth, his brothers, his parents, 
his children, etc. Namely, whether he is going to have brothers, a 
wife, etc. Whether he is going to love those persons, whether he 
is going to be happy with them, and such like [questions], in 
which only something is sought about the native in regard to 
those persons. 
2. For accidents common to the native and those other persons 
such as agreement, disagreement, business dealings, lawsuits, du- 
els, contracts with brothers, parents, children, his spouse, servants, 
bosses, friends, [and] enemies. 
3. For the particular accidents of persons closely associated 
with the native, such as by what kind of death and when the father, 
the brother, the wife, the children will die: at what time a son is go- 
ing to marry, whether a wife is chaste, etc. 
4. For the accidents of persons not closely associated with the 
native by his own nativity, such as when the King is going to be 
victorious, or which of two warring Kings is going to be the victor. 
to write covering the general practice of astrology. 
'Morin uses the name 'Peter' as we would use 'Joe Doakes' to signify any partic- 
ular person. 
44 

===== PAGE 53 =====

5. For general accidents depending upon a universal constitu- 
tion,1 such as war, plague, famine, floods, etc. 
6. For general accidents not depending on a universal constitu- 
tion, such as the King's administration, navigation, the beginning 
of commercial ventures by many associates. 
Chapter 11. How in general Questions belonging 
to those six Categories should be judged. 
No legitimate question should be judged only by a figure 
erected for the moment in which the question was propounded. For 
such a figure contains no truth unless by chance with regard to that 
question, as is sufficiently well-established by the preceding chap- 
ters. And this method was only invented, by the instigation of the 
Devil, by greedy and haughty idlers skilled to some extent in as- 
trology, for the sake of profit and vain fame, namely so that among 
the ignorant they might boast that they could solve whatever sort 
of question is propounded, and they overlook no occasion for 
profit, but from the mad curiosity of wretched men they rake in the 
money from all sides; and in order that their ignorance and fraud 
not be detected, they cover them up with many vain precautions, as 
was made plain above. But the doctrine of judging every question 
is founded on celestial charts, either of nativities or of general con- 
stitutions. 
And so [to consider) questions of the first kind about the per- 
sonal and particular accidents of the native: it must only be an- 
swered from the figure of his nativity. As, if he asks whether he 
will acquire dignities, the 1 Oth house, which is [the house] of dig- 
nities, must be inspected, and it must be seen what signs, planets, 
and fixed stars occupy it or rule it. Whether they are of a benefic or 
a malefic nature, then whether those planets are well or badly dis- 
posed by their celestial state, as well as how they are related to the 
'The most common example of a 'universal constitution' is the Aries Ingress for a 
particular place. 
45 

===== PAGE 54 =====

ASC and its ruler, and to the Lights. Then, whether they are in 
good or bad houses of the figure, and, from a careful inspection of 
these, the response must be given, as will be taught in our Astro- 
logical Practice? whose theory, however, is all contained in Book 
21. and the same thing must be done in similar fashion for ques- 
tions about wealth, brothers, children, the marriage partner, etc. 
whether the native will have such things and be fortunate in con- 
nection with them, according to Aphorism 17 of [the Centiloquy] 
of Hermes: 
"When you have been asked about the father, look at 
the fourth, about a brother the third, about a child the 
fifth, about a wife the seventh. But if you are asked about 
a sick person, you should interpret the ASC only." 
But if the question is propounded for a fixed time, such as 
whether the native will marry in this month, the radical directions 
must be added, then the annual revolution and the monthly ones, 
and also their directions. Opinions must be taken from these; and 
the procedure is the same in other [questions]. 
For questions of the second kind, which are about accidents to 
the native in common with other persons, as a duel undertaken 
with an enemy, the nativities of both persons must be seen, their 
directions and revolutions at the time of the duel; indeed, a figure 
erected for the hour of the duel for which they have come together, 
and from all these considered in turn the response should be deliv- 
ered. If it is asked about conjugal relations or agreement, let the na- 
tivities of the husband and the wife be seen,2 not only whether they 
agree or disagree among themselves, or with the ASC, or the rulers 
of these are opposed to each other, or square, and these rulers are 
malefic by nature, but also whether from the husband's own figure 
'Again, the book that Morin intended to write, but which unfortunately he did not 
live long enough to produce. 
2Some words in the Latin text are partially obscured in my xerox copy of the 
Astrologia Gallica, and consequently I may have made wrong conjectures about 
their reading. 
46 

===== PAGE 55 =====

there is signified for him discord with his wife, or vice versa; and 
according to these and to other significations an opinion is brought 
forth about this. If the native asks whether he is going to have for- 
tunate negotiations with another person at a proposed time, both of 
the nativities must be seen to see whether each is fortunate for the 
negotiation, and especially at that [particular] time the directions 
and revolutions [are fortunate], and whether the nativities of both 
of them agree with each other; and it must be judged on these crite- 
ria; and the procedure is the same in other cases. 
For the question of the third kind. As if the native has asked 
when his brother will die; this in must especially be judged from 
the radical figure of that brother, having [also] inspected his direc- 
tions and revolutions; but if that figure is not known, then the fig- 
ure of the brother must be extracted from the native's figure,1 as 
we have taught elsewhere, and the directions and revolutions of it 
should be made, and the judgment will be made from those [con- 
siderations], although with less certainty. 
Next it must be noted that if the native has only this brother, the 
extracted figure will particularly signify him. But if he has several 
brothers, the extracted figure will only signify for all of them in 
general and not more for one than for another. There should, there- 
fore, be little trust placed in that figure for one particular brother, 
but much more [trust] than in the figures of questions [made] in the 
manner of the Arabs, which have no foundation in nature. And the 
same thing must be said about a figure extracted from the nativity 
of a father, who has one or more children. 
Nevertheless, if a question is made about the death of the native, 
then from figures extracted from the nativities of the father, the 
mother, the brothers, the spouse, etc., it is certain that diverse opin- 
ions must be derived from them, and not all of them will agree on 
'This is a procedure mentioned by Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos, iii. 4 & 5, for extracting 
the horoscope of the native's father or a brother or sister by assuming that the 
planet signifying the person is in the ASC of a special chart. This amounts to re- 
numbering the houses of the native's horoscope by counting them from the 
significator. No further details are given by Ptolemy. 
47 

===== PAGE 56 =====

the same thing. But in this case, the judgment should always be 
made from the figure that signifies most strongly; moreover, the 
personal nativity of anyone signifies most strongly [for him], but 
after that the figure extracted from the nativity of his father, or his 
son—and especially from his first bom; but then [the figures ex- 
tracted from] the wife and the brothers; for this is the order of 
power of the extracted figures; for the son shares the radical influx 
of the father through his generation from his father's wife, and the 
father lives in his children through his seed; moreover, the connec- 
tion by body with his wife is greater and closer than the connection 
by blood with his brothers [as is established] by the Cabala of the 
Houses.1 
For the questions of the fourth kind, the native's figure must 
not be looked at, for it influxes only on persons closely related to 
him; therefore, if any question is made about a unique individual 
not related to the native, that person's nativity should be consulted, 
and if that is unknown, his figure should be viewed that is ex- 
tracted from his father's nativity, or his mother's, or his son's, or 
his spouse's, or his brother's; and the more of these that will be 
had, the more certain will be the judgment if they agree on the 
question that is propounded. But it will be much more certain if 
two of the extracted figures agree with the natal figure of that per- 
son. 
Moreover, if anything is questioned by two men about some- 
thing common to them, such as about a duel, the nativities of both 
of them should be consulted, then their directions and revolutions 
at the time of the duel, if both of them are known, or at least one of 
those with the extracted figures; but if both of the nativities are un- 
known, the opinion must be rendered from several figures ex- 
tracted for each of them. 
'A reference to Morin's theory of the significations of the houses originally set 
forth in his early book by that name, Astrologicarum domorum cabala detecta a 
Joanne Baptista Morino, 'The Cabala of the Houses Revealed by Jean Baptise 
Morin,' (Paris: J. Moreau, 1623). The same theory is set forth later in his 
Astrologia Gallica, Book 17. 
48 

===== PAGE 57 =====

And it must be noted, First, that extracted figures are also more 
valuable for judging more certainly of questions of the first and 
second kind. Secondly, that significators of the wife (for example) 
looked at in the natal figure of the native, by reason of the houses 
in which they are [posited], or which they rule, then their connec- 
tion by body, aspect, and rulership with the significators of the na- 
tive, or of other things pertaining to that [connection], signify 
more things properly or improperly that are common to the native 
and to his wife; moreover, his wife's figure extracted from the na- 
tive's nativity signifies the things proper to the wife more signifi- 
cantly; and the reasoning is the same in other [cases]. 
And a figure should not be extracted from an extracted figure; 
otherwise the process would carry on to infinity and a constant 
contrariety of presages. 
For questions of the fifth kind. The response must be made 
from figures erected at the moments of the universal constitu- 
tions, which were treated of in Book 24, for they alone suffice to 
render a judgment about plague, famine, floods, and similar 
things. But for war, it will bring forth some little bit [of informa- 
tion] if you inspect the natal figures of Kings and Princes, and 
their directions and revolutions, at the time of the current univer- 
sal constitution. 
Finally, for questions of the sixth kind for the administration 
of the Kingdom, see what we have said in opposition to Cardan in 
Chapter 9. For voyages then, the nativities of sailors should be 
viewed and those of the principal persons who undertake voyages, 
then the figure for the moment when the ship leaves port.1 And for 
commercial ventures, the natal figures of the partners in the ven- 
ture, and the figure for the hour at which the venture or the associa- 
tion was begun,2 with extracted figures not neglected if natal ones 
are lacking. 
'But here, without realizing it, Morin is recommending a Horary chart set for a 
time certain. 
2And here he does it again. 
49 

===== PAGE 58 =====

Next, the doctrine set forth above requires the precautions of the 
Arabs, but any legitimate question can be propounded to the same 
astrologer a thousand times, or to a thousand astrologers at the 
same time or in succession. And at least from the previously stated 
fundamentals the same opinions must always be rendered, whether 
the question is about things in the past, the present, or the future, 
because the judgment from a true and stable doctrine is most cer- 
tain. And with regard to questions propounded to an astrologer, 
what has been said so far should suffice. 
50 

===== PAGE 59 =====

Section II. 
Astrological Elections. 
Chapter 1. What the Doctrine of Astrological Elections 
Involves and what the Limits of its Truth are. 
The doctrine of Elections is concerned with finding suitable 
times for avoiding some evil that is signified by the nativity, or 
feared, and acquiring something good that is promised by the na- 
tivity, or is wished for; and also for all undertakings and actions to 
be directed to a desired end. And so, elections differ from ques- 
tions because the latter repose in the understanding of the thing 
quesited, but the former are directed to action.1 
Moreover, elections can be made in two ways. First, by taking 
into account the natal figure of the person for whom the election is 
being made; and this method is legitimate and true. Second, not 
taking into account any natal figure, which method is illegitimate 
and false, as Haly proves by many reasons in Part 7, Chapter 1 of 
his Judgments of the Stars. The sum of which is that in the figure of 
an election of a time, even though it is apparently very fortunate, 
nevertheless if it is contrary to the unknown natal figure, nothing 
of good but rather of misfortunes will come forth from that elec- 
tion; for perhaps the ASC of the election will be the 8th house or 
the 12th of the radix, or the ruler of the ASC of the election will be 
the ruler of the 8th or the 12th of the radix; and it can be declared 
that anyone in an hour most favorable to a journey by reason of the 
current status of the Caelum may begin a journey most unfortunate 
to himself, either in life or in goods; while another person setting 
"Not strictly true, because an election is in essence a question set for a future time, 
viz. "If I do it then, what will be the result?" Morin argues that a current question 
is only in the mind, while an election presupposes a future action. But a current 
question is often put to the astrologer because the Querent wishes to choose an 
appropriate action based on the astrologer's analysis of the chart. And a current 
question also often involves subsequent action, because the Querent must go to 
the astrologer or at least communicate with him in some way to put his question. 
Therefore, there is no real time distinction between questions and elections. 
51 

===== PAGE 60 =====

forth in an hour apparently most unfortunate will experience all 
sorts of good fortune. And that is because for some the malefic 
planets in their nativity are significators of life, dignities, riches, 
etc., when they are well disposed. Moreover, the benefic planets 
are significators of evil things when evilly disposed; but for others 
the contrary occurs. Therefore, Haly exhorts that an election 
should not be made for one whose nativity is not known, at least 
(he says) unless you have the ASC of his Question. In which al- 
ready Haly is wrong when he thinks that the figure of an insubstan- 
tial Question made apart from the nativity for undertaking a jour- 
ney can be the legitimate foundation of a good election for a trip. 
Chapter 2. Some things to be Generally 
Noted Concerning Elections. 
As for the elections of times in general, these things should be 
noted. 
First. Those elections are beneficial not only for attaining good 
or for fortunately taking up anything that has been undertaken, but 
also for avoiding anything threatening evil or that is feared. For the 
one who wants to procure the friendship of a Prince or to contract a 
hoped for marriage, or to build a house, a castle, or a city, it makes 
known [how ] to elect times that are especially favorable for those 
things, namely those in which the Caelum favors the Native who is 
undertaking such things. For the celestial influx only affects the 
Native primarily and per se with regard to those things that it must 
be said to affect by accident. 
For, good fortune for constructing a house does not consist of a 
state of the Caelum as seen in the hour in which that house begins 
to be built (which would nevertheless be brought about if the ce- 
lestial influx would primarily and per se produce an artifact), but 
seen with respect to the architect and the one who orders the house 
to be constructed; and the state of the Caelum could be fortunate in 
the first mode but unfortunate in the second mode, whence there 
52 

===== PAGE 61 =====

would be bad fortune for that house, and the reasoning is the same 
in other cases. 
Similarly, the one who wants to guard against illness threaten- 
ing from the stars, having found the time of the illness by direc- 
tions and by revolutions of the Sun and the Moon, would elect a 
time before the advent of the illness, in which he could either draw 
blood or safely clear away harmful humors. And a King fearing 
war from another King close to him, before the beginning of the 
war will undertake to make peace with him at a time favorable to 
himself for making peace, and also through men who are also at 
the same time fortunately disposed to this; and the reasoning is the 
same about an impending battle, in which goods or life will be at 
hazard. 
Second. Anyone can, either for himself or for someone else, 
elect a time, both for a good or a bad end. For a good, as if someone 
wants to procure a dignity for his own son; but for evil, as if some- 
one wants to ruin another person, either in his life or in his goods 
(which very often is permitted by bad men misusing their own 
power of authority), [in which case] he should wisely pay attention 
to his own natal figure when bad directions and Revolutions are 
completed. And then it will involve him in hazards, or lawsuits, or 
wars, or dangerous matters; and he will take it up if he has a lawsuit 
with him, and then he will prosper according to the stars. And the 
same reasoning applies to a King who will take up a war with an- 
other King. For he should not even undertake a just war, if there 
are [only a] few favorable directions in his nativity and some unfa- 
vorable Revolutions. And moreover it may happen the other way 
around for his enemy; but he would expect that there would be bad 
fortune for his enemies from the Caelum, but on the contrary he 
himself would receive good fortune. And it will be very profitable 
to consider also the nativities of the leaders of the war on both 
sides. And if you do not pay much attention to these,1 usually the 
undertakings will turn out most unfortunately. 
'Reading his 'these' instead of bis 'twice'. 
53 

===== PAGE 62 =====

Third. For any Election, such as for making a fortunate mar- 
riage contract, these two things are required: First, that a fortunate 
marriage was signified in the nativity. Second, that at the time of 
the contract there are fortunate directions, Revolutions, and tran- 
sits of the significators. For with one of these lacking, the election 
will not be produced, however much it may seem to be opportune 
and favorable. For Elections cannot overthrow the things signified 
in the radix, nor can directions and Revolutions. Moreover, the 
radical signification can be of the highest, lowest, or middle de- 
gree, just as the signification chosen for the action can also be. If 
those things that are taken from the nativity agree with the figure 
of the Election to the highest degree, a great and swift effect will 
result, that was conformable on both sides. But if to the lowest de- 
gree, the effect will be less, or it will only be apparent. If it is in the 
middle degree, the effect will be middling. Moreover, the highest 
degree on the one side with the lowest degree on the other side, 
will produce more than the least effect, and with the middle degree 
more than the middle effect, especially if the highest degree be- 
longs to the natal chart. 
The Fourth and principal rule of this doctrine in practice con- 
sists of this—that those things that are going to be done are started 
at the moment of the figure or of the elected celestial constitution. 
For the whole virtue of an Election consists of the situation of the 
Caelum, which is elected to be conformable to the intended end re- 
sult. Furthermore, destroyed by the diurnal motion of the Caelum, 
it also perishes or is deprived of the hoped for virtue, and that 
which was begun fortunately for a journey in the 9th house, is 
thrown into the 8th, where it portends death or dangers to life. Or, 
what was fortunate for health in the 1 st house will cross over into 
the 12th, which is the house of illnesses.1 
And therefore, in preparing to act at the elected time, everything 
should also be made ready before that moment, so that nothing else 
'Here he is referring to the clockwise rotation of planets through the houses, such 
as a planet passing from the 9th house into the 8th house. 
54 

===== PAGE 63 =====

should be looked for except the moment itself, not at the common 
clocks, that are often wrong by more than half an hour, but by tak- 
ing [the position of] the Sun or the stars. And so, having every nec- 
essary thing ready before that moment, the ruler of the said time 
will be rightly acquired, as the one who knew how to use it has 
chosen. And the figure of an Election must be dealt with thus, be- 
cause it is a particular figure. 
Chapter 3. How Great the Utility 
of the Doctrine of Elections is. 
The doctrine of Elections is of so great utility, if it is rightly at- 
tended to, because the practical fruit of universal astrology is 
found to be embraced in it. For the knowledge of the stars was not 
given to men by God, the wisest and the best, for any reason other 
than that they might be able to guard against the evil things signi- 
fied for them by their nativity, or to get the good things promised 
by the Caelum; and so that they might have with themselves a nat- 
ural rule and direction for all their own undertakings and actions, 
respecting the dispensation of Divine Providence for sublunar 
things through the stars, and admiring the force of their own free 
will above the influxes of the stars, so that consequently as exten- 
sively as the field of human actions evidently is, just as extensively 
is [the doctrine of] Elections. 
And yet, because in this obscure life the intellect of man is not 
capable of discerning exactly the astral causes of all his own small 
or medium-sized actions, and is not able to apply them correctly. I 
think it is safer for Elections to be used only in matters of greater 
moment, whose causes are more evident; and to entrust the rest to 
knowledge of the state of inferior things or to their supposed ar- 
rangement. 
Lest someone use Elections for all kinds of business, the same 
thing might happen that happened to Ludovico Sforza (1452- 
1508), the Duke of Milan, about whom Cardan writes in Quadri- 
partite Book 1, Textus 14: 
55 

===== PAGE 64 =====

"that he gambled on a money-making astrologer, but 
an ignorant one, and he had paid him handsomely—a 
hundred and more great gold talents. For which for such 
a price, he prescribed the time for starting such an affair. 
So, absurdly as if the otherwise very wise Prince would 
think it [proper] to mount horses in the greatest storms, 
and to lead his whole court and retainers through the 
middle of the downpours through slime and mud—just 
like enemies, or attackers—or to act as fugitives. I do not 
know whether it was from the stupidity of the astrologer, 
whether from great ambition, or whether from mockery, 
that he would ridicule the Prince himself for shame with 
such comments. And it happened to him (what had never 
happened to any other Princes of our Province) that the 
Kingdom was despoiled and captured by the enemy, the 
King of France. [The Duke] wretchedly alive in prison, 
also ended up confined in a box, sleeping within iron 
bars."1 
With this certainly deplorable history Alexander de Angelis in 
Against the Astrologers, Book 4, Chapter 15 tried to bring into 
disrepute the doctrine of Elections, rather than condemning the ig- 
norance of a sycophantic astrologer. And it is shown that it must be 
feared not only by Princes, but also by any other person, especially 
in matters of great moment, that it is very much more dangerous to 
trust [in the counsel] of an ignorant astrologer, than it is to direct 
one's actions by the sole light of proper reason to the unknown in- 
flux of the stars. For although reason alone by itself may be igno- 
rant of the future; nevertheless, when the future is made, the pres- 
ent is beginning, the reason for that is that also by reason alone it 
will be able either to be removed or to come to pass. 
But whatever Astrology is worth, and especially the doctrine of 
Elections, in undertaking and managing great things, can evi- 
'This refers to the Duke's capture by King Louis XII (1462-1515) of France in 
April of 1500. He spent the next 8 years confined in an underground dungeon at 
Loches, France, where he died on 17 May 1508. 
56 

===== PAGE 65 =====

dently be conjectured from the more secret Council of the King of 
China—to which only 12 men of the whole Kingdom are admit- 
ted—but no one of them is admitted who is not an outstanding as- 
trologer. Because indeed in that Council the stars are consulted 
first about things to be done, rather than about the persons who are 
to be put in charge of those things, and about the times that are suit- 
able for doing those things. But nevertheless, the men most skilled 
in political matters would not act with one voice, unless they 
would know from experience that that thing would lead to the rul- 
ing of the people. And the same thing was common to the first 
monarchs of the World, who in difficult matters used to consult 
their own mages—not so called for any reason other than for their 
skill in astrology, which is the sublime and divine science. 
And I indeed think that for a King or a Prime Minister there is 
scarcely anything that would be more useful than in fact a council 
of three very skilled astrologers, who would have the true nativi- 
ties not only of the Kings and his close Princes but also of all the 
notable Magnates of the court and those aspiring to dignities; for 
then from which King and when, war could be avoided; against 
whom and when it would be undertaken, and those who would be 
selected as leaders of the armed forces, and those who would be 
passed over, and it would not be known without the enjoyment of 
decoration; when on the contrary very often a war might be under- 
taken by a very unfortunate King, and one that led to the dispersing 
of his Kingdom rather than to its flourishing; and that in a very un- 
fortunate year for that King, and by ruinous military leaders; 
against the King then another fortunate time. From which occur- 
rences, could nothing but a great disaster be expected? Moreover, 
what is said here about war can similarly be said about the health 
and the marriage of the King, about sending legations or receiving 
them, and about other important affairs of the Kingdom. More- 
over, I would recommend at least three astrologers, for one might 
not be equal to that burden; while two would disagree with each 
other; but three should certainly be appointed, since in many in- 
stances of quarreling over controversies of little moment, may 
57 

===== PAGE 66 =====

times more judges are admitted. And no one should think that this 
was said on my account—I who would without doubt reject such 
duty; for if in my youth I had held the court in dislike, as something 
inimical to my freedom and personal integrity; and I rather fled 
[from it] instead of courting Princes or being subject to Magnates. 
It is certain that now that I am 66 years of age1 and not far from the 
end of my life, the immeasurably corrupt atmosphere of the court 
strongly makes me sick; and I would be insane if I did not reflect 
on death rather than on life in the court. But let it only be said that, 
thanks to the truth and dignity of Astrology, by which, when I am 
gone, the excellence of Astrology itself will become known from 
this work. 
But if Astrology is useful and necessary for Kings and Princes 
in the greatest affairs, and this part of it especially, no one can have 
any doubt that it can also be useful to other men of any degree for 
undertaking individual works of any sort fortunately—whether it 
pertains to agriculture, the begetting of children or domestic ani- 
mals, or the taking of medicine, or to any sort of human dealings. 
And then, to avoiding unfortunate positions of the Caelum, under 
which great evils or dangers are accustomed to occur—especially 
in those years in which there are bad directions and revolutions, as 
we have abundantly proved by 8 celestial figures in Book 24, Sec- 
tion 2, Chapter 11 at the moment of the beginning of the battle2 in 
which Gustavus Adolphus (1594-1632) the King of Sweden fell, 
of the death of some men, and of the great dangers in which he 
himself was. 
'Since Morin was bom in 1583, he was writing this in 1649, which may indicate 
the year in which he completed the first draft of the Astrologia Gallica. But he 
had yet another 7 years of life remaining, and he may have rewritten some earlier 
portions of the book, but in the main he evidently completed it in 1649. Also, he 
continued writing on various subjects to the end of his life—most notably pro- 
ducing a work in French, his Remarques Aslrologiques, a translation and com- 
mentary on Ptolemy's Centiloquy, written in opposition to Le Centilogve de 
Ptolomee by Nicolas Bourdin, the Marquis de Villennes, that was published in 
1651. Like the Astrologia Gallica, the Remarques Aslrologiques was unfortu- 
nately not published until after Morin's death in 1656. 
2The Battle of Liitzen, Germany, which took place on 16 November 1632. See 
Book 23 for further details. 
58 

===== PAGE 67 =====

But because as often neither the King, nor his Prime Minister, 
nor any other men are taking care to compare their natal figures 
with those of those with whom they are going to have a meeting. 
Therefore, with the elections of times not standing in the way of 
acting harmonious according to the nativity of the King, or of his 
Prime Minister, it may occasionally be that the hoped for effect 
does not follow; for the Minister has hanging over himself the for- 
tune or misfortune of the King that he serves. Moreover, the King 
and the Minister have beneath themselves the fortune or misfor- 
tune of those men who carry out their orders or whom they employ 
to bring them to completion. Moreover, the personal fortune or 
misfortune of the King or the Minister depends upon those persons 
in the common concourse. And therefore, all these things must be 
inspected and mixed together for a truer prediction of events even 
so, and the influences of many Planets on the same occurrence of 
events. But if the nativities of the other persons are unknown, it 
will only have to be said that the stars of the King himself or those 
of his Prime Minister give the particular forebodings in that year 
by their directions and the revolution, then on the very day or hour 
by the Election. For it is better to know this than not to know it, and 
it will produce boldness in prescribing or applying cautions for 
other unknown things. 
And the same thing must be judged about the Commander in 
Chief of any army, and then about all those who serve someone 
else's will, or who entrust their own action to another—especially 
in actions of major moment, but it is better to know one's own 
Caelum, and then to favor it, rather than to do the contrary. For, of 
the two Commanders or Kings battling in turn, if either of them 
will know from the hour of the beginning of the battle that the 
Caelum is propitious for him; he will rightly doubt whether he is 
not equal to the enemy, or is more so; and therefore he will fight 
more boldly—although it would be safer to have the nativity of the 
enemy, and by the inspection of both of them to elect a Caelum op- 
portune for himself, but at the same time one contrary to the en- 
emy. For then, victory will certainly be hoped for the King who the 
59 

===== PAGE 68 =====

Caelum favors, provided that there is due cooperation from a for- 
tunate influx of that Caelum. 
In fact, it must be known from the things that the celestial bod- 
ies are particularly signifying to someone, whatever sort of things 
they are, that the Native has contributed nothing of his own, and 
that he holds himself merely passively, so that when something 
unexpected falls from on high, or when he falls among armed rob- 
bers, or when he receives a benefice from the King, or a promotion 
to a dignity, about which he was not even thinking. And these oc- 
currences occur to the Native solely from a malefic or a benefic in- 
flux of the stars. But there are others even so when the stars alone 
seem to arouse the Native, but they do not cause them alone; but 
those require the cooperation of the Native himself, whatever 
kinds of things are undertaken—battles, business affairs, and all 
actions that are particular to the Native himself. For just as the 
Caelum is in nature a most perfect image of God in his mode of 
acting—just as has been shown elsewhere—so, the natural influx 
is very similar to the supernatural influx of God that is called 
grace. For just as by his own grace God excites the will to acting, 
but He does not compel it, or subject it to Himself, nor does He all 
alone performs an action, but the cooperation of the man is re- 
quired. And when the cooperation of the man is conformable to the 
influx of the Stars, the event happens—whether it is good or 
evil—according to the quality of the influx. But if the man's coop- 
eration is contrary to the influx, or even if he does not cooperate, 
the influence will have no effect upon him properly and per se. 
But hence it is plain that those who confide too much on astrol- 
ogy are very much deceived when they believe that the good for- 
tune signified for them by the stars in their undertakings and ac- 
tions will come to pass, even if they do nothing, or if they act inap- 
propriately—thinking that it is sufficient that because the Caelum 
has signified it, it should certainly come to pass. And if it doesn't 
come to pass, they conclude that either astrology is false, or else 
they have been deceived by an astrologer. For an astrologer in pre- 
dicting good fortune from the stars for undertakings or actions 
60 

===== PAGE 69 =====

freely taken by the Native, supposes a conformable collaboration 
by the native himself, who can by his own discretion avoid a pre- 
dicted evil, but so by his own negligence or indiscretion lose the 
good promised to him by the Caelum. And the astrologer is not 
held to respond by the success of his own prediction, but only by a 
prediction made according to art or the influx of the stars. Truly, 
since the stars incline men—and to what they incline them can be 
predicted—but what may come to pass from their free actions can 
only be predicted conjecturally. Since with regard to these things, 
astrology is for the human intellect only a conjectural science. 
Then, on account of the indifference of free will to anything partic- 
ular; and then on account of the concourse of other causes that are 
also mostly free, but to what extent they are affected by the 
Caelum is not known. For even if the greater part of men follow 
their own innate propensities (which can be predicted safely); nev- 
ertheless, there are many who either by prudence, or religion, or 
compulsion, or captivity escape the influxes of the stars. And it 
must be more cautiously predicted about these persons, by taking 
into account their condition or status, so that it should be apparent 
to everyone how much sagacity is required of the astrologer in pre- 
dicting, and because nothing can be defined for certain or infalli- 
bly with regard to free actions, but only conjecturally. Neverthe- 
less, with the greater probability that things will be signified more 
probably by the Caelum. But always warning those men who are 
greedy for predictions that the Caelum does indeed presage such 
things for certain, but their effects principally depend on coopera- 
tion—either for evil or for good. Moreover, with the things just 
said duly noted, and how much can be done for the things watched 
in electing a suitable time for doing things, it can scarcely be 
doubted that a great utility will frequently come out of that. 
Chapter 4. How Vain the Arguments of Alexander 
de Angel is against Elections are. 
Alexander de Angelis, Against the Astrologers, Book 4, Chap- 
ter 15, has many futile arguments against Elections, with which he 
61 

===== PAGE 70 =====

applauds himself. But none of them are worth commenting on ex- 
cept for these two arguments, by which with fatal schemes he 
thinks that he has overthrown this part of astrology and therefore 
the entirety of astrology. 
The First one is like this: 
"Either the natal stars by a vow promise the thing that 
you have undertaken (he is addressing an astrologer) 
will be fortunate, or unfortunate and inauspicious, or 
else the natal horoscope has nothing to do with it. If the 
former, by whatever star that you have undertaken the 
thing, you will handle the business with a fortunate and 
favorable outcome. If the latter, no stars will avail you 
against the natal decrees. If the things do not pertain to 
the natal stars, every natal teaching, that deduces every- 
thing from the stars that preside over conception and 
birth, fails." 
But, having passed over the last two clauses, I reply to the first. 
That gives evidence very plainly of Alexander de Angelis's igno- 
rance of astrology. For indeed he did not know that the natal stars 
promise fortunate things, but not at just any time, but certainly and 
definitely that they are measured by directions and confirmed by 
conformable revolutions. And because in birth the celestial figure 
is suited to the constitution of the fetus; it marvelously leads it out 
of the uterus into the mundane scene, and it puts it under its own 
jurisdiction and subjects it to itself influentially. So, a good signi- 
fied by the nativity, and by a direction and a revolution that has 
matured conformably, a conformable celestial figure through the 
position of the Caelum and suitable transits of the Planets, is 
brought across from potential to action; and it makes that appear 
which is very true and a genuine foundation of Elections. 
Besides, he does not know that since in every nativity both good 
things and evil things are signified (for there is no nativity that is 
altogether happy or unlucky), it is absurd to suppose that either all 
62 

===== PAGE 71 =====

things are good at the same time or all things are evil at the same 
time, or that all things good and evil happen to the Native at the 
same time. For when would everything happen at once? And what 
[then] would happen in the remaining time of life? Or why would 
it be good rather than evil? Or on the contrary why would it happen 
at a certain time? Therefore, it must be acknowledged that what- 
ever you please of good or evil happens in its own time, as is 
proved by directions; and consequently, it is false that whatever 
thing you are going to undertake by a certain star (that is, at a cer- 
tain time), you will handle the thing with a successful and favor- 
able outcome. 
The Second one is like this: 
"But let us make in the condition of the Caelum to 
take in hand some path by which to choose a path by 
which nothing more lucky can be desired, would the 
constitution of this sort of Caelum endure during the 
whole time of a very long journey? Therefore the 
Caelum ought to stand still as long as the men are mov- 
ing, and who could put up with nonsense of that sort? 
Perhaps with time it will vanish? By which mode will it 
just preserve a long journey of many days and also of 
months? Or is it going to say that a man is affected by the 
stars, when he first mounts a horse, and that he is af- 
fected and preserved to endure for the whole time of his 
life to provide good fortune? But really? The one who is 
making the journey, does he not get up on his horse ev- 
ery day? Why is he not affected by other [configura- 
tions] and by the other daily [configurations], which fol- 
low after them in the [sequential] rulership of sublunar 
things? But already if diversely on individual days—in- 
deed, on individual hours—he is affected—why does ei- 
ther a lucky or an unlucky prognostication come forth. 
And the astrologers will not explain that—how a jour- 
ney extends the path of an acting star, driving away from 
the road armed robbers, the [stars] temper the heat of the 
63 

===== PAGE 72 =====

Sun with scattered clouds, they support the horses lest 
they come to grief, they level out the mountains and val- 
leys, all of which things must occur if a prosperous jour- 
ney can occur." 
These things are good for a laugh, and I wanted to add some 
things unworthy of a learned man, as it is plain that Alexander de 
Angelis was unacquainted with what a prosperous journey con- 
sists of. Therefore, I ask of him whether the journey of the Most 
Blessed Virgin Mary to visit Elizabeth was prosperous and fortu- 
nate? And yet she made that through the mountains of Judea, ac- 
cording to Luke, Chapter 1, which were not leveled like the moun- 
tains Sepher, Gadgad, Hor,1 and Abarim,2 in which the Children of 
Israel laid out camps in their journey from Egypt into the Promised 
Land, Numbers Chapter 33. Whether all journeys through moun- 
tains are unlucky, but those are only lucky that are on the plains, 
which are accustomed to be chosen for battles, in which one part of 
the battlers always experiences misfortune? And why too didn't 
De Angelis say that the Caelum ought to divide the seas and rivers, 
as they were divided in the journey of the Children of Israel? 
Consequently, it is not in these that the good fortune of a jour- 
ney consists, but in this—that beginning a journey with fortunate 
health, without any bizarre or extraordinary obstacles that could 
not be overcome, and without the loss of his own baggage when he 
arrives at the desired place—that is the goal of the journey. But as 
for that which De Angelis queries—whether the elected constitu- 
tion of the Caelum would last for the whole time of the longest 
journey? and that it cannot be true that the Caelum would stand 
still as long as the men are being moved—I reply that that same ab- 
surdity can be asked about the celestial figure, under which some- 
one is said to be fortunately bom, which indeed would not endure 
in the World through the quiet of the Caelum as long as the Native 
'The Latin text has 'Jor', but Numbers 33,41 has 'Hor' for the name of the moun- 
tain. 
2The spelling of these geographical names varies in the modem English transla- 
tions of the Bible. 
64 

===== PAGE 73 =====

lives, but it does endure in the Native through its impression on 
him; and it endures in the Caelum through its determination. 
And so when De Angelis asks whether you are going to say that 
a man is affected by the stars when he first mounts his horse, and 
he is affected and preserved to endure the whole time of his life, 
and to be provided good fortune? I reply that the matter has itself 
thus. And it is mere nonsense and empty words, which are said to 
the contrary by De Angelis. For in the Caelum and man's sympa- 
thy, the natal constitution of the Caelum is a rule for the rest of the 
things of the man himself. For just as a man in his own nativity is 
generally subjected to any determined influx of the stars for his 
whole life, and he does not assume a new subjection day by day, 
as is proved by experience in his habits, his intelligence, and his 
mode of action, so when he begins anything that is not alien to his 
own natal figure and conforming to a direction and a revolution, 
through the figure of an Election suited to a particular moment he 
undertakes a thing, he receives an actual influx from the Caelum 
that is particular and similar to the potential of his radix for ac- 
complishing that very thing. Which, by consequence lasts until 
the thing itself may be perfected, and it is not changed day by 
day. For otherwise, there would be no influx for doing anything, 
but only for beginning it. And if day by day or hour by hour the 
influx relating to that thing should be changed, certainly since the 
celestial influx both from the Caelum and also from the planets 
varies the motion repeatedly, either nothing would be perfected, 
or it would progress very inordinately; and so the radical figure 
would be false in everything, because despite in long journeys 
that were fortunate according to the figure of the Election, it will 
evidently be false and less than that. And the logic is the same in 
other cases. 
Much more seriously would this objection of ours be if the 
Caelum should not only signify future events happening to the Na- 
tive, but also the particular times of those events by revolutions 
and directions, as we have stated many times elsewhere. There- 
fore, either the Caelum will effect those things that it has signified 
65 

===== PAGE 74 =====

for those times, or it will not effect them. And moreover, whatever 
you may have said, the Election of days and hours will be useless 
and ineffective. 
But I reply. The decrees of the Caelum are not a fatal necessity, 
especially in freely-chosen actions, but they depend in their own 
effects on the cooperation by man, which indeed they do excite at a 
certain time, but they do not determine them; and that time has a 
certain latitude, as was said at the end of Section I, Chapter 3, dur- 
ing which a man can determine himself to act. Moreover, since 
during that time the places of the planets are continually being 
changed; and the face of the Caelum varies much hour by hour, it 
cannot be denied that an action undertaken—such as a long jour- 
ney—could most conveniently be accommodated to the Caelum, 
or the Caelum to the action as much as possible, which will always 
be the best and most fortunate [procedure]. And yet this can only 
be done by means of Elections. Therefore, they are most useful, 
and indeed necessary for the more fortunate outcome of the thing 
undertaken. 
Chapter 5. What Cardan Thought about Elections. 
Cardan was stumbling on Elections, so that he only fell flat. For 
in his little treatise On Questions, in Question 14 he says: 
"it is seen that Elections are useful; namely, when 
carved or established1 at an influx of the Caelum, they 
seem to do something for pains and stone in the kidneys; 
not because it is such a figure, for either the dog or the 
lion or the mountain you will have carved at that hour 
will be the same; but because it is an action that can [do] 
something by an Election." 
But Cardan even wishes to avoid superstition by [the use of] 
'Here Cardan is referring to an astrological image that was made at a time chosen 
by an Election. These were what we would call "good luck charms," and they 
were made to bring good fortune to some particular thing in the Client's life. 
66 

===== PAGE 75 =====

such words; nevertheless, he will remain impure by that, when he 
approves of such remedies for illnesses. 
Besides, if something sculpted heals, to what extent is anything 
done under such an election, or an earthen vessel, or a wooden one, 
or a walk, or a speech, etc., able to provide a remedy from kidney 
pains and stone, to what extent is the action with such an Election, 
which it is ridiculous to suppose Besides, we have proved that 
elsewhere, and in Section 1, Chapter 3, we have said that such 
things are not susceptible per se to the celestial influx. 
Cardan also adds: 
"In a monarchy an Election does something, but not 
according to the day." And in Chapter 22 of his Book on 
the Judgments of Nativities he says: "In the beginnings 
of things an Election does something, but in voluntary 
things it is of little use and it is very difficult, and an 
Election of days and hours is most absurd, with the ex- 
ception of natural things, such as sowing, pruning, and 
similar things, since in things free so far of perfection" 
he says "we have not come to [the point] where we can 
arrive at the decrees of the days; and therefore in these" 
he exclaims "who will know how to make an Election?" 
And in the place on Elections cited above he concludes 
"that if anyone is fortunate in voluntary things, it results 
from nature and the year; if he is unfortunate, he breaks 
and rebuffs, not only the convenient time, but also very 
often the thing itself." 
These are Cardan's opinions about Elections. In which, how- 
ever, he is here and there greatly at odds not only with himself but 
with all astrologers. For why are directions and revolutions, pro- 
gressions and transits admitted into this art, unless so that favor- 
able and unfavorable days and hours may be found and the good or 
evil things signified by them may be foretold; which we have read 
has been declared by many persons, and concerning whom Cardan 
67 

===== PAGE 76 =====

prides himself in his Book on Revolutions, then Giacopo Maria of 
Ferrara, and then Paride Ceresario (C.1466-C.1532),1 and he hands 
down that he was familiar with those famous astrologers of his 
own time? 
And would not astrological science be very imperfect, if indeed 
from the nativity there could be predicted the danger of a violent 
death at some time in the future, but not the year, or the month, or 
the day? Or if the year [could be predicted], but not the month, or if 
the month [could be predicted], but not the day? And the Native 
will not be tormented during the whole month or year; and in vain 
would he be in fear before the time of the danger, but, with it im- 
pending, should he neglect taking care of himself? 
And are unlucky accidents observed to happen on fortunate 
days, but lucky ones on unfortunate days? I have certainly never 
observed this, but always the other way around. And more than a 
hundred times I was sorry that I had not predicted great good or 
evil things that would happen to Magnates or Princes whose nativ- 
ities I had, and which I could have predicted to the very day, as I 
have predicted in some instances, for in fact there were evident and 
potent causes on those days. But predictions of that sort—or at 
least frequent ones—only belong to that astrologer, who, as 
Cardan himself warns in Chapter 22, has nothing else to do, and 
will take pains with all of his practice, which certainly never hap- 
pens to me. For, through almost continual distractions and various 
kinds of hindrances during 30 years, I was devoted to constructing, 
purifying, and confirming the Theory [of astrology]. 
But although this particular prediction may be difficult—per- 
taining in particular to the annual and monthly revolutions and 
their directions, and then to the transits of the planets, which were 
discussed in detail in Books 23 and 24, yet it is far from being said 
1 See Thomdike, HMES, V, 256. He seems to have been a native of Mantua. He 
was said to have predicted to Cardinal Alessandro Famese (1468-1549) that he 
would become Pope, which occurred 12 years later in 1534, when he became 
Pope Paul III. 
68 

===== PAGE 77 =====

to be impossible, and I hope that by the Theory—now that it is 
properly constructed—such predictions will be very frequent 
among those of us who have understood the doctrine hitherto set 
forth by us. For even though Cardan in that Chapter 22 boasts that 
he has discovered this science, yet when he exclaims, "who would 
know how to elect?" and when he says that "the Election of days 
and hours in unrestricted things is most absurd," he shows that his 
knowledge about this matter was meager, since an Election does 
not harm anything of free will, but rather it is consistent with free 
will, and it complements it. But let what we have said so far about 
these matters suffice. 
Chapter 6. General Rules Necessary for Elections. And in what 
Way an Election Should be Made for any Particular Thing. 
Having set forth those things that we have previously said, now 
it seems that some general rules that are necessary for elections 
must be added, by which it will be shown how in general an elec- 
tion must be made for any particular thing. Moreover, we have 
chosen these rules from various authors, especially from the 
Arabs,1 from among the many unreliable rules, with which they 
are confusedly mixed; and we have arranged them in order for the 
greater facility of learning and using them, also we have accom- 
modated many of them to our own principles. Furthermore, it must 
be noted that not from these things looked at simply and absolutely 
should the rules for Elections be established, as many of the Arabs 
and their followers make them, but always with regard to the fig- 
ure of the nativity, and those things that depend upon it at the time 
of the Election—namely, the radical directions, the revolutions of 
the Sun and the Moon, and their directions, as well as their transits. 
Therefore, let it be: 
" Here, after having severely criticized the Arabs in Section I, he selects many of 
their rules. But he does modify them to bring them into agreement with his insis- 
tence on using them in connection with the indications of the natal chart of the 
person making the election. 
69 

===== PAGE 78 =====

First. Every legitimate Election should be made by inspecting 
the nativity, its revolutions, directions, and the transits of the plan- 
ets through the places of the nativity and its revolutions, and by ac- 
commodating the individual considerations as much as can be 
done to the goal of the election. 
Second. See to which house of the figure the matter pertains for 
which the Election is to be made. As, if it is about dignity, it pertains 
to the 10th; if about a wife, to the 7th; if about a journey, to the 9th or 
to the 3rd; etc. And if the Election should be made for obtaining a 
dignity, Schoner1 and others elect a time when the progressions of 
the ASC, the MC, and the Sun and Moon of the radix, will be in the 
10th of the radix. But because progressions were rejected by us in 
Book 24,2 therefore you should elect a time when the directions of 
the ASC, the MC, the Sun and the Moon, and their rulers in the revo- 
lutions of the Sun and the Moon, would come to the 10th of the ra- 
dix, or to a favorable aspect of it, or to a benefic planet in it, or to the 
ruler of that house, or to their fortunate aspects. And on the day 
when that will occur most fortunately, elect an appropriate 
hour—that is, when the position of the Caelum is suitable for your 
goal, and then erect the figure. And the procedure is the same for 
starting a journey, or contracting a marriage, etc. 
Third. In the figure of an Election, special attention must be 
paid to the ASC of the person for whom the Election is being 
made, and also to the MC, which signifies his undertakings and ac- 
tions, and to the house of the figure to which the thing for which 
the Election is being made pertains. And also the Moon, which in 
all Elections is rightly important—namely, so that in the figure of 
the Election it should be well disposed. And take care if the places 
of the ASC, the MC, and the Moon should be badly disposed in the 
nativity, or the cusps of the evil houses, but rather well disposed, 
or the cusps of the good and appropriate houses. 
'Johann Schoner (1477-1547), German mathematics professor and astrologer. 
2By 'progressions' Morin refers to what are properly called profections (sym- 
bolic progressions), not to progressions (directions) that have an astronomical ba- 
sis. 
70 

===== PAGE 79 =====

Fourth. See to it that the house of the figure of the election 
which pertains to the thing for which the Election is being made is 
well disposed at the hour of the election. But if in the figure of the 
radix it is also well disposed, and also in the figure of the current 
revolutions of both the Sun and the Moon, that will be best. More- 
over, it will be fortified in effectiveness or by the rulership of the 
benefics, that also in both the radix and the revolutions would be 
benefic by nature, and well disposed; and determined by body, by 
rulership, or by an aspect conformable to the thing for which the 
Election is made. But if the Election is for a dignity, and in the fig- 
ure of the election the sign of the 10th [house] of the radix or of the 
current revolution will have culminated, or else that sign in which 
the ruler of that house was posited is in the 10th, the Election will 
be all the better and more effective; and similarly with other [Elec- 
tions]. Moreover, you will take especial care lest a planetary nature 
or radical determination that is malefic and contrary to the goal be 
in that same house of the election. And you will try to have a 
benefic planet posited in it, or else its ruler, that is fortunate in its 
rulership, or connected by aspect with the ASC or the MC or with 
their rulers. 
Fifth. In personal things—that is, things relating to him 
alone—make the ASC of the Election be the ASC of his own na- 
tivity. But in common things—that is, those in which you require 
the aid of friends—make the cusp of the 11 th or the 5th of the radix 
be the ASC of the Election. That is Schoner's recommendation, 
but why in common things being done with the exertion of friends, 
for the ASC of the Election to be the cusp of the radix put as its 
ASC, rather than the ASC of the radix? Because, if the ASC of the 
radix should be put, then the ASC of every Election ought to be the 
ASC of the radix, because everything that must be done is either 
personal or common, but that is not required. And consequently, 
since the ASC of the election always signifies the one for whom 
the Election is made, I think it should be noted that at least that one 
should be well disposed with the ruler of the house of the radix to 
which the matter pertains for which the Election is made, or else 
71 

===== PAGE 80 =====

with a planet that is present in the house itself. And let the ruler of 
the 11th be well disposed, or a planet that is in it, if the work of 
friends is needed for that thing, or if the Election is for conciliating 
friendship. And the procedure is the same with the other [types of 
Elections]. 
Sixth. In electing the ASC of a figure of Election, the nature of 
the thing for which the Election is being made must be taken into 
account—namely, so that the ASC may be appropriate for that 
thing. And therefore for a thing that you want to be done quickly, 
such as a journey, make a mobile sign ascend and avoid a fixed 
sign. But for a thing that you want to last, such as a marriage, or 
building a house, choose a fixed sign and avoid a mobile one. And 
take care that the mler of the ASC is not slow, retrograde, or af- 
flicted by malefics, and especially that it is not applying to them. 
Seventh. By day make the ASC sign to be a diurnal sign, and by 
night a nocturnal one. and also, let the Sun by day be in a diurnal 
sign; and by night let the Moon be in a nocturnal one. And let the 
Ruler of the ASC be correctly posited with respect to the Sun or the 
Moon; for an Election will be better and more effective when diur- 
nal planets are above the Earth by day, in masculine signs, and ori- 
ental to the Sun; and when nocturnal planets are above the Earth by 
night, in feminine signs, and occidental to the Moon. 
Eighth. If the Ruler of the ASC of the Election is the Ruler of 
the ASC of the radix, or of the current revolution and is benefic by 
nature, and well disposed on both sides, it will be very fortunate in 
the Election. 
Ninth. If anything will be sought from a King, or a Queen, or a 
Prince, or some kind of Magnate, or for a Dignity, or in dealing 
with such men, adjust the ASC and its ruler to the Ruler of the MC 
of the radix and the revolution, and also to the analogous plan- 
ets—that is, the Sun for a King, the Moon for a Queen, Jupiter for a 
Chancellor, Chief Officer, or Bishop, Mars for a General, and so 
on with the rest. And if an analogous planet is the Ruler of the MC, 
72 

===== PAGE 81 =====

it will be more effective. But take care that it is not badly disposed 
in the radix or the revolution, or that it is determined to evil things. 
And the rule is the same for other persons pertaining to houses 3,4, 
5, 7, and 9. 
Tenth. All the old astrologers give as much force to the Moon 
in Elections, as if they would have it pertain if not primarily, at 
least secondarily to the [purpose of] the Election. And yet I do not 
see that they give any consideration to its determination in the rad- 
ical figure, yet nevertheless that observation seems to me alto- 
gether necessary, unless if it was the significator of death in the na- 
tivity, it might be assumed to be the significator of life in the elec- 
tion, or some appropriate precaution. And this must be considered 
not only in the case of the Moon, but in the case of any of the plan- 
ets. Moreover, the old astrologers say the following things about 
the Moon. 
Eleventh. The Native should not begin anything new when 
the Moon is in the radical place of Saturn or Mars, or in their bad 
aspects, or in a sign that is badly afflicted in the nativity, or in the 
6th, 8th, or 12th house of the nativity. And similarly, in the figure 
of an Election take care that it not be afflicted by Saturn, or by 
Mars, by body, or by aspect, and that it not be in the 6th, 8th, or 
12th. Indeed, it should not be in the 1st, as almost all [the astrolo- 
gers] will have it, because (as they say) it might be inimical to the 
ASC on account of its coldness, which I think is a groundless rea- 
son, except perhaps in medicine or agriculture, and even then 
only occasionally. 
Twelfth. The applications of the Moon to Mars from the domi- 
ciles of Venus, and to Jupiter from the domiciles of Mercury, and 
to the Sun from the domiciles of Saturn must be avoided. And con- 
sequently, take care lest this occur in the figure of an Election. 
Thirteenth. The Moon conjunct Saturn or Jupiter, and in- 
creased in light and number1 will be good for everything; but if she 
'"Increased in number" = "swift." 
73 

===== PAGE 82 =====

has little light, it will be evil for everything. But understand the 
contrary of all this, when she will be joined to Mars or Venus. 
Fourteenth. Take careful note of the Moon's place in the figure 
of an Election. For if she is in trine or sextile to any radical planet, 
it will be safe to act with those persons that the planet will signify 
both by its own nature and by its radical determination. But if it is 
in square or opposition to the planet, it will act in a contrary man- 
ner. For example, if the Moon is trine the radical Mars, especially 
if it is the 7th of the radix, or if it is the ruler of the 7th and well dis- 
posed, victory in battle or in a lawsuit will be signified, and also 
the favor of soldiers, cavalrymen, and the governmental army, or 
the favor of administrators and attorneys in lawsuits. But if she is 
in square or opposition, it will be the other way around. And the 
rule is the same for other configurations. 
Fifteenth. The Moon well located in the house of the thing for 
which the Election is being made—for example, in the 9th, if the 
Election is being made for a journey—provided that it is in a place 
that is fortunate in the radix, and which if it also signified that very 
thing, and the Moon herself also signified the same thing; and in 
addition she is also aspecting a well disposed ASC, or ruling it, 
nothing more fortunate could be desired. 
Sixteenth. Take care that the Moon is not joined to a retrograde 
planet or is applying to it. For the thing that is undertaken will be 
destroyed. 
Seventeenth. If you cannot fortify the Moon and the ASC at the 
same time, rather then by day fortify the ASC, but by night the 
Moon. And if by day she is under the Earth, and by night above the 
Earth, it will be better for the ASC. 
Eighteenth. Take note of the conjunction or the opposition of the 
Lights1 preceding the Election—namely, so that their place in the 
figure of the Election is a fortune one, and in an appropriate house. 
'That is, the New Moon or the full Moon. 
74 

===== PAGE 83 =====

Nineteenth. When the Moon is separated from Mars, or is op- 
posite the Sun, and applies to a malefic, especially when it is deter- 
mined to evil in the nativity, beware of starting anything—at least, 
anything of importance. For that time is very evil; and it will be 
worse if she applies to its square or opposition. 
Twentienth. From the good or evil state of the place of Mars or 
the opposition of the Lights preceding the Election; and the state of 
the benefic or malefic planet to which the Moon immediately ap- 
plies, the outcome of the thing for which the Election is being 
made may be conjectured. For if the state of the place is good and 
the planet is a benefic, the thing will proceed fortunately from the 
beginning to the end. But if the state of the place is evil and the 
planet is a malefic, the thing will proceed unfortunately from the 
beginning to the end—or it will not be done at all. If the state of the 
place is good, and the planet is a malefic, the thing will begin well 
and end evilly. Finally, if the state of the place is evil, and the 
planet is benefic, the thing will begin evilly but it will end well. 
Twenty-first. When an Election is urgent, and there is not time 
to check that all the significators are well suited [to the thing]. 
Then in fact it must at least be adjusted so that the Ruler of the ASC 
is well suited to it, and a benefic is in an angle with a fortunate as- 
pect to the ASC. 
Twenty-second. In every Election that requires haste, if you 
cannot fortify the Moon, then put Jupiter or Venus, in the ASC, or 
in the MC, but put the Moon in a cadent house. And beware of let- 
ting a malefic aspect the ASC, especially by a malign aspect, or a 
planet that by its own nature or by its radical determination signi- 
fies the thing for which the election is being made - or their rulers, 
or the ruler of the house to which the thing itself pertains. 
Twenty-third. In an urgent Election, with no time given for 
checking how far all the significators can be appropriately ad- 
justed, at least adjust the ASC and the MC so that they are well 
adapted [to the thing]; and let there be benefics in the angles favor- 
75 

===== PAGE 84 =====

ably aspecting the ASC, or the MC, or their rulers. Indeed, it must 
be noted that it rarely happens in Elections that you can adapt all 
the significators as you would like; but always look to see what can 
be done that is better and more appropriate for your goal; and pro- 
vide that, and whatever else your own prudence may supply. Re- 
member that the cooperation of man with the stars [is needed], and 
the lazier or the more careless he is, the less can be hoped for from 
the stars. But the more diligent, and stronger, and wiser he is, the 
more can be hoped for. 
Twenty-fourth. In every Election take care that the malefics 
are not in the angles, and especially in the ASC and the MC, unless 
by their celestial state and determination they were [acting as] 
benefics in the radix. For then you can use them for good. Never- 
theless, it must be noted that malefics are very useful for things of 
their own nature—such as Mars for battles, victories, hunting, and 
lawsuits; and Saturn for building houses, agriculture, etc. And es- 
pecially if they were determined to such things in the radix. 
Twenty-fifth. A consideration of the fixed stars—especially 
the brighter ones—should by no means be omitted in Elections. 
For in the angles and with the significators they can produce nota- 
ble effects, especially if they should also have been determined in 
the radix to the thing for which there is a question. 
And from the general Aphorisms set above for all Elections, it 
should be sufficiently plain how an Election should be made for 
any particular thing that at least pertains to the things signified by 
the 12 celestial houses; although there are some particular things, 
for which some specific Aphorisms are appropriate—which are, 
for example, those that follow. 
Twenty-sixth. You should not cut any bodily part with iron 
when the Moon is in the sign that is ruled by that part. 
Twenty-seventh. In purgings use the Moon when she is in wa- 
ter signs, and especially Scorpio or Pisces. And let the Ruler of the 
ASC be connected to a planet under the Earth—especially in ap- 
76 

===== PAGE 85 =====

plying, he may vomit up the potion; and also its force may be 
weakened if the Moon is conjoined to Jupiter, or if it is in Leo, or 
an earth sign. 
Twenty-eighth. When going on a journey, take care lest the 8th 
house and its ruler be afflicted; and do not let a fixed sign ascend, 
nor let the Ruler of the ASC be a malefic, retrograde, or the Moon 
be badly afflicted. For the more of these there are, the more unfor- 
tunate the journey will be. 
Twenty-ninth. You should not go out to battle when the Ruler 
of the ASC is especially weak or afflicted, or when it will go to the 
ruler of the 7th—especially if it is strong or in the 8th—or when 
the Moon is badly afflicted. 
Thirtieth. When you are going to ask anything of a King, or a 
Queen, or Magnates, put the Sun or the Moon with Jupiter or Ve- 
nus well disposed in the 10th, and well connected with the ruler of 
the ASC; and you will get [what you are asking for]. 
But these should now be sufficient, for many more things will 
be said concerning the practice of astrology, provided that God 
gives us time.1 And it will only be noted here that a careful election 
of times is not a task for just any astrologer, but only for a very 
learned and wise one, who must not only pay attention to the state 
and disposition of the inferior causes—namely, so that they may 
be prepared for the elected hour. And this to be sure is easy for 
those things that are within our power, such as starting a journey; 
but in things that are not within our power, as in addressing a King 
on a selected day and hour, that will be more difficult in many 
cases, and it can scarcely be done except by the dear mediations of 
friends, who offer access to the King at that very hour. Therefore, 
these causes must first be arranged for the elected hour; and it will 
have to be done similarly in other instances. 
'This refers to a book that Morin often mentions that he intends to write dealing 
specifically with the practice of astrology. But either he never wrote it, or it was 
never published. 
77 

===== PAGE 86 =====

Chapter 7. In which the Use of Elections is 
Shown and Proved by two Notable Examples. 
Elections of years, days, and hours can be made that are of nota- 
ble utility. For if someone has been made fortunate with dignities, 
he will foresee that in some year with a completed direction of the 
MC to the Sun, or to Jupiter Ruler of the ASC or the MC he may 
safely elect that year for providing a dignity for himself, and com- 
bining harmoniously with the celestial influx—especially if in that 
year there is a favorable revolution of the Sun; for even if he ig- 
nores the month, day, and hour in a year, that is more prosperous 
for his intention. Nevertheless, persistently in working with celes- 
tial fate, he will implement the things promised by himself. But if 
he does not ignore those things, then it may occur with a favoring 
Caelum, with much less labor, and his wish will be accomplished 
more happily. 
I could offer many more examples here to show and prove the 
use of Elections from our own observations; but the two that fol- 
low should suffice—warning those for whom they might not suf- 
fice, that from the doctrine handed down by us they were relying 
on other observations. 
Therefore, in the year 1646 around the middle of spring, the 
most illustrious Lord L6on de Bouthillier (1608-1652), Count of 
Chavigny, Antibes, etc., the second Minister of the Kingdom of 
France, along with the eminent Cardinal Mazarin (1602-1661), 
wanted to undertake a long journey to his County Antipolis—in 
French, Antibes—a fortified city and port on the Mediterranean 
Sea, at the extreme southeastern part of France, at least 200 French 
leagues1 distant from the city of Paris. And out of his benevolence 
he invited me to [accompany him on] that journey. I delayed my 
response to what [would be] for me a long journey, and I had most 
'The old French league was equivalent to 2.08 statute miles, so 200 leagues 
would be 416 statute miles. The actual straight line distance between Paris and 
Antibes is 431 statute miles, but they went by a roundabout way that was proba- 
bly near 500 statute miles. 
78 

===== PAGE 87 =====

carefully inspected the stars that were presaging ill health for me in 
that same year; and finally I did agree [to go]. But I asked that most 
illustrious and very intelligent Lord, and a man cultivated in every 
kind of learning, and not alien to astrology, that it would please me 
to elect the day and the hour to make a fortunate departure, which 
would be a test of great moment to begin something that was un- 
dertaken under a conformable state of the Caelum. And so when 
the most illustrious Lord, very fond of knowing things, had ap- 
proved with a pleasing mind, and had decided to depart soon, I 
elected 7:09 AM of 9 May. But I warned him to take care that ev- 
erything was ready to go, so that at that very moment he could em- 
bark on the trip; and that was done by him most diligently and ac- 
curately. And in fact in his very beautiful garden, with the Sun 
shining on an outstanding clock with the sundial illuminated al- 
most by the half hour that we had waited for—the elected moment 
of time; at which instant, with everything having been made ready, 
he embarked on his journey and set out from Paris with around 30 
persons and that number of horses. 
Now we may inspect the figures and the status of the Caelum, 
both for the most illustrious Lord and for me [see page 80]. 
These [figures] and the following nativity are not from the com- 
mons, as at first glance is plain to any astrologer. But the first one 
is distinguished by good [positions]; but the second one is indeed 
distinguished by evils; the decrees of which we have explained in 
judging hundreds of illustrious nativities that have been drawn up 
by us. Here, let it suffice that in the nativity of the most illustrious 
Lord Count of Chavigny the Sun and Mercury, are rulers of the 9th 
house, the Moon is in the 9th house, Jupiter is the Ruler of the ASC 
and the 3rd, conjunct the Sun and Mercury, trine the cusp of the 
9th; and Mars rules the Sun, Mercury, and Jupiter, and is trine the 
Moon; then, Venus is in the 3rd, and Saturn her ruler, are 
significators of travels, but especially the Moon, the Sun, Mer- 
cury, Jupiter, and Venus. Many journeys and also long travels 
were signified by them. 
79 

===== PAGE 88 =====

Figure islativiciUis liiufin.linii D. Co- 
iv.iris De Chavigay. i;3. 4.0 
Figura Rcvoliuionis 
Solis. 
»n- ** 
»«"«•. I-arita. Marfci P- M. M- J? I. 4, M. vfo-zC M. ^ ^ J-s- feXub. £ o. »j. M. 
24M"CU 
a h. m. 
aS. itf, 1}. T. A 
i'-iniaj. 
ro Qa-aa-u;; Jiao 
o 
V v6 
<r- 
T r# ^ 
Fjgara RcvoIiitiGnis Lmi* ?3> 4* 
ons. 
335- fi 
c> 
i X ^ 
u 3x: 
. .y i<4<r. 
Ayritit 
P. H, Mi 
.««• o. T. A Pariiijt. 
w D. H, 4- 10. 9. T.A. Poriiiii. 
;§ 
[The figures above are the Horoscope of Count Chavigny, his 1646 Solar Revo- 
lution, his Lunar Revolution preceding the Journey, and the Election chart for 
the Journey.] 
{The dates and times are 28 March 1608 at 11:23 PM, 29 March 1646 at 4:23 
AM, 25 April 1646 at 8:00 AM, and 9 May 1646 at 7:09 AM.] 
[However, the Electional figure is not accurately drawn! It looks like he calcu- 
lated the chart for 8 May instead of 9 May. The House cusps are approximately 
correct, but on 9 May the Moon was actually in iH/9 (not in 2IZi), Mercury in 
91J.II, Venus in 2(550 Rx, Mars in I If 28, Jupiter in 4tS)29, and Saturn in 
8(556.] 
80 

===== PAGE 89 =====

Moreover, in the year 1645, in the beginning of the Revolution 
of the Year, or the revolution of the Sun, the significator of the MC 
and of actions and dignities was being directed to 8 Scorpio sextile 
Mars, presaging labors, travels, and dignity. And then he was 
made Plenipotentiary for General Peace, and he prepared every- 
thing for a long journey to Munster, a city of Germany, where all 
the Plenipotentiaries of the Princes were convened; but by an al- 
tered royal decree or a decree of the Prime Minister someone else 
was sent. 
Moreover, in the year 1646, to the aforesaid direction, which 
had not yet allotted its own effect, there is added the direction of 
Mercury ruler of the 9th to the partile sextile of Jupiter Ruler of the 
ASC. Both of which were strong indicators of journeys. And so 
that direction signified a long and fortunate journey. But the solar 
revolution of that same year was also presaging the same thing. 
For in it the radical place of Venus was in the ASC, Mercury and 
the Sun rulers of the 9th were in the 1 st with Mars ruler of the 9th 
of the revolution, Mars and Mercury conjoined in opposition to the 
Moon, which had returned to its own radical place under the ruler- 
ship of Mercury, and the Moon was in trine to Venus ruler of the 
3rd and to Saturn Ruler of the ASC. Moreover, Jupiter, Ruler of 
the MC and the 9th,1 was in the 4th in mutual reception by domi- 
cile with Mercury, and trine the ASC. All of which were presaging 
a long and auspicious journey, so that already from the beginning 
of the revolution I had predicted the same thing to the most illustri- 
ous Lord. 
But in the lunar revolution which preceded the day of departure, 
the Moon was the Ruler of the ASC in trine to the Sun ruler of the 
9th of the radix and to Saturn ruler of the 9th of that revolution, 
then in trine to Venus, and to its (the Moon's) ruler Mercury, with 
which it was in mutual reception by exaltation. Moreover, Jupiter 
was in the ASC under the rulership of the Moon and in its sextile; 
'27 Scorpio is on the cusp of the 9th, but half of Sagittarius is in the 9th, so Morin 
took Jupiter to be co-ruler of the 9th. 
81 

===== PAGE 90 =====

and it was exalted there and the Ruler of the MC, and in almost 
partile trine to it; but it was also in sextile to the Sun and Saturn, 
rulers of the 9th of the radix and the 9th of this revolution. By 
which concourse of the benefics, nothing more fortunate could be 
selected for a long and auspicious journey, which this revolution 
was also presaging manifestly [see page 83]. 
Moreover, in the figure for the Election of the time of departure, 
which was briefly standing firm, prudence was conjoined with as- 
trological science. For since the departure had to be by day, I did- 
n't want the Sun to be in the first house, because Saturn and Mars 
would also have been in the 1st or in the 12th. And consequently 
they would also have portended illnesses for the most illustrious 
Lord, and also in its 12th misfortunes for his servants and horses, 
from which I was keen to make those servants and horses immune, 
in so far as those things were pertaining to the most illustrious 
Lord himself. And also I did not want the malefics to be in the 
10th, 9th, or 8th, because they would have portended unlucky 
things for the actions and dignities of that same Lord as well as for 
his journey; and in the 8th at least dangers to his life. 
And so I preferred the Sun, Saturn, Venus, and Mars to be in the 
11th, with Mars strong and oriental going ahead in doryphory to 
the Sun. And I fortified the ASC for the fortunate health of that 
most illustrious Lord, and the MC for a fortunate success of his un- 
dertakings—in fact putting the exalted Jupiter in the ASC, which 
was the ruler of his radical ASC, and putting it in trine to the MC 
which it was ruling, and both the ASC and the MC in sextile to Ve- 
nus which mled the Sun and Saturn. Moreover, I put the Moon 
Ruler of the ASC in the 9th house for the journey above the radical 
place of Venus,1 which in this figure was in its own domicile; and 
Mercury was alone well disposed in the 12th, which was not able 
to be harmful. These were therefore fortunately placed, for al- 
though the 8th cusp of the radix was rising on the ASC, neverthe- 
1 But alas, the Moon was not in 21 conjunct the radical Venus in 24zs, but it was 
actually in 3K19! However, there it was in close trine to Jupiter on the cusp of the 
ASC—a very favorable aspect. 
82 

===== PAGE 91 =====

Figura mc.v Nativitatis crcdapcr 
Triangula Sphxrica. 
a8.(. 4.1 
iW 
s$ I .'5S3■- ' Icbiuarii 
D, H. M. 
li. io. 3.^ T.A 
Figura Revolncionis 
Soils. 
!/©ir.jp 
•ST 
Xl 
l/3x. 
^ i F, 18 
164^. 
Fcbruirii 
D. H. M, 
3. uS.T. A. 
Rlllfiis. 
f XV s v.T* 
Figura Rcvolutionis Luna;, 
jga. 15 
Figura Elcdtionis Tcmporis. 
m- y- 
k: 0'?'V .0 v / <r d 6 v V- 
•v 
 X/ r-X v- --V ; c^o. .545 
.>V 
Vpfiiii rUa; D. H. M. » h. M. 0. io. y, r, a. V ii' u. 14. r,a Kiniuj. 
e5 
1 
x \ l/xy \>A x^v 
[The figures above are the Horoscope of J. B. Morin, his 1646 Solar Revolu- 
tion, his Lunar Revolution preceding the Journey, and the Election chart for 
the Journey.] 
[The dates and times are 23 February 1583 at 8:34 AM, 22 February 1646 at 
3:16 PM, 12 April 1646 at 11:24 PM, and 9 May 1646 at 7:09 AM.] 
[The Electional figure is not accurately drawn! The House cusps are approxi- 
mately correct, but the Moon was actually in iH/9 (not in 2ISZ), Mercury in 
93X77, Venus in 2d50 Rx, Mars in 77T2S, Jupiter in 4$o29, and Saturn in 
S656.] 
83 

===== PAGE 92 =====

less Jupiter in the ASC was stronger and was preserving his health 
and life. And there was only something to be feared from false 
friends on account of Saturn and Mars in the 11th, which were not 
able to cause minor inconveniences else where, and which spared 
that sort of effect is said below. 
But now in the solar revolution, the ASC on the day of depar- 
ture—namely the 9th of May—had come by its annual direction to 
the 16th degree of the 8th house partile Venus in the revolution it- 
self, which was the ruler of the 3rd and strong. Moreover the Sun 
had come to 12 JC, a place square the Moon of both the radix and 
the revolution. 
But in the lunar revolution, the MC in the hour of departure was 
being directed to 611^—that is, on that very day it was coming to 
the radical place of the Moon. And the ASC by direction had come 
to 19111—that is, on that very day it had come to the square of the 
radical Venus; and the Moon had come to 12H opposite its radical 
place, and sextile Venus and Mercury in that same revolution. 
Therefore on that day there was a very great consensus of the stars 
for a fortunate and lucky journey. 
Moreover, since in the Election of the time for that journey, I 
had also decided to have a reason for myself. Now it must be seen 
whether I had also provided properly for that. 
Therefore, in my nativity Jupiter and Saturn rulers of the 9th, 
then Mercury and the Moon rulers of the 3rd, with Mars ruler of 
the ASC centrally located in the 3rd, were significators of jour- 
neys; but especially Jupiter ruler of the cusp of the 9th, which was 
ruling all the planets except Mercury, to which its was neverthe- 
less conjunct.1 Moreover, in the year 1646 at the beginning of the 
annual revolution, the radical MC had come by direction to 16H 
almost the place of the Moon, which was conjoined to Jupiter and 
Saturn; and it was therefore the signiflcator of journeys. And the 
'By a wide "heads and tails" aspect, since Mercury was in 27ss;52 and Jupiter 
was in 4X48. 
84 

===== PAGE 93 =====

Part of Fortune in the 1st had come to 17© precisely trine the 
Moon herself. These configurations therefore also presaged a jour- 
ney for me. 
Moreover, in the annual solar revolution, a long journey was 
also being strongly signified. For the ASC of the radix was in the 
MC of the revolution, which was signifying new undertakings and 
actions for me. Venus, moreover, ruler of the 10th1 was in the 9th 
applying to the radical ASC, and it was sextile Jupiter the ruler of 
the cusp of the 9th, and trine the ASC, which was certainly by no 
means obscurely presaging a long journey. Furthermore, Mars 
Ruler of Venus and the MC was on the cusp of the 7th with Mer- 
cury in Aquarius, which signified not only labors but also Mercu- 
rial contentions, which I had after my return with Fromm the 
Regius Professor of Mathematics at Copenhagen for the Restoml 
of Astronomy, and with P. Leonardo Duliris for his Resume of my 
Finding of Longitudes, against whom I wrote in that year.2 
But in the monthly lunar revolution closely preceding the 9th of 
May, a journey was also strongly signified. For the Moon was 
square the ASC, and its antiscion was culminating, and the Moon 
itself was in the 3rd with Mars, which was partly the Ruler of the 
3rd and the 10th; then the Sun, and Mercury which was the ruler of 
the 9th and trine the ASC. Moreover, Jupiter the Ruler of the ASC 
was in the beginning of Cancer under the rulership of the Moon it- 
self, which in turn it ruled, and it was separating from a trine of the 
radical Mercury to a trine of the radical Venus and a cluster of 
planets. All these things were therefore greatly indicating a long 
journey. 
But already in the Electional figure, what could I do more fortu- 
nately for me than to put Jupiter the ruler of the cusp of the 9th in 
my nativity, and of almost all of the planets, in the ASC and trine 
its own radical place and that cluster of planets, and to put in the 
1 Taurus was intercepted in the 10th, so Morin takes it to be a co-ruler of the 10th. 
2These are references to two books that Morin wrote and to two men who wrote 
critical reviews of them. 
85 

===== PAGE 94 =====

MC the place of that same cluster of planets that Jupiter was ruling 
and which it was fortifying by its own partile trine. But the Moon 
Ruler of the ASC and Jupiter in the 9th in the place1 of the radical 
Mercury and afflicted by a malefic2? These things were certainly 
very artfully disposed for a journey that was also very lucky. 
Furthermore, in the solar revolution, the MC was being directed 
on the 9th of May to 9S the radical place of Mars in the 3rd and 
trine the cluster of my planets; moreover, the Sun at 1Q was sextile 
the radical Venus; and the Moon at 20S was square Venus in that 
revolution. 
But in the lunar revolution, the MC had come to 0^ square Ju- 
piter in that revolution, the ASC to 5/ square the cluster of my 
planets, and especially the Sun and Saturn; moreover the Sun had 
come to Libra3 square the radical Mars; and the Moon to 4H the 
radical place of the Sun and Jupiter and the cluster of Planets. All 
of which was also suitable for a long and lucky journey. And hav- 
ing also inspected these in the year 64 of my age, I committed my- 
self to this long journey in the summertime. And the Sun in the 8th 
of the annual revolution and which Ruled the ASC did not deter 
me, nor did Mars on the cusp of the 7th—namely, because in my 
radix no lethal direction would be completed in that year, and the 
rest of the directions were fortunate. Nevertheless, for my greater 
security, avoiding the heat of the Sun and the weariness of body, in 
[staying] quiet and [exercising] moderation as much as I could in 
banquets, I looked after my health, and I took caution lest I should 
fall into any illness. 
Moreover, what was the result of all of the above said things? 
From the City of Paris to Lyons the travel was by land. From Ly- 
ons to Avignon by water—the whole company of men and 
'But the Moon was not in 21 az, but in 4H. 
2I suppose he is referring to the antiscion of Satum in 9b, which would have been 
in 212^ in partile conjunction with his false position of the Moon. 
3The printed text has the symbol for the Moon's South Node by mistake for the 
symbol for Libra. 
86 

===== PAGE 95 =====

horses—and in that same passage we were transported on the 
Rhone in three larger boats. And finally from Avignon to Antibes 
we proceeded by land through the roughest places and mountains 
by horse, and [those places were] especially most difficult and 
dangerous to pass through. 
Moreover, during the whole journey the most illustrious Lord 
was received with the honors due to a French Minister, to the intel- 
ligence, learning, skill in royal court matters, and to his great fame; 
and not here and there falling short on social obligations. And yet, 
not withstanding the change in climate, the summer heat of the Sun 
in Provence, the vines after the City of Lyons that are thicker and 
more productive [of wine] than those in Burgundy and France, 
which no one and especially none of the servants was sparing (be- 
cause everywhere by custom they were offered copiously to the 
most illustrious Lord), so that not even one servant on foot, and not 
one horse had a bad time on the whole journey. For because any- 
one looking at the most illustrious Lord de Chavigny—[could see 
that] he in his way of life was the most moderate of men; and he 
most prudently governed his own health, whence it was no wonder 
that he was always in good health. And so with notable liveliness 
and with the sky always serene from the City of Paris we arrived at 
Antibes, where we dwelled for a month with the great heat of the 
Sun, but with no one—neither man nor horse suffering harm. 
When a month had passed and the business affairs had been 
completed, the most illustrious Lord wanted to return to Paris, and 
I asked him that because the Election of the time made by me at 
Paris visualized an outstanding experiment, would he like [me] 
again to elect an hour to depart from Antibes. And so, when he had 
approved, and with everything carefully considered, I elected 4:27 
AM on July 2nd. And again when everything had been prepared 
for departure at that moment, the most illustrious Lord waited with 
me in his room with the windows open to the east until be spied the 
rising of the Sun; and then without any delay he departed along 
with all his company, in his carriage, with horses and much bag- 
gage having been sent ahead by sea on account of the roughness 
87 

===== PAGE 96 =====

and difficulty of the mountains, which would occur on the second 
day of the journey. 
Furthermore, in the annual revolution of that most illustrious 
Lord, the ASC was then being directed to 14S square the radical 
Mercury ruler of the 9th house, and the Moon was in the 9th of the 
radix. But the MC was being directed to 17K sextile Venus in that 
same revolution between the bodies of Mars and Mercury that 
were conjoined in the 1 st, of which Mercury was the ruler of the 
9th of the radix, and Mars was the ruler of the 9th of the revolution. 
Moreover, in the figure of the lunar revolution most closely pre- 
ceding the 2nd of July, the place of the radical Mars is ascending, 
which planet is ruling the 9th in the solar revolution, and the 1 Oth in 
this revolution. Moreover, Venus is the ruler of the 9th almost 
partilely conjunct Saturn the Ruler of the ASC to which she is ap- 
plying. And Mars is in her own domicile and angular in the 4th; and 
Saturn, Venus, and Mars were in trine to the ASC and to the Moon. 
All of which things were strongly presaging a journey and also a 
lucky one, because Jupiter was sextile Mars, Venus, and Saturn and 
trine the MC. Moreover, the Moon and the Sun were also favoring 
the MC with fortunate aspects. And although they were in bad 
houses, nevertheless they were not being afflicted by the malefics. 
Besides, in this revolution, the ASC on the 2nd of July was being di- 
rected to 11 sinister trine the Sun, Mercury, and Jupiter in the ra- 
dix. But the MC was being directed to the places of Mars, Venus, 
and Saturn of that revolution; but the Moon was being directed to 
the places of Mars and Jupiter in the solar revolution. 
But in my annual revolution, the MC had come on the 2nd of 
July to 1 Ijy opposite Venus and the cluster of my planets; the ASC 
was being directed to 15111, trine the radical Moon and the cluster 
of planets; and the Sun was being directed to 11X square that same 
cluster. 
Moreover, in the figure of my Lunar Revolution that most 
closely preceded the 2nd of July 1646. The Moon is under the 
Earth by day and angular in the 4th, the ruler of the 9th, trine the 
88 

===== PAGE 97 =====

Figura Rcvolucionis Lun* llluftriffimi Figura Rcvolutionis Lunx 
Domini Dc Chavigny. noftra. 
*'«■ 3» iJS- 47 
\ 
& 
r 6+5. funii D. H. M. i«. i. iJ.T.A. 
Antipoii. 
Luiiud.4}, 
Junu tr D. H. M. 
6. s. »8.T.A. 
Ann poU 
N7 
J: ©TO.fl 
[The figures above are the Lunar Revolution of Count Chavigny, and the Lu- 
nar Revolution of Morin—both of them preceding the start of the return from 
the Journey,! 
(The dates and times are 18 June 1646 at 8:18 PM, and 6 June 1646 at 5:28 
PM., both of them setforAntibes, France] 
Figura Ele&ooit Temper is. 
J4*. « 
s> 
iM< ]** 
D. H. M. 
•. 16. v TJL 
Aaopoii- 
p/ 
/The figure of the Election for the Departure from Antibes setfor 2 July 1646 at 
Sunrise 4:27 AM] 
89 

===== PAGE 98 =====

ASC and Jupiter ruler of the 1 st,1 with whom she is mutual recep- 
tion by domicile, and she is also square the Sun the mler of the 9th,2 
and Mercury Ruler of the MC. Moreover, Mars Ruler of the ASC is 
conjunct the powerful Venus, which is trine the MC. All of which 
are rightly related to a journey. In addition, neither the Sun, the 
Moon, the ASC, nor the MC, were afflicted by the malefics. Be- 
sides, in this revolution the ASC was being directed monthly to 2 
July at the hour of the departure, when it was at 27^ opposite my 
radical ASC, and running forward on that day to the trine of my 
cluster of planets. And the Moon at 18zz arriving on that same day 
to the cluster itself. And the Sun on that same day arriving at 2b 
square that same cluster. And so from the stars there were many 
stimuli. 
But with these being thus, I elected the hour mentioned above, 
when the Caelum and the planets, with the exception of the Sun, 
were nicely disposed in the 1st of the Electional figure, which 
since it would have turned out best, should I have turned this 
away? Therefore in this figure the Sun and the ASC are applying to 
Jupiter, which in return is exalted in the ASC, and trine the MC 
which it rules; and again the Moon, ruler of the ASC, the Sun, and 
Jupiter is in the 9th on the radical place of Venus in the figure of 
the most illustrious Lord. Moreover again, Mars, and Venus are in 
the 11 th—namely, because I wanted them to be away from the 1 st, 
12th, 10th, 9th, and 8th houses on account of the reasons stated 
above. And the Sun and Jupiter were in square to their own radical 
places [in the figure] of the most illustrious Lord. But that which [in 
this Electional figure] relates to me, is that the ASC is in trine to the 
cluster of my planets, and Jupiter the ruler of my radical 9th is in the 
ASC; and the radical place of my Moon was partilely on the MC; 
and the Moon herself was in the place of my radical Mercury and 
sextile the radical ASC, while applying to the cluster of planets. 
'Jupiter is co-ruler of the ASC, since the cusp is 21 Hh but V is in the 1st house. 
2The Sun is the co-ruler of the 9th, since 24S is on the cusp but is in the 9th 
house. 
90 

===== PAGE 99 =====

Now, this is what came about from this. From the City of 
Antibes to Lyons the travel was on land. But then the most illustri- 
ous Lord, his own carriage, and the greater part of his own com- 
pany passed on through Burgundy, but he himself—with most of 
his company on foot—wanted to go down the Loire with some 
special and more necessary domestics; but with an intolerable con- 
dition existing over the river, he was forced by the fear of illness to 
go down the river atNevers, and to finish off the rest of the journey 
by riding; and we all arrived at Paris healthy and cheerful at the be- 
ginning of August. 
And none of us, neither man nor horse fell ill on the whole jour- 
ney, during the time when in many places both men and pack ani- 
mals were dying from too much heat and dryness; and in the cities 
with abundant water, we were finding men from villages three or 
four leagues distant who had come with carts and large jars seek- 
ing water for men and pack animals. So that [when we had arrived] 
at Paris, we aroused much admiration because in all that journey of 
three months no man or horse had had any illness. 
But finally, it must be stated what Saturn and Mars did in the 
11th house of that Election. They did indeed arouse false, malign, 
and fraudulent enemies, who, in the absence of the most illustrious 
Lord Count, worked with all their powers to evict him from his 
Ministry; and it was believed that this was going to happen here 
and there in the Court at Fontainebleau. And so he was warned by 
friends, that he should turn away from the Court and go to Paris. I 
am rather silent about the false pretexts that were received, among 
which however was this—that the most illustrious Lord had taken 
an astrologer with him to consult about the life of the King,1 the 
Queen,2 the Most Eminent Cardinal Mazarin,3 the Prime Minister 
'Louis XIV (1638-1715), who was only 8 in 1646. 
2Anne of Austria (1601-1666), who was the regent of France 1643-1651) and a 
close friend of Cardinal Mazarin, whom she appointed Prime Minister in 1643. 
3Giulio Mazzarini, called in French Jules Mazarin (1602-1661), He was created 
Cardinal in 1641, and as Prime Minister from 1643 to his death, he was very pow- 
erful in France. 
91 

===== PAGE 100 =====

of France, etc. But concerning which, certainly not a single word 
was spoken during the whole time of the journey. 
Moreover, from this envy and slander it resulted that the most 
illustrious Lord also asked me twice whether I could see in the 
stars any misfortune in dignities that was threatening him? And I 
always said that there was nothing threatening. Nevertheless, be- 
cause some days had also passed since our return, but he had not 
yet seen his Eminence the Cardinal, nor therefore the Queen.1 I 
said that it would be good if he would not go and see the Cardinal 
at any random hour, but rather at an elected one! For Christ him- 
self, being warned by the Apostles, that He should not go to Jeru- 
salem on account of the Jews wanting to kill him, replied not with- 
out cause, "Are there not twelve hours in the day?"—namely, 
some safe, some lucky, and others dangerous or unlucky." 
Consequently, if he would let me elect an appropriate hour that 
would be favorable, I elected the following hour, in which the sign 
of the 10th of the radix2 was ascending, and its ruler Venus applies 
to the Moon3 which was powerful and the Ruler of the MC. More- 
over the 10th house, which is the House of Dignities, is very fortu- 
nate. For the Sun and Jupiter, which were significators of honors in 
the 4th of the radix, were in the 10th itself—the Sun in its own do- 
micile, and Jupiter exalted. Moreover, Mercury the Ruler of the 
MC of the radix was with the Heart of Leo on the cusp of the 11 th.4 
Mars ruler of the 7th was sextile the Sun and trine the ASC. More- 
over, the Moon and Venus were sextile the Part of Fortune, which 
was found in the place of the radical Moon. And although the Sun 
was square Saturn (for we cannot have everything the way we 
would like), nevertheless the Sun was in the 10th and 
strong—namely, in its own sign. 
'Cardinal Mazarin actually controlled access to the Queen. 
229'T1P was on the cusp of the Count's MC, but most of the house was occupied by 
the sign 
3Actually, the Moon is separating from Venus and applying to the MC. 
""This was the fixed star Regulus or a Leonis, which was in 24^23 at the time of 
the Count's birth. 
92 

===== PAGE 101 =====

Whence I dared to assert that if he would visit the Cardinal in 
that hour—the 1 Oth house being so favorable—I could not per- 
suade myself that he would not be received favorably, and that 
there would then be nothing to fear. And certainly the matter 
turned out like that. 
[Figure of the Election of a Time from just the Figure of a Nativity] 
[In the 11th House it should be Mercury in 25 Leo, not Venus.] 
[Set for Fontainebleau, France 8 August 1646 at 10:00 AM] 
For by my warning on the day before, he went to Fontainebleau 
and by night lest he be seen. Then on the following morning at the 
elected hour he visited the Cardinal with fortunate results, by 
whose company he was received, and at lunch he was taken to the 
Queen, by whom he was also well received. In the hour of the 
Council he was ordered to take his seat in his second Ministry. 
And not in these things indeed did he need to employ the work of a 
Magnate, in which matter he was priding himself, not without ad- 
miration. 
I could introduce many other Elections here from my own prac- 
tices and those of others that have met with outstanding and hoped 
Figura Flcdionis Tcmpons ex Ibla genefis Figura. 
93 

===== PAGE 102 =====

for success. But (as is plain) it would be too long to explain them; 
and consequently, let those shown above suffice. And here we 
shall bring to an end our Theory of Astrology [dedicated] to the 
honor and glory of the Eternal Wisdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
who made the Heaven and the Earth and enriched the heavenly 
bodies with admirable virtues. And let there be eternal Praise, Vir- 
tue, and Glory to Him. Amen. 
THE END 
94 

===== PAGE 103 =====

APPENDIX 1 
The time used in all of the charts in Book 26 is Local Apparent 
Time (LAT). To assist the reader who may want to recalculate 
some of the charts, I have prepared a table of the Equation of Time 
for the year 1625. That year is approximately in the middle of the 
time period spanned by the charts. The Equation of Time changes 
slowly from year to year, but the table shown below is sufficiently 
accurate for dates within 75 years or more before or after 1625. 
The argument of the table is the true longitude of the Sun. To 
find the value of the Equation of Time locate the solar longitude 
that is just before the longitude of the Sun and the one just after; 
these are at 5 degree intervals. Interpolate these two values to get 
the value for an intermediate longitude. Once found, the Equation 
of Time can be rounded off to the nearest whole minute. 
Table of the Equation of Time for the Year 1625 
Sun Eq.T Sun EqT Sun EqT Sun Eq.T 
0 +7.7 90 +0.9 180 -7.7 270 -0.9 
5 +6.1 95 +2.0 185 -9.4 275 +1.6 
10 +4.5 100 +3.0 190 -11.0 280 +4.0 
15 +2.9 105 +4.0 195 -12.4 285 +6.3 
20 +1.4 110 +4.8 200 -13.7 290 +8.4 
25 -0.0 115 +5.3 205 -14.7 295 + 10.2 
30 -1.3 120 +5.6 210 -15.4 300 +11.8 
35 -2.3 125 +5.7 215 -15.9 305 +13.1 
40 -3.2 130 +5.5 220 -16.1 310 +14.1 
45 -3.8 135 +5.0 225 -15.9 315 +14.7 
95 

===== PAGE 104 =====

50 -4.2 140 +4.3 230 -15.4 
55 -4.3 145 +3.3 235 -14.5 
60 -4.1 150 +2.1 240 -13.3 
65 -3.7 155 +0.7 245 -11.8 
70 -3.1 160 -0.8 250 -10.0 
75 -2.3 165 -2.5 255 -7.9 
80 -1.3 170 -4.2 260 -5.7 
85 -0.2 175 -5.9 265 -3.3 
90 +0.9 180 -7.7 270 -0.9 
320 +15.0 
325 +14.9 
330 +14.6 
335 +13.9 
340 +13.0 
345 +11.9 
350 +10.6 
355 +9.2 
360 +7.7 
LMT = LAT + Equation of Time 
LAT = LMT - Equation of Time 
Suppose for example that the Sun in a chart is in 23° 19' of Scor- 
pio. This is equivalent to 233° 19' or 233.3° to the nearest tenth of a 
degree. Looking in the table, we find for 230° that the Equation of 
Time has the value -15.4, and for 235° the value is -14.5. The dif- 
ference is 0.9 and it is decreasing. We want 3.3/5 or 0.67 of that 
difference; it will be 0.67 X 0.9 or O.6., so we subtract that amount 
from the figure for 230°, and we have -15.4 reduced by 0.6 or 
-14.8. That is the value in minutes and tenths of a minute. We can 
round it off, and we will say that the approximate value of the 
Equation of Time is 15 minutes. Then, if the stated time was 6:05 
AM LAT, the equivalent LMT will be 6:05 AM -0:15 or 5:50 AM 
LMT. 
96 

===== PAGE 105 =====

Index of Persons 
""Ali ibn abi al-Rijal, astrologer 5,8,9,11,15,16,19,20,27,28,51,52 
Al-Kindi, Abu Yusuf, science writer 15n.2,101 
Angelis, Alexander de, cleric 61,66,101 
Arabs, astrologers 3,5,6,9,11,14-20,20-30,31-32 
Bourdin, Nicolas, Marquis de Villennes 58n. 1,101 
Bishops 72 
Bouthillier, Leon, Count of Chavigny {See Chavigny) 
Carmody, Francis, scholar 101 
Cardan, Jerome, astrologer 5,38-43,49,55,66-69, 101 
Ceresario, Paride, astrologer 68 
Chaldeans, astrologers 16,32 
Chancellors 72 
Chavigny, Leon de Bouthillier, Count 78,79,80,87,89 
Chief Officers 72 
Christians 33,34 
Cicero, Marcus Tullius, writer xi 
Coley, Henry, astrologer 101 
Commanders 59 
Devil vii,31,32,33,37,45 
Dorotheus, astrologer 19 
Duliris, P. Leonardo, scholar 85 
Elizabeth, Biblical character 64 
Famese, Alessandro, Pope Paul III 68n. 1 
97 

===== PAGE 106 =====

Firmicus Matemus, Julius, astrologer vii,3n.l 
Fromm, professor of mathematics 85 
Gauls 6 
Generals 41,42,72 
Germans 36 
God 20,31,32,43,55,60,77 
Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden 58 
Haly {See "All ibn abi al-Rijal) 
Hermes Trismegistus, astrologer 8,9,15,22,102 
Irvtians, astrologers 3,7,8,14,32 
Jesus Christ 94 
Kidd, Douglas Alexander, lexicographer hi, 102 
King of China 
King of France 38,56 
Kings 41,42,43,44,49,57,58,59 
Liechtenstein, VqXqx, publisher 15n.2,103 
Lilly, William, astrologer ix,102 
Louis XII, King of France 91n.l 
Luke, Gospel writer 64 
Magnates 17,57,58,68,72,77,93 
Maria Giacopo, astrologer 68 
Mashifallah, astrologer 17n. 1 
Mazarin, Jules, Cardinal 78,91,92n.l 
Messahala {See Mash^allah) 
Ministers 57,59,87 
Morin, Jean Baptiste, astrologer vii,viii,ix,x,xi,xii,102,103 
Omar Tiberiades, astrologer 6-8,103 
Oriental Peoples, astrologers 14,31 
Partridge & Blunden, publishers ix, 102 
Plenipotentiaries 81 
Pontano, Giovanni, astrologer 14,103 
98 

===== PAGE 107 =====

Prime Ministers 57,59,81 
Princes 42,49,52,56,57,58,68,72,81 
Ptolemy, Claudius, science writer vii,ixn.l,3,5,6,7,24n.l,25, 
32n.3,39,47n.l,58n.l 
Queen of France (Anne of Austria) 91n.2 
Queens 72,77 
Ratdolt, Exhdjd, publisher 101 
Schoner, Johann, astrologer 70,71 
Sforza, Ludovico, Duke of Milan 55 
Spaniards 36 
Thorndike, Lynn, historian 68n. 1,103 
Tooke & Sawbridge, publishers 15n. 1,102 
Vlacq, publisher 103 
Virgin Mary 64 
Vuellius (See Vettius Valens) 
Vettius Valens, astrologer 8n.l,29n.l,103 
99 

===== PAGE 108 =====

Bibliography. 
<Ali ibn abi al-Rijal, Abu'l Hasan 
Liber completus de iudiciis astrorum. 
Venice: Erhard Ratdolt, 1485. 
Al-Kindi 
De iudiciis astrorum 
[The Judgments of the Stars] 
Venice: Peter Liechtenstein, 1509. 
Angelis, Alexander de 
In Astrologos coniectores. 
(Conjectures against the Astrologers] 
Lyons: H. Cardon, 1615. 4to xxviii,351,xxxi pp. 
Rome: B. Zanetti, 1615. 2nd ed. 4to 
Bourdin, Nicolas, Marquis de Villennes 
Le Centilogve de Ptolomee. 
Paris: Cardin Besongne, 1651. 
Cardan, Jerome 
Opera Omnia 
Lyons: Huguetan & Ravaud, 1663. 10 vols. 
New York & London: Johnson Reprint, 1967. 10 vols. 
Carmody, Francis J. 
Arabic astronomical and astrological Sciences 
in Latin Translation. 
Berekeley & Los Angeles: Univ. of California Press, 1956. 
101 

===== PAGE 109 =====

Coley, Henry 
Clavis Astrologiae Elimata. 
London: Tooke & Sawbridge, 1676. 
Hermes 
Centiloquy. 
translated by James Herschel Holden in 
Five Medieval Astrologers. 
Tempe, Az.; A.F.A., Inc., 2008. 
Holden, James Herschel (translator) 
Five Medieval Astrologers. 
Tempe. Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2008. 
A History of Horoscopic Astrology 
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 1996. 1st ed. 
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2006.2nd rev ed 
Kidd, Douglas Alexander 
Collins Latin-English English-Latin Dictionary. 
London & Glasgow: Collins, 1972. 
Lilly, William 
Christian Astrology, Modestly 
Treated of in three Books. 
London: John Partridge and Humphrey Blunden, 1647. 
Lull, Ramon 
Book Explaining the Elemental Figures of the Demonstrative 
Art. 
Morin, Jean Baptiste 
Astrologicarum domorum cabala detecta a Joanne Baptista 
Morino. 
Paris: J. Moreau, 1623. 
Remarques Astrologiques. 
102 

===== PAGE 110 =====

Paris: P. Menard, 1657. 
Paris: Retz, 1976. repr. 
Astrologica Gallica. 
The Hague: A. Vlacq, 1661. 
Omar Tiberiades 
De nativitatibus. 
trans, by John of Seville 
Venice: Sessa, 1503. 
Pontano, Giovanni Gioviano 
Centiloquium. 
Venice, 1503. 
Thomdike, Lynn 
A History of Magic and Experimental Science (HMES) 
New York: Columbia University Press, 1923-1958. 8 vols. 
Various Authors 
Liber novem iudicium. 
The Book of Nine Judges. 
Venice: Peter Liechtenstein, 1509. 
Vettius Valens 
Anthologiae. 
ed. D. Pingree 
Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1986. 
103