===== PAGE 1 =====

ASTROLOGIA GALLICA 
Book Sixteen 
The Rays and Aspects of the Stars 

===== PAGE 2 =====

Jean-Baptiste Morin 
Astrologia Gallica 
Book Sixteen 
The Rays and Aspects of the 
Planets 
Translated from the Latin 
By 
James Herschel Holden, M.A. 
Fellow of the 
American Federation of Astrologers 

===== PAGE 3 =====

This book is for All Students 
Of the Morin Method. 
in 

===== PAGE 4 =====

Contents 
Translator's Preface ix 
Book Sixteen 
Preface 3 
Section I. 
Chapter 1. The Difference between a Ray and an Aspect; 3 
and the Various Opinions on that as to their Effect on 
Sublunar things 
Chapter 2. In which the Doctrine of Jofrancus Offusius, 4 
the German, On the rays of the Stars is set forth; and 
what it is Asserted Should be Judged about it 
Chapter 3. What is an Aspect among Astrologers; and 10 
What does its Formal Reason Consist of in General 
Chapter 4. How many Astrological Aspects there are; and 14 
what are the Quantities of each one; then, which ones 
are Simple and which ones are Mixed 
Chapter 5. Whether the Aspects of the Planets should be 22 
Established for the Mean Places of those Planets; or for 
the True Places as seen by the eye, or for the True Places 
at the Center of the Earth 
Chapter 6. In which Great Circle the real Aspects of the 23 
Planets should first be Conceived According to Ptolemy 
and Cardan, and a Refutation of their [Opinions] 
Chapter 7. Giovanni Bianchini's and Cyprian Leowitz's 27 
Opinions on that same Matter, and a Refutation of 
[their Opinions] 
v 

===== PAGE 5 =====

Chapter 8. John Regiomontanus's Opinion on this Matter, 31 
and a Reftitation of it 
Chapter 9. In what Great Circle the Aspects of the Planets 
must be conceived to be according to the Truth of the 
Matter 
Translator's Comment 
Chapter 10. The Benefic and Malefic Nature of the 
Aspects and what the Cause of both of them is. And then, 
which Aspects are Benefic and Which are Malefic 
Chapter 11. Whether the Astrological Aspects differ in 
kind among themselves 
Chapter 12. The Cause of the Astrological Aspects 
Chapter 13. The Orb of Virtue of the Stars, and the 
Semidiameter of that Orb for the Planets and the Fixed 
[Stars]. A new and true Doctrine for the Recognition 
of the Aspects 
Chapter 14. The Partile and Platic Aspects of the Planets; 
then the Dexter and Sinister Aspects 
Chapter 15. The Antiscions of the Planets 
Chapter 16. How the Usual way of Speaking about 
Aspects and Antiscions must be Successively Reshaped, 
or at least Understood 
Chapter 17. Whether one Planet Aspecting another, or 
Located in its Antiscion, Transmits to it its own Nature 
and Virtue and that of the sign that it Occupies 
Chapter 18. What Objections have been made by Pico 
Mirandola, Alexander de Angelis, and the rest against 
the Aspects of the Planets. And first, those by Pico 
Chapter 19. Those Objections made by Alexander de Angelis 
Chapter 20. Those Objections that are made by Plotinus 
and Marsilio Ficino 
35 
55 
57 
69 
71 
72 
78 
81 
86 
87 
90 
98 
102 
vi 

===== PAGE 6 =====

Chapter 21. The Mutual Aspects of the Planets and the 104 
fixed Stars 
Section II. The Applications and Separations 
of the Planets. And also the Translation and 
Abscission of their virtue, etc. 
Chapter 1. What an Application and a Separation are, and 105 
to which Planets they are properly Appropriate 
Chapter 2. The Modes and the Effects of the Simple 110 
Applications and Separations of the Planets 
among themselves 
Chapter 3. The Modes and Effects of the Combined 115 
Applications and Separations of the Planets among 
themselves 
Chapter 4. The Doryphory of the Planets or their Attendance 122 
Section III. Planets Combust by the Sun. 
Chapter 1. Why a Planet is Combust by the Sun 125 
Chapter 2. Every Planet is always Somewhere: in the 126 
Heart of the Sun, Combust, or Under the Sun Beams; 
or rather, the Aspects of the Planets with Respect to the 
Earth are often burnt up 
Chapter 3. Whether Combust Planets are of no Virtue [for 127 
acting] on these Inferior things, as the Ancients thought 
Chapter 4. [There is no Chapter 4] 
Chapter 5. Reasons against the Opinions of the Ancients 130 
Chapter 6. Experiences against the Opinions of the Ancients 136 
Chapter 7. In which Lucio Bellantio's Reasons for the 139 
Opinion of the Ancients are discarded 
Index of Persons 143 
Bibliography 145 
vii 

===== PAGE 7 =====

Translator's Preface 
In this Book, Morin begins the lengthy Section I by discussing 
rays emitted by the Planets, how they differ from aspects, and 
how they form aspects at various angles. He points out that if the 
latitude of the Planets is taken into account, the exact length of its 
aspects will vary. He then rehearses at considerable length the 
opinions of previous astrologers on this matter,1 and he explains 
with diagrams and accompanying trigonometric detail how they 
calculated small corrections to the aspects. But as usual he dis- 
agrees with most of them. Finally, he explains what he believes to 
be the correct way to calculate the variations in the lengths of the 
aspects. 
The reason for varying the length of the aspects from their usual 
figures of 30°, 60°, etc. is that if a Planet has latitude, then a right 
triangle is established with the Planet slightly above or below the 
ecliptic (due to its latitude), and the nominal aspect distance is 
measured along an arc from the Planet's body to a point on the 
ecliptic, rather than from the Planet's ecliptical position to another 
point on the ecliptic. It is easy to see that there will thus be a small 
difference in the longitude of the aspect point. 
'These discussions are now of mainly historical interest since most of the earlier 
authorities' books (and even the authorities themselves) are unknown to 21st 
century astrologers. However, in Morin's day their books were still being read 
and their opinions discussed, so he felt obliged to mention them, lest he be ac- 
cused of ignoring "authorities." The astute reader will, however, notice that the 
critics of 500 years ago did have some technical knowledge of astrology, in con- 
trast to the 21 st centjry critics who know absolutely nothing about it but who sol- 
emnly declare that it cannot possible work. 
ix 

===== PAGE 8 =====

The reader who is not interested in the details of all the mathe- 
matical calculations, may skip these abstruse explanations and 
proceed to the "Translator's Comment" following Chapter 9. 
There, I have set forth Morin's own theory in (I hope) an easily un- 
derstood manner. 
In Chapter 10 he states which aspects are benefic and which are 
malefic, and he explains why. Three topics of particular astrologi- 
cal interest are then discussed. 
In Chapter 13, he sets forth what he believes to be a rational the- 
ory of orbs. He bases the extent of the orbs on the ability of the 
Planet to be seen when the Sun is at a definite distance below the 
horizon. This in effect relates the orb of a Planet to its apparent 
brightness in the sky (or its visual magnitude, as the astronomers 
call it). And he concludes by specifying a definite orb for each 
Planet. Interestingly, he allows Venus an orb of 13 degrees, or 1 
degree more than the Moon's 12 degrees. 
In Chapter 14 he defines partite and platic aspects and dexter 
and sinister aspects. 
After that, in Chapter 15, Morin takes up the topic of antiscions. 
He begins by stating that the older astrologers simply reckoned an 
antiscion as being that point of equal distance from the nearest sol- 
stice, but on the opposite side from a Planet. Then he considers 
what effect the latitude of the Planet might have on the precise lo- 
cation of its antiscion point. And he finally adopts the idea of find- 
ing a point on the ecliptic that has the same declination as the 
Planet. That causes the simple antiscion point to be shifted to one 
side or the other. It is thus a sort of half-way house between what 
we might call the classical antiscion and the modem adoption of 
parallels of declination as a sort of aspect without any reference to 
antiscions. 
And to close Section I, Morin talks about whether the fixed stars 
cast aspects among themselves, and whether they cast aspects to 
the Planets and to points in the astrological chart. 
x 

===== PAGE 9 =====

In Section II, Morin explains that aspects that are not exact can 
be classified as forming or passing away, and that leads to defini- 
tions of applications and separations and a discussion of their va- 
rieties along with some examples, after which he passes to other 
types of aspects. Finally, he discusses doryphories. 
The topic of combustion is discussed in detail in Section III. 
Morin disagrees with some of the traditional interpretations of 
combustion. 
Unlike the majority of astrological writers, Morin does not sim- 
ply enunciate a rule or an opinion, but he gives an explanation of 
why he believes it to be valid. 
In order to make my translation of Morin's text easier to com- 
prehend, I have italicized a number of technical terms. And I have 
broken up some of his long sentences into shorter ones. I have also 
subdivided the text into paragraphs, and I have also added some 
words to the translation, since Morin sometimes speaks rather 
shortly, especially towards the ends of sentences. And I have 
added some footnotes either to clarify the text or to provide my 
own comments. 
In converting 17th century French money into current U.S. Dol- 
lars, in my earlier translations from the Astrologia Gallica, I as- 
sumed that in the 17th century the French livre (which literally 
means "pound") was still equivalent to a troy pound of silver, and I 
used the price of silver at $5.20 per troy pound to arrive at a value 
of the livre = $62.50. However, I have recently found that by 1760 
the livre had been greatly depreciated and was equivalent to only 
about 0.15 troy ounce of silver. So my earlier valuations of the 
livre were not very accurate. 
I have been unable to discover the silver equivalent of the livre 
in say 1650, when Morin wrote, but in this translation I shall as- 
sume that it was equivalent to 0.5 troy ounce. At the present price 
of silver at $12.50 per troy ounce, the 1650 livre may therefore 
have been equivalent to $6.25, but since the equation 1 livre = 0.5 
xi 

===== PAGE 10 =====

troy ounce is a guess, 1 livre = $6.25 may be too high. 
Note; by the date of publication, the price of silver had risen to a 
range of $ 16 to $ 18 per troy ounce, so the estimated current values 
of money amounts in French livres that are mentioned in the trans- 
lation (based upon 1 livre=$6.25) should be increased by at least a 
third to reflect an estimated conversion rate of 1 livre = $8.35. 
James Herschel Holden 
December 2006 
XI i 

===== PAGE 11 =====

Preface 
The doctrine of the aspects is the principal and most subtle one 
of all astrology. That is, that the planets alter these sublunar 
things diversely according to the diverse aspects among them- 
selves and to the angles of the horizon and the MC. Moreover, as- 
trologers differ very much about this among themselves. Both as to 
the number of aspects, and as to the celestial circle in which they 
must be understood to exist, and as to the reasons that have been 
thought up for the lengths of the individual aspects, as well as why 
some are benefic but others are malefic. Concerning which, it is 
all set forth uncommonly well in this book. 
Section I. 
Chapter 1. The Difference between a Ray and an Aspect; 
and the Various Opinions on that as to their 
Effect on Sublunar things. 
The rays and the aspects of the planets differ among them- 
selves, such as simple and complex things; namely because a ray is 
only and simply an outpouring of its virtue by some star in a 
straight line, as we have said in Book 11, Section I, Chapter 3. But 
an aspect consists of two rays, emitted by two stars, and [actually] 
seen, or at least they come together in a single line, passed recipro- 
cally from one star to the other, as if those stars were looking at 
each other, or as they constitute an angle in the center of the Earth 
or the World, as if by lines passed by both stars to the center of the 
World, as if they were seeing that angle. 
3 

===== PAGE 12 =====

Moreover there have been different opinions about rays and 
aspects. If indeed Jofrancus Offusius [c.1500-c.1565], a man of 
subtle intellect, in his Book on the Divine Faculty of the Stars 
against a Decadent (as he calls it) Astrology? only considers the 
rays, either just as they simply and solitarily pour forth upon 
these inferior things, or, just as brought forth from two stars, they 
are brought together in a single line; and he makes these to be es- 
pecially potent causes of changes in sublunar things. But he does 
not notice aspects as an angle that they make at the center of the 
Earth; indeed, he rejects [that concept]. But on the contrary, Kep- 
ler approves these same aspects; and he thinks them to be causes 
of alterations. Moreover, aspects between the planets proved by 
Offusius—and he did not reject them—were occurring at the cen- 
ter of the Earth. 
Besides, among the Old Astrologers and Kepler, there is still a 
great dissension about their number and effectiveness, or their 
method of producing astrological effects, which he judged must be 
almost solely retained, [as he says] in the New Star, Book I, 
Chapter 2, but almost all of the rest of the astrological technical 
tools must be eliminated. However, these individual items will be 
commited to examination by us, but we will begin with Offusius's 
doctrine. 
Chapter 2. In which the Doctrine of Jofrancus Offusius, 
the German, On the Rays of the Stars is set forth; 
and what it is asserted should be Judged about it. 
Offusius contemplated a very subtle philosophy about the ef- 
fects of the stars and one not entirely alien to reason, while he en- 
deavored in vain to overturn the astrology of Ptolemy and the an- 
cients. That is, he only considers the distances of the stars from the 
Earth, then their altitudes, and the length of time they stay above 
xDe divina astrorum facultate facultate in larvatam astrologiam 'On the Divine 
Power of the Stars Against a Bewitched Astrology' (Paris, 1570). 
2De Stella nova in pede Serpentarii... [The New Star in the Foot of Ophiuchus...] 
Prague: Paul Sessius, 1606. 
4 

===== PAGE 13 =====

the horizon, from which he judges about the force and power of the 
simple ray of any planet on these inferior things, and in addition he 
speculates on the mixtures and reflections of the simple rays. From 
all of which, he busies himself with ingeniously deducing at least 
the sublunar alterations, having added some tables of these along 
with the fundamentals. And here it remains for us to deal with 
Offusius's [opinions] about the mixtures and reflections, for that 
which should be understood about the rest of the matters we have 
already stated in Book 8, Section I, Chapter 3. 
And so in Chapter 10 of his book, Offusius will have the stars 
by their rays to pour on light, heat, and what they call occult qual- 
ities on sublunar and corruptible material and to mix their rays, 
not indeed all of them, but those rays of the two brighter celestial 
bodies that are the only miscible ones, with which those Lights' 
affect themselves reciprocally, and which are united in a useless 
right line drawn from one Light to the other, or rather in one ra- 
dial column intercepted by lines tangent to the bodies of the 
Lights. And by this mixture to alter themselves in turn, mean- 
while with the Light as the source of the ray allowing nothing, 
and a mixed virtue to be compounded from that, which if that col- 
umn falls upon a region or a corruptible material, it alters it in ac- 
cordance with the nature and strength of the mixture, but at least 
it frustrates its own effect. However, the force of the rest of those 
rays emitted by the Lights and intersecting each other are cut off 
and not mixed. 
And consequently, in the following figure from his Chapter 18, 
let the Earth be LA, whose center is M, the outermost surface of 
the air is B, the Sun in the Ether at D, and the Moon in her own or- 
bit at E. 
'That is, the Sun and the Moon. 
5 

===== PAGE 14 =====

Offusius will have the common ray DE frustrating its own ef- 
fect, due to its declining nature, corruptible in the Ether, as he 
judges, but with the Moon coming to the Sun at F, G, and H, and 
with common rays DC, DB, and DA, pervading the regions of the 
elements to alter individual ones of these, until when the Moon 
herself is revolved around to I, the common ray DN abandons the 
elemental region. And that which is said here about the union of 
the rays with respect to the conjunction of the Sun and the Moon, 
is to be understood similarly about their opposition, with the 
Moon revolved around to O, P, Q, R, S, as well as to conjunctions 
and oppositions with the rest of the planets; but the rays of the 
Sun and the Moon, DL and EL, that are coming to the surface of 
the Earth and intersecting each other, are not united, but their 
force is cut off. 
And besides, in Chapter 10 he will have it that if a star is found 
diametrically between the centers of both of the Lights (as in line 
DP), the Earth by its own opacity will impede the union and mix- 
ture of the rays, especially if one of the Lights or the other is 
smaller than the Earth; but if the rays of both of the Lights only 
graze the surface, then a very robust and efficacious union is made. 
6 

===== PAGE 15 =====

With regard to this doctrine, I confess in the first place that there 
is a force in such a mixture of the rays that should by no means be 
spumed for [its effect] on the daily alterations of the heat, cold, hu- 
midity, and dryness of these inferior things, which alone Offusius 
has deduced from them and says that he has observed. Indeed, I 
think that if there is in the Ether any material suitable for generat- 
ing a comet,1 that is intercepted by the column of rays, it can be in- 
flamed, especially with the Sun or Mars coming together. For light 
and heat and cold by their act cast their own rays on the circle ev- 
erywhere, and through them they act, and everywhere they touch 
material alterable in those qualities; and it seems to me that this 
should be noted as the efficient cause of comets; but there is no in- 
fluential force in that column, unless it turns those things toward 
the Earth or the center of the World, according to Book 7, Section 
2, chapter 7. 
Finally, Offusius errs in asserting that the Earth placed diamet- 
rically between both of the Lights impedes the union and mixture 
of their rays, and consequently their effect, as is confirmed in 
Chapter 14. For even if this should be true about the rays of light, 
heat, and cold, as is well known, it is yet false about the rays of 
their influences, which penetrate the whole body of the Earth ac- 
cording to Book 7, Section 2, Chapter 7, which Offusius did not 
know about. 
Besides, he is wrong again when he says that the force of the 
rays DL and EL, intersecting on L the surface of the Earth, are cut 
off and do nothing. For thus it would follow that the Sun D does 
not heat the Earth by the ray DL, nor does the Moon E cool and hu- 
midify the same part L by its ray EL, which no one of sound mind 
has said, and which is contrary to Offusius's doctrine about the 
simple rays. Moreover, with the Sun and the Moon acting on that 
same part L of the Earth, it is necessary that a mixture of the rays be 
made there, especially since there the rays, at least those of heat 
1 This refers to the old belief that comets were generated by configurations of the 
Planets. They were later discovered to be independent celestial bodies. 
7 

===== PAGE 16 =====

and cold, are for the most part situated at the meeting of earthly 
density. Indeed, any other material in the air or the Ether can be al- 
tered by similar rays, but not very strongly as by the above said 
column of rays. And this [is what can be said] about the mixture of 
rays. 
But as for that which looks at their reflections, Offusius has 
these three principles. First, that for the star whose center is on the 
horizontal axis, its ray is very strongly reflected back upon itself; 
and consequently in the place on Earth from which it is reflected, it 
makes the greatest alteration that it is able to make. Second, that if 
two stars of unequal mass were centrally conjoined on the horizon- 
tal axis, and tangent lines are around each of the two globes, and 
those end conically at the same point on Earth; then a reflection 
that is reciprocal and of the greatest virtue is made by tangent lines, 
and great effects occur on the reflecting part of the Earth, and then 
in the conical space enclosed by the tangent lines. Third, that if two 
stars launch their oblique rays (which for that reason are reflected 
into the air) onto any part of the Earth, and the rays of the reflection 
are reciprocally mixed together, and they are united by the rays of 
that occurrence; then that mixture of the rays will be very 
powerful. 
And I similarly concede those things, especially for the light, 
which, since it does not penetrate the Earth and opaque bodies, is 
suitable for reflection to an immense distance before its other qual- 
ities, [but] less for heat, the greater part of which does at least pene- 
trate dense bodies. But least of all [do I concede it] for the influ- 
ences, which penetrate the whole globe of the Earth. 
Besides, how difficult and crippled that astrology of Offusius 
is, will be plain from this. First, because he supposes the elemental 
forces of the stars, their semi-diameters and their distances from 
the Earth to be exactly known at any particular time, then many 
other things that are scarcely possible to know, so that it may be 
known at what hour a superior column of rays will touch the sur- 
face of the air or the Earth, and what alteration is going to be from 
8 

===== PAGE 17 =====

those. Second, because his hypotheses about the natures and quali- 
ties of the planets are erroneous and only fictitious, as are their ex- 
tension and remission. Third, that besides light, heat, and cold, he 
allows other occult qualities to be in those stars; and he does not 
offer anything about their effects or their mode of acting, indicat- 
ing his own ignorance about them - a man otherwise of outstand- 
ing and subtle intelligence. Fourth, that having made for himself 
an objection to the light of the Sun - that the Moon reflects it to us 
during the whole month of its visibility, although during the whole 
month the column of rays of the Sun and the Moon does not touch 
the Earth, he is obliged to declare that two things are distinguished 
in the rays of the stars - that is light and the beginnings of the qual- 
ities, namely of heat and cold, etc., and a kind of light that they ex- 
hibit indistinctly through some angle and communicate to us; but 
of the quality that the ray has secretly (he says), [it is 
distinguished] only by a reciprocal reflex and at a right angle from 
the Sun to the Moon. 
However, since in Chapter 16 it is ingeniously stated that mate- 
rial collected in the air is moved by two planets that are also occu- 
pying different angles of the figure, so that one is on the horizon 
and the other on the meridian, in which case [there is] a column of 
mixed rays, very distant from the air, the cause of which cannot be 
deduced from his own new astrology, and he declares that he can- 
not know that. Fifth, that in Chapter 10 against the virtues of the 
common aspects [accepted] among the astrologers he declares that 
he has nothing to say about the sextile, square, and trine [aspects]; 
indeed [being] convinced by the most evident effects of two plan- 
ets in square [aspect] in angles of the figure, and strongly agitating 
these inferior things, especially the air. 
Therefore, after it was said by us to what extent that astrology 
can produce, and how crippled and tedious it is with regard to the 
effects, both elemental and influential, of the astrological aspects 
from Offusius's own confession, yawning here, we now take up 
the task of dealing with things that are more worth hearing and 
more solid. 
9 

===== PAGE 18 =====

Chapter 3. What is an Aspect among Astrologers: 
and What does its Formal Reason Consist of in General. 
No one has dealt with the astrological aspects scientifically up 
till now, even thought the greater part of astrology is concerned 
with them, and various opinions have been introduced about them, 
and also no small difficulties, which we shall now try to discuss 
with the best of our ability. 
And so, by the name aspects, three things can be understood. 
First, a line or distance between two points or two stars of a partic- 
ular Caelum, or a star and a point on the Caelum taken together, as 
if these two were seeing each other by means of that line. Second, 
for a line emitted from any point on the Caelum or from a star to 
the Earth or a man, as if that point or star were viewing us by 
means of that line. Third, for the concourse of two lines to the 
Earth or the center of the World emanating from two celestial 
points or two Planets, or from one Planet and one point on the 
Caelum, in which signification alone the name of aspect is taken 
up among astrologers, with the other two previous ones discarded. 
For one Planet does not properly look at another, even though 
this manner of speaking is familiar to astrologers, but the rays of 
both of them to the Earth constitute an aspect properly said; and 
therefore aspects are to be conceived with respect to the Earth not 
to the Planets or to the individual points on the Caelum to which 
the rays from any Planet are conceived to be drawn. By which, the 
objections of Marsilio Ficino [1433-1499] to the astrological as- 
pects in Chapter 4 of Tractate 3 of the 2nd Enneads ofPlotinus col- 
lapse. 1 
And yet this third signification is not employed indiscrimi- 
nately; for any two lines or points on the Caelum drawn to the cen- 
ter of the World do not constitute an astrological aspect, but only 
'in the cited passage, Plotinus asks the question: "And why should there be any 
difference as a given star sees certain others from the comer of a triangle or in op- 
position or at the angle of a square? " (MacKenna's and Page's translation). 
10 

===== PAGE 19 =====

those that terminate at the Zodiac of the Primum Mobile—they cut 
off arcs, which are great circles divided into 12 equal portions 
comprising a part or parts, and they subtend similar angles at the 
Earth. 
And consequently, an astrological aspect can be defined gener- 
ally as A concourse of two celestial rays at the Earth or the center 
of the World, which, terminated in the Zodiac of the Primum Mo- 
bile, cut off an arc, of which great circles divided into 12 equal 
parts, contain a part or parts, and it subtends a similar angle at the 
Earth. Moreover, it is said that they are seen in the zodiac of the 
Primum Mobile because the places of the Planets and aspects are 
only seen by astronomers and astrologers in the Zodiac of the Pri- 
mum Mobile by reason of their longitude. 
And it is also said that they are great circles divided into 12 
equal portions on account of the reason that will be explained more 
conveniently in the next chapter. And that is why the conjunction 
of two stars in the same ray of the Primum Mobile is excluded by 
this definition, seen separately and without any relation to the 
other ray, because the ray seen thus is only the beginning of an as- 
pect, as the simple ray of one Planet, moreover the diametrical is 
not admitted to be an opposition, which would not be an aspect to 
their mind, since for the nature of each aspect they will have it to 
be made by rays of angles at the Earth. 
But so that the formal relation of aspect seen generally will be 
more plainly known, [in the following diagram] there are two di- 
ameters AC and BG1 in the Primum Mobile ABC, intersecting 
each other by right angles at the center D; and [the line] AB is 
drawn. 
'The Latin text has BC, but this is an error for BG. 
11 

===== PAGE 20 =====

B 
A C 
G 
It is generally admitted by astrologers that the points A & B are 
in square, and therefore the native receives the force of such a 
square; and it is asked in what [circumstance] does the relation for 
that square consist. For the right line AB is indeed not a square; 
from which it is clear, because the native receives something from 
that square, moreover that which he receives must be brought to 
him by some ray, since the celestial bodies only act by means of 
rays aiming at a subject experiencing them; but the line AB does 
not aim at the native; and consequently it brings nothing to him. 
But also neither is the arc AB, or the angle ADB that subtends 
it,1 seen simply and absolutely; for otherwise the virtue of the 
square would flourish in E, which is by our hypothesis distant 
from A by 60 degrees;2 however, where it is there is no force but 
that of the sextile aspect with A, which differs from a square by its 
nature; and nevertheless, the reason of the square aspect consists 
of the concourse of the rays AD and DB to the center of the World 
D, with the distance of the points A & B on the Primum Mobile 
'The angle ADB is a right angle. 
2In the figure, the point E appears to be 45° from A. However, Morin did not rec- 
ognize a 45° aspect, so perhaps the diagram is not drawn precisely, and he in- 
tended the point E to be 60° from A. 
12 

===== PAGE 21 =====

And because the center is always the same, but the distance of 
the rays on the Primum Mobile is variable; therefore, the thing that 
is important in the case of the square will depend upon that circular 
distance, or the similar angle that it subtends at the center D; but 
more or less distance, simply or absolutely seen, does not vary the 
kind [of aspect], since the sextile and the square nevertheless differ 
in kind and virtue, as will be shown in what follows. 
Therefore, the reason of the square will be principally seen ab- 
solutely by the distance, namely with respect to it, whose square is 
said to be a square; moreover, the square i s a squaring of the whole 
circle, either you see all angles at the center, or the area, or you see 
the periphery of the circle; therefore by the reason of the squaring 
to the whole circle or the angle that subtends it at the four right an- 
gles that are made in the center, the reason or the nature of the 
square can be absolutely defined. Therefore, from these [facts] it is 
manifest that the ray BD is a square aspect with respect to the ray 
AD, and the latter similarly with respect to the ray BD, insofar as 
both radii are distant by a quadrant of the circle, which arc em- 
braces three parts of the whole circle divided into 12 equal parts, 
and it subtends a similar angle at the center. 
Similarly, since between B & G, and also A & C, there is an op- 
position aspect; therefore, in the lines BG as well as AC there will 
be the reason of the opposition; and therefore the center, or the 
point D, only common to them, will be at least partly the reason of 
the opposition of the rays BD & CD going to the center; but espe- 
cially of the reason it will be the distance ABC embracing six parts 
of the whole circle, divided into 12 equal parts, or subtending two 
right angles at the center D; and so with the others. 
From which it is plain that as the elemental virtue of the Planets 
is spread out and returned with respect to us by a lesser or greater 
inclination of its own simple ray to the horizon; so, their influential 
virtue with respect to us undergoes a specific difference through 
the variation of the ratio of the distance of the rays to the whole cir- 
cle, or the angles intercepted by the rays to the four right angles. 
13 

===== PAGE 22 =====

Furthermore, although the conjunction of two Planets is no more 
said to be an aspect than is the ray of a single Planet, which posited in 
the ascending part of the Caelum is also said to be conjoined to the 
ASC, with that degree and the Planet influencing the native by one 
ray; nevertheless, the conjunction of Planets is commonly accus- 
tomed to be among the aspects or the syzygies; nevertheless, since 
from what was said above it is only the beginning of an aspect, as an 
isotone or a unitone is the beginning of consonances. 
Chapter 4. How many Astrological Aspects there are, 
and what is the Quantity of the Distance of each one: 
Then, which ones are simple and which ones are mixed. 
The astrologers had various opinions about the number of as- 
pects. For Ptolemy, whom the rest of the astrologers commonly 
follow, besides the conjunction, enumerates only four aspects, the 
sextile, and the square, the trine, and the opposition. But Cardan 
[1501-1576] in his Commentary^ even states that these aspects suf- 
fice; nevertheless, not being consistent [in this], in his reckoning of 
critical days he admits the octant,2 or a figure of 8 equal sides, 
along with Naibod [1527-1593] and Magini [1555-1617]. 
But the author of the Centiloquy, which by many is falsely at- 
tributed to Ptolemy, along with Lucio Bellantio,3 Pontano,4 
Giuntini,5 and others, wants a figure of 16 equal sides to be ob- 
served in the case of illnesses; since, however, Galen, On Critical 
'Jerome Cardan, Claudii Ptolemaei Pelusiensis libri quatuor/ De astrorum 
iudiciis cum exposition Hieronymi Cardani. [Claudius Ptolemy Pelusiensis Four 
books/ On the Judgments of the Stars with Jerome Cardan's Commentary] in vol. 
5 of Cardan's Opera Omnia (Lyons: Huguetan & Ravaud, 1662. 10 vols.; Lon- 
don: Johnson Reprint, 1967). Cited herein as Cardan's Commentary. 
2To make what we call the semi-square. 
3Lucio Bellantio, M.D. (d. 1499), De astrologia verilate 'The Truth of Astrol- 
ogy' (Florence, 1498). 
4Giovanni Gioviano Pontano (1426-1503), De rebus coelestibus 'Celestial Mat- 
ters' (Basel, 1530). 
'Francesco Giuntini, Th.D. (1522-1590?), Speculum Astrologiae 'Mirror of As- 
trology' (Lyons, 1573. 2 vols. folio). He is more commonly known under his 
Latin name, Junctinus. 
14 

===== PAGE 23 =====

Days, Book 3, will have it that only Ptolemy's aspects must be 
observed in acute illnesses. And only that nature cannot admit a 
diverse division of aspects. I say nothing here about Maestlin1 
and Kepler, who have introduced many other merely fictitious 
aspects. 
Ignorance of the origin or the foundation of aspects has pro- 
duced these various opinions because that it what it is. Since the 
true places of the planets affecting us are seen, not in the proper 
orbit of each Planet, but in a great circle of the Primum Mobile, 
under which they are seen to move; and the Planet's place has it- 
self as the physical point of that circle, but a particular point on a 
great circle of the sphere has its being from a pole of that circle, 
even as that whole circle, and an essential connection with it, as 
was shown elsewhere; therefore, if from such a point of the circle 
to its pole there is drawn another circle of that connection, it will 
be reciprocally one pole of a circle in another circle, and if both 
poles calling upon and claiming another connection, are con- 
nected to a third circle, that is made from a third pole, and then 
any circle will be cut at four points, anyone of which will possess 
the virtues of the three poles, namely because it will possess 
whatever is [the virtue] of the third pole, and it has its own being 
from the other two poles. 
If therefore, any one of these four points of the same circle 
will be multiplied by the three-fold virtue of each of them, they 
will produce either 12 virtues or 12 points dividing the circle; 
whence it is plain that by some necessary relationship any point 
in a great circle of the sphere, designates and determines an- 
other 11 points and no more in that same circle of the Primum 
Mobile, which is the prime physical cause determinable wholly 
and everywhere. 
And this is the origin of the astrological aspects; in general the 
same or a very similar origin of the 12 signs of the zodiac, which 
'Michael Maestlin (1550-1631), German astronomer. I do not know to which of 
his works Morin refers. 
15 

===== PAGE 24 =====

are treated in Book 14,1 Section I, Chapter 4, and then the origin of 
the 12 houses of the celestial figure, which will be treated in Book 
17, which are individually reduced to the same beginning, of 
course very refined and very simple, as are all first principles. 
Consequently, twelve divisions are made from that division of 
the circle, neither more, nor fewer than 12 aspects, namely be- 
cause the individual points of division are powerful in their virtue 
from what was said above; and therefore it is alien to reason to re- 
ject any one of them, since all of the individuals are equal in 
this—that they have a natural origin—but the points dividing the 
circle into 8 or 16 parts do not, for those parts are merely ficti- 
tious and arbitrary.2 
Moreover, these aspects will be a conjunction (although it is not 
properly an aspect, but the beginning of one) two semi-sextiles3 
that is a dexter and a sinister one, each of which is distant from the 
place of the conjunction by the twelfth part of a circle, or 30 de- 
grees, which are said to be the quantities of the distance of this as- 
pect; two sextiles, of which the quantity of the distance from the 
place of the conjunction is the sixth part of a circle, or 60 degrees; 
two squares, of which the quantity of their distance is the fourth 
part of a circle, or 90 degrees; two trines, of which the quantity of 
their distance is the third part of a circle, or 120 degrees; two quin- 
cunxes, of which the quantity of the distance from the place of the 
conjunction is 5/12 part of a circle, or 150 degrees; and the opposi- 
tion of which the quantity of the distance from the place of the con- 
junction is half a circle, or 180 degrees, all of whose symbols are 
put here with their proper significations: 
See Astrologia Gallica, Books Thirteen, Fourteen. Fifteen, and Nineteen trans- 
lated by James Herschel Holden (Tempe, Az.; A.F.A., Inc., 2006). 
2Again Morin rejects the semi-square of 45° and its half of 22.5° as aspects. 
3This aspect is consistently called dodectile by Morin, but I have translated it by 
its modem name. 
16 

===== PAGE 25 =====

Conjunction. Semi-sextile. Sextile. Square, 
cr v * □ 
Trine. Quincunx. Opposition.1 
A A cP 
Moreover, this is a marvel of Nature, because these 12 places in 
the Primum Caelum, determined to the effects of each Planet, are 
active according to the nature of that Planet, its celestial state and 
determination in the figure. For this is evidently proved by the di- 
rections of significators to the places of the aspects, and the transits 
of the planets through them, namely when they produce effects de- 
termined by the nature of the Planet and the nature of the aspect, 
according to the determination of the Planet and the aspect in the 
figure, also by that same absent Planet, which from itself cannot 
produce all the contrary effects of its own aspects. 
Therefore, the planet itself acting on the native through its own 
primal ray according to its own nature and celestial and terrestrial 
states determines the places of its own 12 aspects in the Caelum for 
acting on the native in accordance with its own nature and state, 
but differently in accordance with the diverse nature or kind of as- 
pect and of the place in the figure in which this falls; and so, all the 
strengths and actions of the Planets are referred to the Primum 
Caelum, or to the first physical cause wholly determinable, which 
is certainly worthy of note and admiration. 
And these aspects are to be understood as simple ones, that is, 
from a single Planet, which, as was said above, determines by it- 
self the 12 places of the Primum Caelum to its own virtue. More- 
over, mixed or composite aspects are those which are made by two 
Planets, either conjoined together or in some other arc of a simple 
aspect in turn with distant ones. And these are more powerful than 
the simpler ones on account of the virtue of the duplex Planet. 
'Morin uses different symbols for the semi-sextile (3 horizontal lines crossed by 
3 vertical lines) and the quincunx (represented by a 5-pointed star), but here I 
have shown the symbols in use today. The symbols Morin used are shown in 
both the Table and the Figure in Chapter 7 below. 
17 

===== PAGE 26 =====

But since every aspect properly said consists of two rays, it 
must be known of every simple aspect that another is primal from 
its rays, namely since there is one that emanates from the body of 
the star, and it is more corporeal and physical. But the other one is 
only resulting from a congruous distance of the aspect within the 
zodiac, according to the twelve-fold division set forth above, and 
in a way that one deserves to be said to be spiritual and metaphysi- 
cal because it operates above the common mode of Nature. 
And the name of spiritual ray must not be rejected in astrology, 
since these rays are immensely more subtle than chemical spirits. 
Furthermore, in addition to Ptolemy's aspects, I have added the 
semi-sextile and the quincunx', not only because the superior 
duodenary division has persuaded [me], but the observation of the 
virtue of those aspects in nativities for many years has compelled 
[me]. And this nicely squares with the passage in Ptolemy, Quadri- 
partite, Book 2, Chapter 12," which Cardan in his Commentary caWs 
the most difficult that is in the whole volume,2 namely where Ptol- 
emy prescribes "for the disposition of the air, [it is necessary] to no- 
tice not only the conjunction, opposition and square of the lights, 
but also for about three days before and after the equated path of the 
Moon to the Sun." That is, around the third day before and after the 
Moon by her own motion has equaled the path of the Sun in con- 
junction or in opposition. For at those times the Moon is in 
semi-sextile or in quincunx to the Sun; and the effect in trine or in 
sextile must not be referred to, as some awkwardly explain it, not 
paying attention to Ptolemy's thought, which distinguishes the posi- 
tion of the Moon on those days from the position in trine or in 
sextile, and attributed the force of both. But he did not give a name to 
'This is Chapter 11 in the Quadripartite, but Chapter 12 in Robbins's edition of 
the Tetrabiblos, and Chapter 13 in Hiibner's new edition. Here and in what fol- 
lows I have retained the Latin book title Quadripartite, but I cite the correspond- 
ing chapters in Robbins's edition of the Tetrabiblos. 
2Morin is citing Textus LXIII (p. 231, col.2), which reads "This is the most diffi- 
cult point that is in this whole volume. Nevertheless the opinion seems to be that 
the Moon is hiding under the Sun, because the Sun for 15 degrees before and 15 
degrees after the circle of the equinox hides.. 
18 

===== PAGE 27 =====

these [aspects], unless perchance Quadripartite, Book 1, Chapter 12, 
approved those aspects that were received from the ancients. But it 
would not seem that it is established that they multiplied themselves. 
For we do not agree with Cardan, who in Quadripartite, Book 
3, Chapter 2, attributes to Ptolemy a figure of 12 equal sides, and 
consequently the semi-sextile aspect, for Ptolemy himself never 
mentioned this figure and aspect. Incidentally, however, we men- 
tion here that Cardan himself attributes force to them for the natu- 
ral principle of being bom, which he wishes to be that time found 
by the correction of the time of the nativity according to Ptolemy's 
laws set forth in that Chapter 2, which they call the Animodar} not 
however for actions, namely because (says Cardan) that figure is 
not of sufficient virtue for actions, on account of the vain reasons 
that he offers, which will be refuted by us elsewhere. 
But (which is more [significant]) after those strengths of the 
semi-sextiles and quincunxes that have been observed by me for 
many years, finally Kepler, in the Preface to his own 
Ephemerides,2 warned that he had very often observed the same 
things with regard to the constitutions of the air, although he was 
unable to deduce the origin of those aspects from the harmonic 
causes that he had thought up; and he therefore rejected them with 
these words: "But I, partly thinking over my principles explained 
above, and partly having diligently observed storms, saw finally 
that Music must be abandoned. For the sesquiquadrate of 135 de- 
grees3 does agree with Music, but the semi-sextile does not, and 
yet the latter is effective, but the former is not." 
Animodar is the Latin version of the meaningless Arabic word an-namuddr See 
Paul Kunitsch, Mittelalterliche astronomisch-astrologische Glossare mil 
arabischen Fachausdriicken 'Medieval Astronomical-Astrological Glossary 
with Arabic Technical Terms' (Munich; Verlag der Bayerischen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften, 1977), 34-35, who says it is derived from a Persian word, which 
was the name given to Ptolemy's procedure for determining the ASC degree. 
2Johannes Kepler, Ephemerides novae motuum coelestium ab anno 1617 ad an- 
num 1628 (Sagan: , 1630). 
3The Latin text has 35 degrees, but the sesquiquadrate has 135 degrees—evi- 
dently a typographical error. However, as we saw above, Kepler also postulated 
the semi-square of 45 degrees. 
19 

===== PAGE 28 =====

And as it is plain how much Kepler faltered in this matter—let 
his Preface to the Ephemeris for the Year /6/7be read—where, af- 
ter he has said that besides the common aspects, sextile, square, 
trine, and opposition, he admits no others, except the quintile of 72 
degrees, the bi-quintile of 144 degrees, and the semi-sextile of 30 
degrees, he adds in what follows: "Not differently, again and again 
when I am observing storms, the quincunx of 150 degrees seems 
also to be very strong." Which he again commends in his Preface 
to the Ephemerides of the year 1620. 
Kepler therefore supports me for the semi-sextile and the 
quincunx, because in introducing them he somewhat confirmed 
me, but I reject his quintile, bi-quintile, sesqui-quadrate and all his 
other [aspects] as fictitious, which lay claim to no place in the 
twelve-fold division of the circle given above. 
Furthermore, for a greater confirmation of the aspects received 
by me above, this fact is most worthy of note, that if the quantities of 
the individual [aspects] are referred to the semi-circle or to the 
whole circle, reasons for the individual ones result, that are attrib- 
uted to harmonies, so that consequently the whole twelve-fold divi- 
sion is established by harmonies; which is thus proved and gathered 
from the book by my former very good friend the Reverend Father 
Marin Mersenne, Harmony, Book 4, Proposition 18.1 
For if with 180 degrees interjected between opposed places, the 
semicircle also of 180 degrees can be imputed, and from that there 
will arise a ratio of equality, which is attributed to a single tone; if 
the whole circle of 360 degrees is imputed, a two-fold ratio will be 
bom, pertaining to the diapason or the octave. If with 30 degrees 
interjected between the [two] places of a semi-sextile, the semicir- 
cle or 180 degrees is imputed, [and] there will arise the ratio of 6 to 
1, for a fifth of the diapason? or a twelfth; if it is the whole circle, 
'The reference is to Father Marin Mersenne (1588-1648), Preludes de I harmonie 
miverselle (1634) or perhaps to his earlier work. Trade de Tharmonie universe lie 
(1627). Morin intends to show that his establishment of aspects as multiples of 30° 
agrees with Mersenne's musical harmonies. But it doesn't. 
2The Latin has the words diapenle diapason sive duodecimo 'fifth of a diapason. 
20 

===== PAGE 29 =====

the ratio will be 12 to 1, for a fifth of a disdiapason, or a 
twenty-sixth.1 
Again, the ratio of the semicircle to 60 degrees for the sextile is 
6 to 2, for a fifth of the diapason, but of the whole circle the ratio 
for 60 degrees is 12 to 2 for a fifth of a disdiapason, or a nine- 
teenth.2 Besides, the ratio of the semicircle to 90 for the square is 6 
to 3, for a diapason or an eighth,3 but the ratio of the whole circle 
to 90 degrees is 12 to 3, for a disdiapason, or a fifteenth.4 And the 
ratio of the semicircle to 120 for the trine is 6 to 4, for the diapente 
or the fifth, but of the whole circle the ratio is 12 to 4, for a fifth of a 
disdiapason!1 Finally, the ratio of the semicircle to 150 for the 
quincunx, it is 6 to 5 for the sesquiditone,6 or a tenth less. 
The whole twelve-fold division is therefore in agreement with 
the harmonies, which no one would hitherto have thought, except 
perhaps Kepler, who worked immensely hard at referring these as- 
pects to harmonic ratios, when he excluded the semi-sextile from 
his own harmonic ratios above, and he could not refer the 
quincunx to them; and for that reason he first rejected it, although 
at last, driven by experience, he pronounced it to be fully valid. 
or a twelfth'. But Morin's arithmetic is wrong. He says that 180° is a diapason or 
an octave. The semi-sextile of 30° is a sixth of that, not a fifth. 
'A disdiapason is a 'double octave'. The Latin text has vigesima sexta 
'twenty-sixth', but since it is twice the twelfth previously mentioned, this must be 
a typographical error for vigesima quarta 'twenty-fourth'. But again it is wrong: 
it should be a twelfth! 
2The Latin text has decima nona 'nineteenth', but this must be an error for 
vigesima quarta 'twenty-fourth' as in the preceding note. And yet, since the ratio 
is said to be 12 to 2 or 6 to I, the text should read diapente diapason or sixth! All 
of the arithmetic is bad! 
3It should be a. fourth. 
4It should be an eighth. 
5A11 of this is wrong. The trine of 120° is 2/3 of a semicircle and 1 /3 of a full cir- 
cle. 
6This curious word means 'one and half of a ditone, but a ditone was defined 
above as 360 degrees, so it would equal 1.5 X 360 or 540 degrees! Again, most of 
the numerical ratios that are given here and above are correct, but their conver- 
sions into fifths, diapasons, and disdiapasons are all wrong. The student should 
ignore them. 
21 

===== PAGE 30 =====

Chapter 5. Whether the Aspects of the Planets 
should be established for the mean places of those Planets, 
or their true places as seen by the eye, 
or their true places at the center of the Earth.1 
In the first place, it is evidently plain that a conjunction of the 
Planets must not be defined with their mean places; namely be- 
cause the mean place of a Planet is only fictitious or artificial 
thanks to calculation, but almost always different from its true 
place, from which alone that Planet influences us. For we do not 
receive a Planet's own influx through any other line or ray than 
that which emanates from the very body of the Planet. But the true 
place of that Planet, which we are accustomed to call a conjunction 
is the beginning of all the rest of the aspects. Therefore, the rest of 
them also end not in the mean places but in the true places, accord- 
ing to the preceding twelve-fold division and the quantity of the 
distance of each aspect from the true place of the Planet as seen in 
the Primum Mobile. 
But because the true place of the Planet on the Primum Mobile 
is two-fold the one from the center of the Earth which is desig- 
nated by a straight line from the center of the Earth through the 
center of the Planet and the Primum Mobile, which is only reck- 
oned in Ephemerides and in Celestial figures. But the other from 
the eye, which is designated by a straight line from the eye [lo- 
cated] on the surface of the Earth to the center of that same Planet 
and to the Primum Mobile. Rightly, there seems to be a contro- 
versy about these two true places; [namely], which should be se- 
lected, especially on account of the Moon's not being exposed to 
the dislocation from parallax. 
But truly because we are only affected by the stars through their 
rays impinging upon us, the true place on the Primum Mobile [as 
"in this chapter, Morin says that the true place of the planets as affected by paral- 
lax must be used in astrological charts, not the position calculated for the center 
of the Earth as given in the ephemerides. He devotes another chapter to this rule 
in Book 17, Section 3, Chapter 2. But while this is logical advice, he never seems 
to have followed it himself, and most other astrologers have ignored it. 
22 

===== PAGE 31 =====

seen by] the eye will have to be especially noticed for the true 
place of the Planet with respect to us and for the beginning of its 
aspects. Therefore, at least the Moon's place as deduced from the 
ephemerides will have to be corrected by parallax for use in direc- 
tions, especially if it is close to the horizon,1 as will be more fully 
stated in Book 22," but not the places of the other Planets, which 
scarcely experience a parallax of 1 or 2 minutes [of arc]. 
Chapter 6. In which Great Circle the real Aspects 
of the Planets should first be conceived According to Ptolemy 
and Cardan, and a Refutation of their [Opinions]. 
The Planets' aspects are not considered by astrologers orbicu- 
larly, that is by the aspect of the other stars surrounding them or- 
bicularly; but they are only considered with the path or approach 
of the planets by their own motion from the setting to the rising. 
Therefore, since the Sun is seen to move perpetually in the ecliptic, 
it will therefore have all of its own effective aspects in that circle, 
according to Chapter 5. And experience not only proves that, but 
reason also confirms it. 
For the true place of the Sun (from which solely it influences us 
per se) is seen in the ecliptic, to which place or point of the ecliptic 
it is diametrically opposed and in opposite aspect to the Sun, which 
consequently falls in that same ecliptic, in which also the rest of its 
aspects have their own accurate quantities of distance in the con- 
junction, not moreover in any other circle. Therefore, all the as- 
pects of the Sun fall in that circle, under which it is seen to be 
moved. And there is not any dissension about this among 
astrologers. 
But they greatly disagree about the Planets when they have lati- 
tude. For Ptolemy in Quadripartite, Book 1, Chapter 24, wants 
'When the Moon is near the ASC or the DSC. Its parallax in longitude can reach 
1° of arc. 
2Astrologia Gallica, Book Twenty-Two/Directions trans, by James Herschel 
Holden (Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc. 1996). 
23 

===== PAGE 32 =====

their bodily latitudes to be noted in their configurations. And the 
reason is that he does not admit those configurations or conjunc- 
tions unless they are in the middle line of the zodiac, or the ecliptic, 
namely for the same circle of latitude of both Planets. 
Moreover, it is plain that this reason is null, if indeed the config- 
urations of the Planets are admitted solely in the ecliptic for the 
same circle of latitude of both Planets. However, there always re- 
mains [the necessity of] rendering the reason why their latitudes 
should be noted in the same circle, a reason that Ptolemy himself 
does not disclose. 
Moreover, Cardan in his Commentary, speaking about all of 
the difficulties of this place, gives this response: "Ptolemy's 
opinion is that all conjunctions are referred to the ecliptic, be- 
cause then they say that the stars are joined, when a line drawn 
through the poles (understand, the poles of the ecliptic) passes 
through both centers and then divides the ecliptic; therefore, 
when those stars are conjoined, they are in the same point of the 
ecliptic." This is verbatim. 
But how Cardan deviates from Ptolemy's thought and from the 
truth is established by this, because Ptolemy, except that he wants 
the conjunction to be made in the same point of the ecliptic, that is 
in that circle of latitude, also wants in addition to take account of 
the latitudes of the Planets, lest the two stars in the same circle of 
latitude, also agreeing in distance, should be said to be conjunct, as 
would follow from Cardan's false response. 
And so, for Ptolemy and the truth of the matter, it must be said 
by us, that in configurations of the Planets, except for their con- 
course in the same point of the ecliptic and in the same circle of lat- 
itude, the latitudes of the planets should therefore be thought to be 
in that same circle, lest if they are mutually distant from each other 
by a difference of the latitudes that is more than both of their 
semi-diameters or their own bodies [taken together] or of the orbs 
of their virtues, which will be mentioned below, they are wrongly 
24 

===== PAGE 33 =====

said to be in conjunction—just as when one of them has its greatest 
northerly latitude, and the other its greatest southerly latitude.1 
But the greater difficulty remains of elucidating [this matter] for 
the rest of the aspects, which Ptolemy also wants to be seen only in 
the ecliptic and to be reckoned from the Planets' ecliptical places 
without any observation of their latitude. The reason for which he 
explains is that the rays, for example, of a sextile aspect to the 
Earth, or extending to its center, come together there from wher- 
ever they were sent—that is according to Cardan—either from the 
Planets' places in the ecliptic, or from their centers, wherever these 
may be beyond the ecliptic. 
But in truth it is not sufficient for the rays to come together at 
the center, but it is required that they establish the angle of the 
sextile at the center, which according to Ptolemy himself is 60 de- 
grees, and this indeed is also done if they are drawn from points 
terminating in the ecliptic that are in sextile, because the Planets' 
ecliptical places are put at exactly a sextile's distance apart; but, if 
they are drawn from the centers of the planets, especially those 
having a great latitude and one especially diverse by direction, and 
determining the sextile in the ecliptic by their own circles of lati- 
tude, there is made to the center an angle that is greater than the 
sextile itself, as it is established by spherical triangles. 
Or rather, having placed two stars in the same circle of latitude 
with 30° of latitude in different directions, the rays from their cen- 
ters to the Earth will establish the angle of the sextile, when how- 
ever they make no configuration in the ecliptic, but they are con- 
joined. It is therefore plain that Ptolemy's logic is false and con- 
trary to Ptolemy himself in the place and measure of the aspects, 
although Cardan, who is perpetually sold on Ptolemy's words, as- 
serts that it is best, and nevertheless declares that the arc of a trine 
'This is essentially what Ptolemy says: "...with respect to the bodily applications 
and separations of the heavenly bodies it is of use also to observe their latitudes, 
in order that only those passages may be accepted which are found to be on the 
same side of the ecliptic." (Robbins's translation.) Morin agrees theoretically, 
but I believe that he never observed that distinction in his practice. 
25 

===== PAGE 34 =====

taken in the ecliptic differs by [only] 15' from the arc taken in the 
circle passing through the center of the Planet. 
Moreover, in addition, he tries to support this with another 
physical reason, namely because life and the rest of things are due 
to the light of the Sun, and the Sun always moves in the ecliptic, 
and therefore its aids and hindrances (that is, the accidents of life) 
ought to be referred to that line—which reason is more absurd than 
the previous one. For it is not the light of the Sun that is the cause 
of life, but rather the heat or the influence of the Sun; and the acci- 
dents of men must be referred, first and per se to the line of the 
Sun's path, but [also] to the Sun and the rest of the Planets and 
stars, by which in the first place, the Sun's virtues per se are real- 
ized with respect to these sublunar things, and secondly by their 
aspects to whatever circle they belong to. 
Besides, if the Moon is seen in the 2nd degree of Scorpio with 
northern latitude, its true place will not be in the ecliptic, but in a 
point of its own circle of latitude, where it is seen, from which it 
would be absurd to think that it does not influence [from] there, but 
rather from the point on the ecliptic to which it is only referred by 
calculation, and in which it is not present, otherwise universal as- 
trology would collapse, or indeed the doctrine of things acting at a 
distance, which supplies by experience the force flowing out of 
distant things acting as a source from them, and not from places 
where they are not. 
Moreover, something diametrically opposed to this true place 
of the Moon, is rightly considered by astronomers to be an opposi- 
tion aspect of the Moon, not even falling in the ecliptic, but in a 
point diametrically opposed to the prior circle of latitude. There- 
fore, since the true place of the Moon and its opposition may truly 
and physically fall outside the ecliptic, and these true places with 
latitude are noted in directions, but not their correlates in the eclip- 
tic, in which these are not present, other than by a mental reduction 
of calculation, would it not also be absurd to think the same thing 
about the middle of other configurations and their proper distances 
26 

===== PAGE 35 =====

from the Moon, or not to measure the conjunction in that same cir- 
cle from the body of the Moon to its true opposition; but to mea- 
sure from an empty point on the ecliptic where it is not to another 
opposition point that is similarly empty? 
It is established, therefore, from what was said above that all the 
true aspects of the Planets are not first seen in the ecliptic, although 
they can be reduced to it thanks to calculation; and this should be 
understood to be said about the Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Ve- 
nus, and Mercury. 
Chapter 7. Giovanni Bianchini's and Cyprian 
Leowitz's Opinions of this same Matter, and a 
Refutation of [their Opinions].1 
These two famous astrologers, carefully noticing that natural 
effects have natural and true causes, but not fictitious ones made 
by calculation, which are the aspects primarily seen in the ecliptic 
or in the equator by right or oblique ascensions, as Regiomontanus 
states about other astrologers in Problem 31 of his Tables,2 who 
have imagined a great circle drawn from the true place of the Moon 
to its true opposition, described from a pole taken in the circle of 
latitude of the Moon; and in which they count the numerical quan- 
tities of the aspects. 
Which agreed, the square aspect was always falling in the eclip- 
tic, and even so if the Moon was lacking any latitude, but not the 
rest [of the planets], which consequently were needing an equation 
of longitude and latitude, so that they could be reduced to the 
ecliptic, or right ascension and declination, so that they could be 
reduced to the equator. 
"Beginning here, Morin initiates a discussion of the "correction" of aspects to 
take into account the latitude of the Planets. He goes into more detail and makes 
recommendations for the use of the corrected aspects in calculating directions in 
Book 22, Section II. 
2Johann Miiller (1436-1476), known in Latin as Johannes Regiomontanus. Fa- 
mous among astrologers for his book, Tabulae directionum profectionumque...in 
nativitatibus multum utiles .Tables of Directions and Profections... very Useful in 
Nativities' (Augsburg: Erhard Ratdolt, 1490. often reprinted) 
27 

===== PAGE 36 =====

And many astrologers have followed this opinion of Bianchini,1 
as being more in accordance with Nature, among whom is Andrea 
Argoli,2 the famous Italian astronomer and astrologer; and he I 
thought to be otherwise to it, on account of the efficacy of the 
square falling on the ecliptic, especially because from the Table of 
the Ray of the Aspects set forth by the famous astrologer Johann 
Schoner in Book 1 of his Judgments of Nativities,1 it is plain that 
that method was familiar to Schoner himself. 
And it was one to which Cardan also clung in his Book on the 
Judgments of Nativities, Chapter 7, but having looked at the matter 
more deeply, he abandoned it on account of the reasons that will be 
stated below. And yet it is pleasing to show it here and to add the 
Table of the equation of the aspects corresponding to it. 
Q G * JL 
V 
* o N 
B C x> 
V 
'Giovanni Bianchini (15th century), Professor of Astronomy at Ferrara, author of 
ephemerides, Tabulae coelestum motuum (1495). 
2Andrea Argoli (1570-1657), Professor of Mathematics at the University of 
Padua. He published ephemerides and astrological works, including a consider- 
able number of horoscopes of notable persons. 
3Johann Schoner (1477-1547), Dejudiciis nativitatum libri tres 'Three Books on 
the Judgments of Nativities' (Niimberg, 1545). There is a modem English trans- 
lation. 
28 

===== PAGE 37 =====

Let the ecliptic be AEC, the Planet Mars at B with southern lati- 
tude AB, and having taken the pole in Mars' s circle of latitude, a great 
circle was drawn through Mars; which will pass through D, the point 
diametrically opposite with northern latitude, and it will intersect the 
ecliptic at E; and EA and EB will be quadrants, and consequently E is 
square Mars in the ecliptic. Therefore, since the conjunction, square, 
and opposition are exactly on the circle BED, consequently the rest of 
the aspects V, A, and A will also be exactly on that same circle di- 
vided into 12 equal parts for those aspects; and indeed it would be ab- 
surd for the conjunction, square, and opposition to be on one circle 
and the rest [of the aspects] to be on another circle. 
And, having put the southern latitude of Mars to be AB, the as- 
pects in the semicircle will be southern in their latitude, but in the 
remaining semicircle EDF they will be northern, and vice versa. 
And because in directing significators to these true places, they 
ought to be deduced for the circles of positions of these 
significators. Therefore, if the ASC should be directed to the dex- 
ter sextile of Mars, which is at G, the longitude of G will have to be 
sought on the ecliptic at H with latitude HG in that manner. From 
the triangle HGE, with a right angle at H, are given EG 30°, and the 
angle HEG or its measure ASB the known latitude of Mars; FH 
will therefore be given for the longitude and HG for the latitude. 
From which will be found the oblique ascension of G at the lati- 
tude of the place of the nativity; from which, if the oblique ascen- 
sion of the ASC is subtracted, there will remain the arc of direc- 
tion; and so with the other [aspects]. 
Nevertheless, it will be shorter to use the table put below, con- 
structed by us on one occasion from the foundation above. In this 
table, there is put the latitude of each aspect according to the lati- 
tude given for the Planet, with the equation of the longitude of that 
aspect—namely, by which equation is had the true longitude of the 
aspect reduced to the ecliptic.1 
'The table can be constructed by these two formulas.: (1) LA = arcsin (sin LP * 
cos A); and (2) EQ = 30° - arcsin (sin 30° ■" cos LA). Where LA = Latitude of the 
29 

===== PAGE 38 =====

Planet* acitudo 1 1 1 M ♦ 5 7 8 
Lacitudo 
/Equatio 0. 51' O. 0 1.4.x' 1. 36" 3.1S' 4.. io' 
0. 1 0. i 0. 4. 0, 6 Q. ' 8 
6. 3 6. yd' O. 11 0. id 
* A Latitude X. uatio 
0. 30' 
0. 30' 1. 0' 1. 30' i. 0' x, 30' 0. 1. 0. 1 0. 4. 0. ^ 0.' 8 
3. 30' 4. 0 0.11. 0. 16 
Use of the Table 
The latitude of the semi-sextile and the quincunx is the same; 
and so too, the equation; and the same must be said for the sextile 
and the trine. Moreover, that equation is always added to the 
semi-sextile and the sextile, that is to their 30 and 60 degrees; and 
it is always subtracted from the trine and the quincunx, that is from 
their 120 and 150 degrees, counted in the ecliptic in their dexter 
and sinister directions from the true place of the Planet in the eclip- 
tic, so that the true place of these aspects in the ecliptic will 
emerge;. But it must be noted that to add to the dexter aspects is to 
subtract from their number in the ecliptic, and vice versa to sub- 
tract is to add. But in the case of sinister aspects, the converse is 
going to be understood. As [for example] let Venus be in 12018' S 
with 7° North latitude; its sinister sextile will be in \2029'Tp2 with 
a North latitude of 3o30' from the table above; and its dexter 
sextile will be in 12o07' b with the same latitude. But the sinister 
trine will be in 12o07' H]# with southern latitude 3o30'; and dexter 
trine will be in H with the same latitude. Think the same 
about the semi-sextile and the quincunx both sinister and dexter, 
from which their right ascensions or oblique ascensions are easily 
found from Argoli's Tables of Directions. 
Besides, Bianchini and his followers err in this because his 
circle is only fictitious. And it does not refer to that which is de- 
scribed from a pole taken in the circle of latitude of the Planet. 
For it is described from a pole taken from its circle of declina- 
Aspect, LP = Latitude of the Planet, A = Longitude of the Aspect (30° for the 
semi-sextile and the quincunx and 60° for the sextile and trine). 
2The Latin text has the symbol for Scorpio by mistake for the symbol for Virgo. 
30 

===== PAGE 39 =====

tion. It will equally pass through the true place of the Planet and 
its opposition, and it will always intersect the ecliptic, but not in 
those points that are distant by a quadrant from the Planet's 
place. 
Indeed. Numerous circles can be drawn doing the same thing, 
and no valid reason can be offered why one of them should be pre- 
ferred to the others, unless the path of the Planets should be deter- 
mined through some third real point, to which that planet moves by 
its own motion, or from which it recedes. 
Chapter 8. Johannes Regiomontanus's Opinion 
on this Matter, and a Refutation of it. 
For us, there remains to be discussed the opinion of the very fa- 
mous Johannes Regiomontanus, which he expounded in Problem 
31 of his Tables, the rest rejected only on his own authority and 
without examination, and which the great part of the astrologers of 
his time approved, however all are conquered by the equation of 
the aspects, both by the methods put above, and also by that 
method instituted by Regiomontanus. 
Therefore, he takes for his foundation that a star in its orbit dif- 
fuses its ray, both of light and also of its occult virtue. Moreover, 
since there are an infinite number (as he says) of such rays, the 
more effective ones must be apprehended, one of which to be sure 
is the side of the hexagon inscribed in the circle passing through 
the center of the star; moreover, another is the side of a square; but 
the fourth is a diameter of that same circle. 
Furthermore, he thinks that the center of each star must be 
conceived to be on the concave [surface] of the Primum Mobile, 
because the true places of the stars are located on that concave 
[surface]. These things being granted, he now, from the center 
of such a star [taken] as a pole, imagines parallel circles to be in- 
scribed, one of which is distant from that pole by a sixth of a 
great circle, another by a fourth, and another by a third; and 
where the first parallel intersects the ecliptic, there par excel- 
31 

===== PAGE 40 =====

lence he wants the ray of the sex tile aspect to be; where the sec- 
ond intersects, there is the square; where the third intersects, 
there is the trine. 
And because the quantity of these aspects is not exact in the 
ecliptic if the true place of the Planet is located beyond the ecliptic, 
he teaches us how to reduce it to the ecliptic by means of his Tables, 
and how to find how much the true quantity of each kind of aspect in 
the ecliptic is; and the foundation of the Table is such as this. 
Let an arc of the ecliptic be AC, and Venus at B with latitude 
AB of 4 degrees; the arc of the great circle BC is 60 degrees for the 
sextile aspect intersecting the ecliptic at C. The arc AC is 
sought—that is, the quantity of that aspect counted in the ecliptic 
from A, Moreover, it will be found to be 59055' if there is made 
the sine of the complement of AB times the sine of the complement 
of BC, so [we have] the radius to the sine of the complement of 
AC. And so with the rest [of the aspects].1 
But very briefly, that equation of the aspects can be extracted 
from the Table placed here, which we have deduced for all the as- 
pects from the same fundamental, so that anyone can also more 
easily know this equation of the aspects. 
'Rather, AC = arccos (cos BC/cos AB). The numbers in the table on the next page 
are the absolute value of AC minus the length of the aspect. 
B 
A. 
32 

===== PAGE 41 =====

Plancbc Latitude i 3 ! 4 1 T f 6 7 | 8 
1# j&quatio o. i o. 3' o. 8' o. o, «j'j o. jj' 4-y' j 0- 59 
% A jEquttio 0. 0 o. l' o, i o- A O, t' 1 Q. Jl' o. if',| o. ao' 
The equation for the semi-sextile and quincunx is the same just 
as for the sextile and the trine. Moreover, this equation should al- 
ways be subtracted from the semi-sextile and the sextile, that is 
from 30 and 60 degrees; and it should always be added to the trine 
and the quincunx, that is to 120 and 150 degrees, whether they are 
dexter or sinister to the true place of the Planet in the ecliptic, so 
that the true place of these aspects in the ecliptic may become evi- 
dent; but it must be noted that it is the same thing as in the Table for 
the equation by Bianchini. 
So moreover, having found the places of the aspects in the 
ecliptic, Regiomontanus, Origanus, and the rest of those followers 
of this opinion have no reason for the latitude of the aspects. But 
Kepler, in the Preface to his Ephemerides for the year 1617, 
frankly states that that Table is not sufficient as having an arc of 
the ecliptic corresponding to an aspect if the planets aspecting 
themselves have either unequal or contrary latitudes. And he adds: 
"and for me (he says), there is need of a warning about the aspects 
of the Planets among themselves when they have large latitudes. 
For then it can occur that an aspect, even the square itself, may fall 
by a long number of days on the great circle calculated as drawn 
through the Planets, as if we should establish the quantity of the as- 
pect as the arc of the ecliptic intercepted between two circles of lat- 
itude drawn through the centers of the Planets." This from Kepler, 
who of course touches somewhat upon the difficulty but does not 
resolve it. And here he does not speak about all the aspects of a sin- 
gle Planet and on what great circle of the Primum Mobile they fall 
per se. 
Besides, this opinion of Regiomontanus seems to me to be more 
absurd than the rest [of the opinions]. First, because all of the as- 
33 

===== PAGE 42 =====

pects of a particular Planet will not be in the same great circle 
drawn through the center of the Planet, but the sinister sextile and 
the dexter trine diametrically opposed, they will be in one great 
circle inclined to the ecliptic and passing through the center of the 
Planet, but the dexter sextile and the sinister trine also opposed, 
will be in another. 
And the same thing must be said about the two semi-sextiles 
and the quincunxes. Moreover, both of the squares will be in still 
another; but the conjunction and the opposition will be in their 
own individual ones. It is, therefore, alien to Nature to constitute 
the true aspects of the same Planet in five different great circles 
that are also only fictitious. 
Secondly, the aspects of Planets moving beyond the ecliptic do 
not fall in the ecliptic, but they are projected from the Planets 
themselves onto following and preceding [great circles] with their 
own movement and their own path, which is neither the ecliptic 
nor the equator, but another circle set beyond and below them. 
There must, therefore, be a reason for their latitude, as Kepler 
asserted above. 
Thirdly, if the ray from the source and the influential ray are dif- 
fused from the orbit to every point of the parallel described from 
its center, and a point of that parallel falling on the ecliptic is effec- 
tive in directions when it come to the circle of position of a 
significator, why are other points on that same parallel also effec- 
tive? For because it is said that that point in the ecliptic is the 
sextile par excellence, or the square, or the trine, rather than some- 
where else, that is fabricated short of reason or experience of the 
other points. However, the absurd is not avoided, because the rest 
of the points on that parallel ought also to be at least a little less 
effective. 
Whence, Lucio Bellantio, Question 9, Article 2, most absurdly of 
all, thought that those aspects must be taken in individual points of 
the parallels, and in no other circle, and consequently with no rela- 
34 

===== PAGE 43 =====

tion to the ecliptic. And yet such a hypothesis would overturn the 
doctrine and experience of directions, and entirely throw it into dis- 
order, since experience proves that the effect of the square of Mars 
coming to the ASC does not arise from any point on that parallel. 
Therefore, that opinion must also be rejected; that is, it, like the 
rest of the preceding ones, is alien to the nature of the matter and to 
the principles of astrology. But I have undertaken the work to dis- 
cuss the individual [hypotheses], because the aspects of the Plan- 
ets accomplish the greater part of [the effects of] astrology; and 
consequently, a true doctrine of them is indispensable. 
Chapter 9. In what Great Circle the Real Aspects 
of the Planets must be Conceived to be 
according to the Truth of the Matter. 
Nature and the principles of astrology must be consulted about 
this matter. In fact, they will furnish another method to follow that 
I have found after lengthy mental exertion about this matter. 
It is conceded by all that the true places of the Planets are seen in 
the Primum Mobile, and it is certain that their bodies influence us 
from their own true place with respect to us or appearing to us in 
the Caelum, but not from any other [place]. Therefore, from that 
same place they will determine the Caelum with respect to the 
Earth or the native. Both by reason of their own corporal site, and 
by reason of the aspects, through which they also act. 
Moreover, these aspects must be counted from the true place of 
the Planet, as Regiomontanus and Bianchini have done. Not in- 
deed in diverse fictitious circles, as Regiomontanus wanted to do, 
and not in that same but also fictitious [circle] with Bianchini; but 
in that same real path, or at least in the real path of the moving 
Planet in the Primum Caelum as it appears to us, the discovery of 
which through many years sharply engaged my intellect, because 
that matter would seem to be of great moment in astrology, and as- 
trologers acknowledge that; and yet it was unknown to Kepler, 
Regiomontanus, and Ptolemy himself, all of whom have spoken 
35 

===== PAGE 44 =====

about the correction of aspects, even though they were famous as- 
tronomers, and Ptolemy was also the primary Prince of Astrology. 
Moreover, after frequent and daily speculations about that mat- 
ter, I finally considered that there are two paths for each 
Planet—that is, a true or absolute path, and one that appears with 
respect to us. The true path is that one that the Planet describes ab- 
solutely in the Ether with the center of its body, and which is imag- 
ined to be continued on the Primum Mobile, and is termed the orbit 
of the Planet or its eccentric path. 
But the apparent path is the one that is in the Primum Mobile, 
under which that Planet is seen to move with respect to the Earth or 
by us. Moreover, in the case of the Sun, the true orbit continued on 
the Primum Mobile coincides with the path that is apparent to us, 
because the Sun's true orbit is arranged around the Earth, and the 
Sun and the Earth are always in the same plane of the ecliptic. And 
therefore, there is the same circle of the ecliptic, in which the Sun 
always moves with respect to us, and which by the witness of ex- 
perience it influences us both by its own body and also by its as- 
pects that are exactly defined in that circle. 
But Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury have their true 
orbits not arranged around the Earth according to Copernicus and 
Tycho; and they therefore move in non-circular lines, as will be 
plain to anyone, if he describes their path on a celestial globe 
with their longitude and latitude throughout the whole zodiac. 
Nevertheless, because the orbits of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars in- 
clude the Earth, these lines therefore degenerate somewhat from 
circular lines, and those planets in their own revolution are at the 
same time either north or south of the ecliptic. But Venus and 
Mercury, whose true orbits are beyond the Earth apparently de- 
scribe to us lines in the Caelum that are more irregular and wind- 
ing, and especially Mercury, who in passing through the zodiac is 
of northern or southern latitude five or six times [during the 
course of a year]. 
36 

===== PAGE 45 =====

Moreover, all astrologers—taught by experience—agree that 
aspects are to be taken in the complete celestial circle in which 
the true place of the Planet exists, [and] in which their aspects are 
defined by their own proper quantities. And besides, they agree 
that a Planet acts with respect to us, not only by reason of its own 
true location, but by all of its own aspects defined in that great 
circle, although the orbits of Venus and Mercury do not encircle 
the Earth—that is, because the true place of a Planet determines 
another 11 places in that same great circle for the places of its 
own aspects, as we have said in Chapter 4. Moreover, the entire 
difficulty consists of designating that circle, which at least goes 
with the real path of the Planet in the Primum Caelum as it ap- 
pears to us. 
Moreover, in the first place, it is certain that that circle is not the 
ecliptic, for the latitude of the body of the Planet, if it has any, must 
be observed in [calculating] the directions of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, 
Venus, and Mercury, and their oppositions, [thereby] agreeing 
with Ptolemy's direction and with experience. But no valid reason 
can be offered why if the body of the Planet and its opposition hap- 
pens to be beyond the ecliptic, the rest of its aspects should be in 
the ecliptic, as Ptolemy himself would have it; for thus, not all the 
aspects would be in the ecliptic, and either the circle of the aspects 
would not be exactly circular, or two circles would have to be ad- 
mitted—one for the body of the Planet and its opposition—but an- 
other, namely the ecliptic, for the rest of the aspects of that same 
Planet, which is absurd. 
Second. Moreover, it is also certain that that circle is not the or- 
bit of the true Planet continued from the Sun to the Primum 
Caelum. Because that orbit, although it is a circle inclined to the 
ecliptic, is nevertheless inclined at a constant angle—for Saturn 
indeed it is 2032/, for Jupiter lo20', for Mars lo50', for Venus 
S1^', and for Mercury 6054' according to the Rudolphine Tables) 
'These are their inclinations to the ecliptic as seen from the center of the Sun. But 
as seen from the Earth, which can be closer to the Planet than the Sun, their maxi- 
mum latitudes can be greater than those inclinations. 
37 

===== PAGE 46 =====

But the true latitudes of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury 
frequently exceed those inclinations, and Mars goes up to 7° of lat- 
itude.1 
For they can therefore be taken between the ecliptic and their 
true orbit. And it is therefore necessary that the circle whose incli- 
nation to the ecliptic we seek, should be either the latitude of the 
Planet at the moment for which its aspects are sought, or the great- 
est latitude next following or preceding that moment, in which the 
Planet is descending from its ascending [point], or the other way 
around, or the maximum and final latitude, to which the Planet can 
reach, while it is in the northern or the southern part [of the celes- 
tial sphere]; for every other method will deviate more from the true 
path of the Planet in the Caelum, as will be plain in the following 
objections. 
But now, the first method is that of Bianchini, who makes the 
momentary latitude of the Planet to be the measure of the inclina- 
tion of the circle of the aspects to the ecliptic. For example, let the 
ecliptic be ABEC, the Planet Mars D, which is lacking latitude in 
the ecliptic at the point A, and let its latitude then be north, and let 
its path be ADF. Moreover, from the circle of the latitude of Mars 
through its place D, let the circle DEG2 be drawn for the circle of 
the aspects; and indeed from that the place of the square to Mars 
will fall in the ecliptic at the point E; but it will be plain to the eye 
that Mars can in no way go along that circle; for otherwise, from D 
to E it would continually approach the ecliptic, when on the con- 
trary it continually recedes from it along its own apparent path 
ADF on the celestial globe. Therefore, Bianchini's circle must be 
rejected as being alien to Nature. 
'And Venus can occasionally have a latitude of 8o30' or more. 
2The Latin text has DFG by mistake. 
38 

===== PAGE 47 =====

The second mode coincides with the third for Mars, Venus, and 
Mercury, for these Planets are never descending from their rising 
points, or the other way around, except when they have attained 
the maximum latitude that they can have, when they are north or 
south in latitude, but they are continually increasing in latitude up 
to that maximum, as it is also plain in the ephemerides. But Saturn 
and Jupiter, although they do not continually increase in latitude, 
but they are often (especially Satum) seen to be retrograde in lati- 
tude; nevertheless, they continue on, returning up to their own 
maximum latitude north or south that they can attain in that 
revolution of theirs. 
And consequently, if a circle of aspects is established, whose in- 
clination to the ecliptic is the greatest northerly or southerly lati- 
tude of the planet to which that Planet can attain, according as the 
Planet is in the northern part or the southern part, then that cir- 
cle—before the rest of the circles going with the force of the 
Planet, appearing to us in the Caelum, and which is not circu- 
lar—must be held to be the true circle of the aspects and the most 
natural of all. 
39 

===== PAGE 48 =====

Besides, both orbits of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mer- 
cury seen in the Caelum, that is apparent from the Earth and true 
continued from the Sun, having themselves thus, so that as often as 
the Planet in its own true orbit also continued to the Caelum is 
lacking in inclination according to Kepler's opinion, and it is on its 
own node in that orbit, then that same Planet is also lacking lati- 
tude in its own apparent orbit and in the circle of aspects assumed 
by us, and it is in their nodes. 
But there are different places for the nodes, also differing by 
many degrees, even as the eccentric place of the Planet and its ap- 
parent place in the Caelum are different in the ecliptic. For exam- 
ple, in the year 1647, on the 23rd of April at Paris noon, Venus is 
found in the Rudolphine Tables in its tme or apparent motion to be 
in 19° 49' Taurus; it is therefore in the intersection of its orbit and 
the ecliptic, and it is northern. Moreover, then the northern node of 
Venus in its own tme orbit with mean motion is at 13037' Gemini; 
and therefore the difference of both of those is 23048'. 
Besides, the motion of the nodes differs greatly in both orbits. 
For in the true orbit they are moved very slowly, but in the appar- 
ent orbit differently and very much more quickly. Finally, the in- 
clination of the true orbit to the ecliptic is invariable, as was said 
above, but the inclination of the apparent orbit is variable. For, 
through the individual revolutions of the Planet, its maximum 
northern or southern latitude is not the same, nor its maximum 
northern and its maximum southern latitude, but these latitudes are 
different as often as the Planet crosses over from the northern part 
to the southern one. And the crossing of these Planets from the Sun 
and the parallax of the orbs causes all these [phenomena] with 
respect to the Earth. 
Based on the foregoing, it would now be time to show how that 
circle for Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury should be 
drawn on the Primum Mobile and how the aspects should be desig- 
nated on it. 
40 

===== PAGE 49 =====

First, therefore, the maximum latitude that the Planet can attain 
in the northern or southern part in which it is situated may be taken 
for the inclination of the circle of aspects to the ecliptic at that 
same time. 
Second, with that inclination and the given true latitude of that 
Planet at that same time, the place between the intersections of that 
circle and the ecliptic at that time may be found by the following 
method. 
In the year 1647, on the month, day, and hour mentioned above, 
Venus was in 19047' Taurus without any latitude, and conse- 
quently on its own apparent node; from which it is noted to be in its 
own apparent orbit, until the time when it obtains its maximum 
northern latitude of r47'. Therefore, let that latitude be taken for 
the inclination of the circle of aspects to the ecliptic, which in the 
following figure is AEC, and the circle of aspects 
B H 
X> C 
K E 
R 
A F 
P 
1/ 
M 
going on the apparent path of Venus is ADB, and their intersection 
or the north node is at A, from which Venus is conceived to be 
moved, continually increasing in latitude until at B it is in its maxi- 
41 

===== PAGE 50 =====

mum northerly latitude of 1047'. Moreover, let Venus be at point D 
in that circle with northern latitude DE of lo10', which it will ob- 
tain on 22 May at Paris noon [when it is at] 25015' Gemini. 
Now, from the given BC and DE, let there first be found the arc 
called AE. As the tangent of BC is to the tangent of DE, so is the 
sine of AC to the sine of AE; and AE will be found to be 40o52'1; 
which, subtracted from the place of Venus in the ecliptic 2 signs 
25° 15', leaves 1 sign 14024', that is 14024' Taurus for the place of 
the north node A, in which occurs the intersection of the circle of 
aspects at that time; which place must be noted, and also its oppo- 
sition 14° 24' Scorpio for the place of the southern node. 
After these, let AD be found by saying, as the sine of BC is to 
the sine of DE, so the radius or sine of AB is to the sine of AD, 
40o52', which is the arc of the circle of aspects, corresponding to 
the arc of the ecliptic AE, marking the place of Venus in that circle 
and its distance from the node A.2 
Now, from Venus's place D in the circle of aspects, or its appar- 
ent orbit, that is 40o52', the distance from Q3 or the node A, all its 
aspects should be counted exactly in that circle, namely giving to 
the semi-sextile 30°, to the sextile 60°, to the square 90°, etc.; and 
let the sinister semi-sextile be at H, of which we ought to find the 
longitude and latitude. 
"This procedure yields a value (actually 40o5r) for the arc AE that is only for- 
mally correct. That is, it assumes that the values of the two latitudes that are used 
to determine it are absolutely exact. For example, let us repeat the calculation 
with DE= ril' instead ofTlO'. We get AE = 4 r34'instead of40o5r. Thus, a 
change of 1' of arc in the intermediate latitude causes a change of 43' in the arc 
AE. Unfortunately, if the latitudes are only given to the nearest minute of arc, the 
calculated arc from the Planet to its apparent node will be subject to considerable 
error. 
2Note that the arc AD in the circle of aspects has the same value in this example as 
the arc AE in the ecliptic. This is because the inclination (1047') is small. The dif- 
ference can amount in extreme cases to 17 of arc. Also, note that in the next nu- 
merical example Morin forgets that he found AD = AE when the arc in question 
was 40o52' and derives an erroneous difference for an arc of 70o52', although the 
maximum difference must occur at 45°. 
3The Latin text has the symbol for Leo by mistake for the symbol of the node. 
42 

===== PAGE 51 =====

Therefore, having added AD 40o52' and DH 30°, 70o52' are 
made for AH. And then let it be made that the sine of all of AB to 
the sine of AH 70o52' is equal to the sine of BD 1047' to the sine of 
GH l04r, which will be the ascending northern latitude of the 
semi-sextile defined as the point G on the ecliptic; and so that that 
point, or the ecliptic arc AG, may be known, let it be as the tangent 
of BD to the tangent of GH, so the sine of AC to the sine of AG 
70o44' or 2 signs 10o44'; to which, let the place of the node A be 
add, 1 sign 14024',they make 3 signs 25o08' or25o08' Cancer for 
the true place of that semi-sextile in the ecliptic. 
For finding the sinister square of Venus, to D that is 40o52' let 
90° be added, they will make 130o52' for the arc ADI; which, sub- 
tracted from the semicircle ABF, leaves 49o08' for FI; and then let 
it be made that as the sine of FB is to the sine of FI, so the sine of 
BC is to the sine of IK, and they will yield 1021' for IK the northern 
descending latitude of that square, defined as the point K in the 
ecliptic; and since that point is known, or the arc of the ecliptic FK, 
let it be that as the tangent of BC is to the tangent of IK, so the total 
sine FC is to the sine of FK, or 1 sign 19012', which, subtracted 
from the place of the south node F 7 signs 14024', will leave 5 
signs 25o09', i.e. 25o09' Scorpio for the true place of that square in 
the ecliptic.1 
The sinister quincunx will be found [thus]: if 60° is added to the 
place of the square I, it will terminate at the point N; and so, if from 
the 60° are taken away 49o08' for [the arc] FI, 10o55' will be left 
'This method of calculation, while formally correct, is impractical because the 
aspect arc is made to depend on the ratios of the sines and tangents of two small 
angles. And unless these angles are calculated to seconds of arc, the aspect arcs 
cannot be depended on to the nearest minute of arc. For example, Morin calcu- 
lates the ratio ofthe tangents of 1041' and 1047' and gets for the arc sine of that ra- 
tio 70o44'. If we change 1041' to 1042' and repeat the calculation, we get 72025'. 
Thus, a change of 1° of arc in the latitude produces a change of 1041 in the longi- 
tude of the aspect. This procedure is obviously unsatisfactory. It seems odd that 
Morin, who was the Regius Mathematician of France, did not notice this. (Actu- 
ally, the difference between the arcs AG and AH is only about 31' of arc, which 
should have been apparent from the fact that he found above that AE = AD when 
AE is 40o52'.) 
43 

===== PAGE 52 =====

for [the arc] FN. And therefore, let it be made as the total sine of FL 
is to the sine of FN, so is the sine of ML or BC to the sine of N; and 
it will make 0o20' for NP, the south descending latitude of the 
quincunx itself, which terminates in the ecliptic at the point P; and 
since the arc FP is known, let it be that as the tangent of LM is to 
the tangent ofNP, so the total sine FM is to the sine of FP, 10o46', 
which, if it is added to the place of the node F at 12024' Scorpio, it 
will make 25° 10' Scorpio for the place of that quincunx. 
And so with all the others for Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and Mer- 
cury. Moreover, having found the sinister aspects as above, the 
dexter aspects are diametrically opposed to them, with equal lati- 
tudes but of the opposite denominations, viz. the sinister 
semi-sextile is opposed to the dexter quincunx, the sinister sextile 
to the dexter trine, the sinister square to the dexter square, the sin- 
ister trine to the dexter sextile, and the sinister quincunx to the dex- 
ter semi-sextile; and consequently, it is only necessary to find the 
sinister [aspects] or the dexter ones. Moreover, we shall give an 
excellent table in Book 22, with the aid of which these aspects and 
their own longitudes and latitudes can very easily be found, for the 
present method is only suitable for learned persons and those fond 
of theory.1 
But since for finding the true place of any aspect in the ecliptic, 
the arc of the ecliptic first found must be added to or subtracted 
from the true place of the node that is nearest to the true place of 
the Planet in the ecliptic, it may be known whether this node is the 
ascending node or the descending node of the Planet as follows. 
When the true latitude of the Planet is north and subsequently in- 
creases, the Planet is departing from its own true north node and is 
going toward its northern limit; if it decreases, the planet is depart- 
ing from the northern limit and is going toward the descending 
node. And when the true latitude of the Planet is south and in- 
'in my translation of Book 22, Morin goes into more detail and presents some ta- 
bles of aspects, and I have also added two Appendices that contain an extended 
discussion of this aspect theory. The reader who wants to pursue Morin's theory 
may benefit from reading that material. 
44 

===== PAGE 53 =====

creases thereafter, the Planet is departing from its descending node 
and is going toward its southern limit; if it decreases, it is departing 
from the limit and going toward the ascending node. And this is al- 
ways true for Mars, Venus, Mercury, and the Moon, but not for 
Saturn and Jupiter. 
And so in general if a Planet in the northern part [of the Caelum] 
has not yet attained its maximum north latitude, it precedes the as- 
cending node; if it has already passed [its maximum north lati- 
tude], it follows the descending node. And think the same about a 
Planet in the southern part [of the Caelum]. Moreover, when it pre- 
cedes the ascending node or the descending node, take away the 
arc first found (which is the distance of the planet from the node in 
the ecliptic) from the Planet itself, and the remainder will be the 
place of the node in the ecliptic. But if it follows the ascending 
node or the descending node, add that same distance to the place of 
the Planet to get the node. 
But some things can be objected to in this doctrine, from the res- 
olution of which it may be established more firmly. And first, that 
the Planet does not move in the assumed circle of aspects, as the 
Sun in the ecliptic circle [does] for the aspects of the Sun; there- 
fore, that circle is also fictitious, as are the circles of Bianchini and 
Regiomontanus. 
I reply: there is no other circle that coincides more closely with 
the apparent path of the Planet, especially for Saturn, Jupiter, and 
Mars, from whose paths the circles of Bianchini and Regiomon- 
tanus absolutely diverge; and consequently, the circle assumed by 
us ought to be chosen in preference to the rest as being more natu- 
ral and real, seeing that the apparent path of the Planet in the 
Caelum is not circular, but the aspects are put in an exact circle by 
the astrologers, forced by experience. 
It may be objected in the second place that through this method 
the true node of the Planet in the Caelum appears to run not only 
through more degrees in a year, but even more signs, although the 
45 

===== PAGE 54 =====

mean motion of that same node, is not even 2' in any year. There- 
fore, that apparent motion is fictitious. 
But I reply. It is not fabricated, but it also really happens. For 
example, on 23 April 1647 Venus lacking any latitude is in 19049' 
Taurus, and on its own true north node according to The 
Rudolphine Tables', and on 13 August it is in 3o05' Libra, in its 
own true south node; and consequently, its true north node at that 
time ought to be in 3o05' Aries; and so, from the day 23 April to 13 
August, it had moved backward 1 sign 16044'. 
Moreover, on 4 December of that same year, this same Venus is 
again lacking in latitude in 8o02' Sagittarius, in its own north node, 
although that same node had previously been in 19049 Taurus; and 
so, from 23 April to 4 December, it had moved backward 5 signs 
11047'. 
And in short, in the figure above, Venus's motion in longitude 
from its own true ascending node A up to C, where its latitude is a 
maximum, is less than a quadrant or 90° just as much as the true 
node A itself has gone back apparently in the preceding direction 
because of the transfer [of the coordinates] of these Planets from 
the Sun and the phase of the Earth. Nor is that only true of this 
quadrant AC, but also of the arcs AE and AG, when the true mo- 
tion of Venus in longitude is less than the quantity of these same 
arcs. 
It may be objected in the third place that the inclination of the 
apparent planetary path in the Caelum is never the same, but is 
continually varied, otherwise it would be a perfect circle; there- 
fore, the maximum apparent latitude cannot be taken for the con- 
stant inclination to the ecliptic of the circle of aspects while the 
Planet is moving from its own node to that maximum latitude, or 
from the latter to the former. 
But I reply that since the above said circle of aspects and the ap- 
parent path of the Planet in the Caelum have this in common: that 
46 

===== PAGE 55 =====

through each line the Planet proceeds from its own true node to the 
above said maximum latitude, or recedes from there, the differ- 
ence in longitude and latitude of the aspects arising from this vari- 
ation is for the most part insensible, at least in the same northern or 
southern semicircle through which the Planet runs, and which 
alone is considered, because the other [line] from its determination 
is continuous with it, namely they make one single perfect circle. 
It may be objected in the fourth place that this method cannot al- 
ways be used for Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury. For 
when the Planet is lacking in latitude, being in its own true node, 
what will its circle of aspects be then? Perhaps the ecliptic? But 
the Planet does not move in the ecliptic. Perhaps another circle? 
But what will its inclination to the ecliptic be? And will it be the 
maximum north latitude, or will it be the maximum south latitude, 
differing between themselves by several degrees? 
I reply that although the Planet is truly on its own node, lacking 
any latitude, yet it is certain that it truly moves with respect to us in 
its own apparent orbit, inclined to the ecliptic. And consequently, 
that will always be the circle of aspects which goes according to 
that apparent path. Moreover, its inclination will be the maximum 
latitude from which the Planet has departed, and it has decreased 
up to that very node in which the Planet's latitude has ceased [alto- 
gether], and not the maximum latitude [next] following, to which it 
is going, because it has not yet entered upon that. And this objec- 
tion can be made for any other circle of aspects going with the ap- 
parent path of the Planet in the Caelum, whatever inclination is 
taken for it from the north part [of the Caelum] or the south. 
It may be objected in the fifth place that it seems more probable 
that the circle of aspects ought to be traced through the true place 
of the Planet and the nodes of its own true orbit, reduced to the 
ecliptic of the Primum Caelum through the phase of the Earth. For 
thus, from the given true place of the Planet with its longitude and 
latitude and also from the true place of its node, an inclination of 
the circle of aspects will be given that is appropriate and conform- 
47 

===== PAGE 56 =====

able to whatever time was assumed. That indeed seems to be more 
conformable to reason than to take the maximum apparent latitude 
of the Planet for the constant inclination of the circle of aspects as 
long as the Planet moves from its own node to that maximum lati- 
tude, or from the latter to the former. 
I reply that it does indeed seem more probable at first glance, 
and I myself was deluded by this method until I discovered that the 
inclination to the ecliptic of the circle of aspects of Mars could 
amount to as much as 12°, which deviates too much from the maxi- 
mum latitude of Mars, which never exceeds 8°. And the true place 
of Venus and Mercury in the ecliptic sometimes (that is, when they 
are traversing the interior parts of their own true orbits) coincide 
with the true places of their nodes; and yet, [placed] thus, Venus 
and Mercury possess a latitude of several degrees even, which can- 
not happen, or their latitudes are made equal to their distances 
from their true nodes, which would call for a 90° inclination to the 
ecliptic for the circle of aspects, and this deviates much more from 
the true latitude of Venus and Mercury. 
Therefore, if the circles differ too much from the motion in the 
apparent paths of the Planets in the Caelum, then consequently the 
only thing left for us is to take the circle we have explained, which 
follows that motion more than the others and never exceeds the 
maximum latitude of the Planet, although for Saturn and Jupiter ei- 
ther method can be employed indiscriminately without any great 
error. 
But as for the Moon in its orbit around the Earth, it also admits a 
double orbit, that is a true orbit that it describes truly with the cen- 
ter of its own body around the Earth, which orbit is called the mean 
eccentric orbit1 by Kepler, inclined to the ecliptic at a constant an- 
gle of 5°, then the apparent orbit, in which it is seen from our point 
'in Latin ecceniricus solutus. That is, the eccentric orbit "freed [from minor vari- 
ations]" that yields the "unperturbed" or elliptical position of the Moon. Morin 
does not actually use the Latin word medius 'mean', but by (modem) definition a 
mean orbit is one "freed from perturbations." 
48 

===== PAGE 57 =====

of view to move projected upon the Primum Mobile, and it under- 
goes monthly anomalies by means of which its longitude and lati- 
tude are varied.' 
And this apparent orbit is called the monthly eccentric [orbit], 
librating about the mean [orbit] and inclined to it by a variable an- 
gle because of the libration, but not exceeding 19' according to 
Tycho and Kepler. Moreover, the true place of the Moon in longi- 
tude and latitude with respect to the center of the Earth is always 
taken in this orbit, also the true place of its north node, and these 
are put into the ephemerides. 
But since the inclination of the apparent orbit or of the lunar 
path in the Caelum is continually varied by this libration, it results 
that the path itself is not a perfect circle, as happens in the case of 
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, but somewhat different 
from a circle, although [the difference is] nearly imperceptible. And 
consequently the maximum latitude that the Moon can attain in the 
northern part [of the Caelum] or the southern, through which it 
moves, can be taken much more accurately for the inclination of the 
circle of aspects, which is nearly the same as the librational orbit. 
And the places of the aspects can be projected from the true place 
of the Moon, as is done for Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mer- 
cury. And so, for all these Planets there will be one and the same 
method, which recommends it still more, and whose verity will begin 
to shine forth particularly in the case of the Moon's aspects, because 
their circle and the Moon's apparent orbit nearly coincide. 
'Morin here refers to the variation of the Moon's inclination. Tycho Brahe intro- 
duced terms into the lunar tables that had the effect of causing the inclination of 
the Moon's orbit to oscillate back and forth by as much as 9o30' on either side of 
its mean value of 5o08'. This also caused the Moon's nodes to oscillate back and 
forth by as much as 1046' on either side of their mean position. The variation of 
the nodes is something like the so-called "true node" given in some modem astro- 
logical ephemerides. The combination of the variation of the inclination and the 
nodes gives rise to variations in the Moon's latitude. In addition to these motions, 
the Moon's longitude in the ephemerides of Morin's time contained three varia- 
tions or "anomalies" that caused it to vary by as much as 7° from its mean elliptic 
position. But Morin is mainly concerned here with the variation of the latitude, 
the inclination, and the nodes. 
49 

===== PAGE 58 =====

Indeed, since the place of the North Node is given in the 
ephemerides of the Moon for every single day, it will be a shorter 
method for the Moon if from the places of the Moon and the near- 
est node, calculated for the same moment, the preceding is taken 
away from the following, and the distance of the Moon from its 
node will remain. 
Then, let it be: as the sine of that distance is to the total sine, so is 
the tangent of the tme latitude of the Moon to the tangent of the 
maximum latitude, or the inclination to the ecliptic of the apparent 
lunar orbit at that time, which inclination will be the measure of the 
angle A in the figure above, a quantity that is variable in individual 
revolutions of the Moon because of the libration, but without any 
sensible error for the aspects; and finally (with the Moon placed at 
point D) let it be as the sine of BC to the sine of DE, so the total sine 
is to the sine of AD, and the place of the Moon in the apparent orbit 
will be had at point D, or [its place] in the circle of aspects, from 
which the aspects will be projected, as is done for Saturn, Jupiter, 
Mars, Venus, and Mercury. And this method for the correction of 
the Moon's aspects differs hardly at all from the one given above. 
With everything that we have said above thus established by 
reason and approved by experience, at length by chance I fell 
upon Cardan's Aphorisms 30, 31, and 32 of the first Section,1 
which I had previously read many times but could not understand 
on account of his brevity of speech and the ambiguity of the 
words in this difficult matter. I began to scent that Cardan had 
scented the circle of aspects that I had set forth, although he says 
some things that are foreign to that circle. But in the rest, he ex- 
plains his own intention so badly, that what he really had in mind 
is unknown. Moreover, whether he really scented [my method] 
and disclosed it, the reader, experienced by what has already 
been said, may judge. 
'Jerome Cardan, Seven Segments of Astronomical Aphorisms, Segment I, Apho- 
risms 30-32 (1563 ed., p. 31). See the text and discussion in my translation of 
Book 22, Appendix 1. 
50 

===== PAGE 59 =====

And so, in Aphorism 30 he says: "It is also very likely that any 
Planet may be directed by the line in which it moves, such as the 
Sun in the ecliptic and all the rest in their circles of latitude. And 
thus we may know1 the [fixed] stars to which they move bodily. For 
the direction of the place is always by the degrees of the ecliptic." 
Here, when he says "It is very likely," it is plain that he does not 
assert this, but he is in doubt about it. When he says, "that any 
Planet may be directed by the line in which it moves," that line can 
be understood as well by the true orbit as by that which we have 
called the apparent orbit, and he did not make any distinction. Be- 
sides, the circle that we have assumed is neither of these lines, and 
the apparent orbit is not the circle. 
When he says, "and all the rest in their circles of latitude," he 
has confused both himself and the reader's understanding. For if 
any particular Planet ought to be directed by the line in which it 
moves, how should all the rest of the Planets be directed? And then 
he says, "these are to be directed in their circles of latitude." It is 
established in astronomy that the circle of latitude of a Planet is 
that which descends from the pole of the ecliptic through the cen- 
ter of the planet at right angles to the ecliptic. And this is not the 
circle that we have set forth above. 
Finally, when he says, "And thus we may know the [fixed] stars 
to which they move bodily. For the direction of the place is always 
by the degrees of the ecliptic," he gives a nod to the twofold direc- 
tion of a Planet—one bodily in the line in which it moves, or (as he 
says) in its circle of latitude, and the other through the place in the 
ecliptic, which he wants to be directed by the degrees of the eclip- 
tic. But this direction is contrary to the intention of Ptolemy, who 
wishes the latitude of a Planet to be used in the method of direc- 
tions,2 and, directing by the horary times, he directs by the degrees 
'The Latin text has inveniemus 'we may find' by mistake for Cardan's sciemus 
'we may know', but Morin cites it correctly below. 
2This is false. Ptolemy says nothing about using the latitude of the Planets in di- 
rections. His instructions and examples are for what we would call zodiacal pri- 
maries by the Placidus method. 
51 

===== PAGE 60 =====

of the equator; and this is also contrary to reason, for a Planet 
ought not to be directed from a place in which it is certainly not 
present; and its place is certainly not in the ecliptic, but it is only 
reduced to the ecliptic if it has latitude. Moreover, in the other di- 
rection there is nothing different from the methods of Bianchini 
and Regiomontanus for directions to the [fixed] stars, for every 
[fixed] star of the same declination as the Planet being directed can 
come to it according to those methods. 
Aphorism 31 says, "When, therefore, it is done thus, it is also 
appropriate for all the rays to be taken in the same way in that cir- 
cle." And this is certainly true, if it means that all the rays are taken 
in the circle we have set forth as they are taken for the Sun in the 
ecliptic. And when he goes on to say, "and thereby those opposed 
to the Sun agree with the method of Bianchini," he has again con- 
fused [both] himself and the reader's understanding. For what else 
can be understood by "those opposed to the Sun" than Saturn, Ju- 
piter, and Mars, which are seen by us [at times] to be opposed to 
the Sun, but not Venus and Mercury? 
Now in our method for aspects, neither Saturn, Jupiter, and 
Mars, nor Venus and Mercury agree with Bianchini's method, in 
which the aspects always fall in the ecliptic, as is also the case in 
Regiomontanus's method. But [on the other hand] if it is only to be 
understood as, "about the opposite aspect of these Planets," then 
he has added "to the Sun" in vain,1 for in both Ptolemy's and 
Regiomontanus's methods the opposite aspect falls in the same 
point of the Caelum as with Bianchini's and our own methods. 
And when he says subsequently, "the maximum latitudes of the 
Planets ought to be known," it means those that they can have sim- 
ply from the northern part [of the Caelum] or the southern part, and 
which Cardan himself gives, although not exactly. Namely, 3o05' 
for Saturn, 2o08' for Jupiter, 7o07' for Mars, Til' for Venus, and 
'Morin has been led astray by the typesetter's error in capitalizing the Latin word 
soli only', so that it reads Soli 'to the Sun'. The translation should read, '...only 
the oppositions agree with Bianchini'. 
52 

===== PAGE 61 =====

4o05/ for Mercury.1 And when he continues, "And to know the 
places where the circle of latitude intersects the ecliptic at that 
time," this certainly ought to mean the circle set forth by me, but 
this is not a circle of latitude, as is said above. 
And when he proceeds, "from which to find the radiations," it is 
doubtful whether the radiations or aspects are to be taken in the 
ecliptic from the point where it is intersected by the circle of the 
Planet properly said, or whether they are to be taken in the circle 
set forth by us, and counting from the point in which the circle it- 
self intersects the ecliptic, but neither of which is to be done in our 
method. But they are to be counted in the circle set forth by us be- 
ginning from the body of the Planet. Although from the point 
where the ecliptic is intersected, we may use the node recognized 
by us for finding or determining the longitudes of the several as- 
pects in the ecliptic, as was made plain above. 
Finally, Aphorism 32 says, "Moreover, the maximum latitude 
should not be taken simply, but [rather] that [latitude] which is 
then the maximum when the Planet moves in that circle." Now 
Cardan seems to favor our [position] entirely. For, I take for the in- 
clination to the ecliptic of the circle of aspects the maximum lati- 
tude that the planet can have or has had in the northern or southern 
semicircle through which it moves, either in the northern or south- 
em part [of the Caelum] in which it is situated. 
If anyone then wants to deny that Cardan in these three Apho- 
risms understood the method given by me, that may be permitted 
him on account of that which was said above in the explanation of 
these Aphorisms. But if anyone asserts the opposite, at least our 
method will be confirmed from the fact that [by means] of it I my- 
self have explained the intricate and confused intention of Cardan, 
'Cardan, op. cit., gives the maximum northern and southern latitudes for each 
Planet in two successive rows of figures. Morin has taken the top row (south lati- 
tude) for all the planets except Mercury, for which he has unaccountably given 
the northern maximum. (The southern maximum given by Cardan is 4013'.) 
Cardan' figures are of course based upon the ephemerides of his day that were 
less accurate than those available to Morin. 
53 

===== PAGE 62 =====

which neither I nor anyone else had done hitherto. 
But nevertheless it is certain that Cardan himself did not explain 
how to reduce this method to practice, perhaps intimidated by the 
difficulty of the matter, nor did he ever make use of it, but instead 
[he used] the method of Bianchini, which he recommends and 
openly teaches in his Book on the Judgments of Genitures, Chapter 
7.1 And no astrologer from Cardan's time down to ours has taught 
or employed our [method]; however, Origanus, Argol, and other 
more recent [astrologers] who have discussed the correction of as- 
pects have read and re-read the Aphorisms cited above, just as I too 
did; and before [I arrived at] my own conception, I understood 
nothing in them, nor did I think about them, nor did I venture to af- 
firm until now what Cardan had in mind in them. 
Whatever then, with everything considered, we were able [to 
do] in a matter of such moment and one so difficult, one thing only 
seemed to be left to be desired in our astrology; and this the kindly 
reader may receive with a grateful spirit, or, with me also applaud- 
ing, he may propound something better. 
But we warn [the reader] that this thing must be used with the 
very best ephemerides, in which the true longitudes and especially 
the latitudes of the Planets are given correctly, if the astronomy 
fundamentally restored by us at last, once it has supplied such 
ephemerides, in which at the beginning of each year, at least for 
Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, are put their maximum latitudes in the 
northern or southern semicircles through which they move, and at 
what time it has gone ahead or it is going to come after, lest search- 
'This chapter is on p. 444 of vol. 5 of the 1663 edition. Cardan does not mention 
Bianchini (or anyone else), but explains that the oppositions and squares fall in 
the same degree and minute as the Planet itself, but the sextiles and trines must be 
corrected by a table that he gives in Col. 1. The table proceeds at intervals of 30 
from 0o30 to 8o00, and the correction ranges from 0' to 15'. Cardan says to add 
the correction to sextiles and subtract it from trines. For the latitudes of the as- 
pects, he says the opposition has the same latitude but the direction is reversed, 
the squares have zero latitude, the sextiles have half the Planet's Istitude, and the 
trines have half the Planet's latitude with the direction reversed. See Appendix 1 
for a translation of the entire chapter. 
54 

===== PAGE 63 =====

ing for these things be too tedious, especially in the case of Saturn, 
which in the same semicircle is ascending in latitude around 
twelve times and descending in as many in the space of about 15 
years. 
Moreover, how much it matters to have ephemerides or exact 
tables for this procedure, he will sufficiently infer who notices that 
the latitudes of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury in the 
Prutenic Tables, the Lansbergian Tables, and the Rudolphine Ta- 
bles frequently differ among themselves by I0.1 
Translator's Comment 
Morin's method of finding the appropriate maximum latitude 
for a Planet in a particular instance seems to be this: 
1. If the Planet is decreasing in latitude, find the previous maxi- 
mum. 
2. If the Planet is increasing in latitude, find the subsequent 
maximum. 
3. In the case of the slower Planets, take the maximum obtained 
from Rule 1 or Rule 2, even though the maximum so obtained is 
only a "yearly maximum." 
4. For the Moon, use the nodes given in the ephemeris, and de- 
'The Prutenic Tables (1551) were prepared by Erasmus Reinhold (1511-1553), 
the Lansbergian Tables (1632) by Philip van Lansberge (1561-1632), and the 
Rudolphine Tables (1627) by Johann Kepler (1571 -1630). Of these, Kepler's ta- 
bles were the most accurate. Morin also issued his own version of the Rudolphine 
Tables in 1650, and it is probably those to which he refers under that title. The so- 
lar and planetary positions given by the Rudolphine Tables are usually accurate 
to within a few minutes of arc, although the solar positions have a sinusoidal error 
with a maximum of 7 or 8 minutes of arc, which in the worst case can be multi- 
plied several times in the position of Mercury or Venus. The Moon positions can 
be off by as much as 30', since only the three largest perturbations of its true lon- 
gitude had been determined (empirically) by Kepler and his predecessors, and 
twenty or more are required to ensure a maximum error of no more than 1'. The 
latitudes were also not precisely calculated for a similar reason. These sizable er- 
rors in the Moon positions would tend to vitiate Morin's efforts to apply his as- 
pect correction successfully, but he was of course unaware of this. 
55 

===== PAGE 64 =====

termine the inclination from the Moon's latitude and its distance 
from the nearest node, as explained above. 
5. Having determined the appropriate inclination to use and the 
distance of the Planet from the nearest node, add multiples of 30° 
to the Planet's "eccentric arc" to obtain the eccentric location of 
the aspects. 
6. Convert the eccentric positions of the aspects into ecliptic 
longitude and latitude by following the Rules given above or by 
using Morin's Tables (given in Book 22). 
This method is somewhat similar to Cardan's, in that it postu- 
lates an "aspect circle" whose inclination and nodes must be deter- 
mined for each particular case. But Cardan always locates the 
Planet at either the northern or southern limit (the point of maxi- 
mum latitude), while Morin's method permits the Planet to be any- 
where in the circle. Consequently, the derived corrections to the 
aspect longitudes (other than to that of the opposition) and the de- 
termined latitudes of the aspects will nearly always be different. 
Both methods seem to be developments of the earlier idea 
(Bianchini's) of assigning the Planet's latitude (with reversed di- 
rection) to its opposition. And behind the whole thing is the doc- 
trine of the projection of rays, much discussed by the Arabs, which 
contains the basic idea that the arcs of aspects must be adjusted for 
latitude under certain circumstances. 
In view of the fact that the maximum errors in the Moon's lon- 
gitude given by the best tables of Morin's time are equal to or 
greater than the maximum aspect correction in longitude given by 
his theory, it seems doubtful that Morin's "experience" with his 
method is entitled to as much weight as he gives to it.1 And since 
'The change of mundane position caused by the assignment of latitude to an as- 
pect will ordinarily be greater than that caused by the shift in longitude, espe- 
cially in higher geographic latitudes, but the maximum ephemeris error can still 
cause a shift of half a degree in the mundane position, with a consequent error in 
timing of 6 months. Also, like virtually all astrologers before and since, Morin, 
56 

===== PAGE 65 =====

the errors in both the lunar and Planetary longitudes were much 
larger in Cardan's time, it is virtually certain that he could not have 
proved the validity of his method. (And in fact he does not claim to 
have done so.) Thus, we are left with an interesting subject for 
modem research. 
Chapter 10. The Benefic and Malefic Nature of Aspects, 
and what is the Cause of both. Then, which Aspects 
are Benefic and which are Malefic. 
Here we do not inquire whether some of the astrological aspects 
are by their own nature benefic, and others malefic. For we sup- 
pose that by daily experience this is proved and accepted by all as- 
trologers. And hence it follows that not all of them are benefic, nor 
are all of the malefic; therefore, it remains to determine which ones 
are benefic, which ones are malefic, and from what source the lat- 
ter and the former have that [quality]. Concerning which, certainly 
nothing before now has occured to me in astrology that is more dif- 
ficult and abstruse; for even though the astrologers' opinions 
about this matter are varied, yet not one is consistent, nor does it 
satisfy me or its own author. But individually they all lapse into 
absurdity. 
For first Ptolemy, Quadripartite, Book 1, Chapter 13, refers the 
benefic nature of the trine and sextile to the affinity or the harmony 
of the signs in which such aspects fall. And the malefic nature of 
the opposition and square to the contrariety of the signs in which 
those aspects fall. Moreover, he says nothing about the nature of 
the conjunction, the semi-sextile, and the quincunx. 
But that this opinion is erroneous is plain from this—because 
all the [pairs of] opposition signs harmonize among themselves no 
less than [those of] the sextile. In fact, both the latter and the for- 
mer are among signs of the same sex and sect; indeed, they are 
similar in their active qualities, [but] dissimilar in the passive qual- 
while explicitly acknowledging the need to use parallax, in his practice ignores 
its effect on the Moon's position. 
57 

===== PAGE 66 =====

ities; whence, it would follow that both [pairs of] aspects are 
benefic, or both are malefic—the contrary of which Ptolemy 
himself asserts. 
Moreover, Cardan in his Commentary philosophizes otherwise. 
For he says, "Those that differ in each condition are contrary, and 
so they greatly disagree; moreover, the opposite signs are greatly 
distant; that is by a whole diameter. 
But (I say), even if it is conceded by reason of the distance, nev- 
ertheless when Cardan deduces from that that the square is less 
disjunct than the opposition, because there is less contrariety in the 
square, namely of sex and nature, that is plainly absurd. For the 
comparison as to agreement and disagreement ought to be made in 
things of the same kind, which are the linear distance of the two 
signs and their sexes and nature. 
Add to this that the opposite signs are always of the same sex 
and symbolic of an active life, and consequently it is very false to 
disagree, except by reason of the distance, as was said above. But 
on the contrary, even if the squares disagree less by reason of their 
distance, yet they disagree between themselves more by reason of 
their sex and nature than the oppositions. 
Finally, the reason for benefic and malefic aspects cannot be 
sought from greater or lesser distances; and this can also be proved 
plainly, for if a greater distance as such was malefic, then the least 
distance—namely every conjunction—will per se be benefic, and 
the trine per se will be worse than the square, which is absurd. 
Therefore, this reasoning of Cardan's is also groundless. 
Pontano, Celestial Things,x Book 1, from the sex and nature be- 
queathed by the signs, observes the manner in which the lines for 
the aspect come together at the center of the Earth. And he says 
that in the case of the opposition, the rays violently meeting and 
observing themselves through the same diametrical line, excite 
'Giovanni Gioviano Pontano (1426-1503), De rebus coelestibus (Basel, 1530). 
58 

===== PAGE 67 =====

discords and enmities, and as a result this aspect is harmful and 
hostile. Moreover, the rays of the squares, even though they do not 
meet each other from opposite fronts, nevertheless because they 
strike each other by a right angle, and neither wishes to give way to 
the other, they arouse contentions; and therefore, this form of radi- 
ation is also menacing. But the triangular and sexangular rays dis- 
turb themselves in neither way, but combine themselves like com- 
panions and proceed together just like a single blade. Whence, 
both of these radiations are thought to be benevolent. 
Truly, this opinion too does not satisfy. First, because although 
it could be supported between two Planets that are opposed or 
square, both of whose rays are corporeal in a way, and basically of 
a diverse nature, yet it cannot be supported between simple aspects 
from a single Planet, which are made by two rays of the same basic 
nature, which are a ray from the body of Mars and a ray from the 
place of Mars,1 which are not both corporeal, but one is spiritual, 
as was said in Chapter 4, for a violent meeting and a restraining 
beating, or refusing to yield, is only given between bodies, even 
more than the rays of the influences. 
Second, because even if it were also conceded about the 
semi-sextile and the sextile, that they combine themselves like as- 
sociates, and just as they proceed together in one line, namely be- 
cause they are making acute angles in the center with the basic ray, 
they seem to extend a zone with that basic ray; but nevertheless it 
should not be conceded about the trine. For the rays of the trine ex- 
tend into opposite zones, encountering themselves at an obtuse an- 
gle; and they are stronger than the angle of the square; whence, the 
ray that is established with the basic trine seems from that cause to 
agree more with the nature of the opposition than with that of the 
square. Therefore, this opinion of Pontano's must also be rejected. 
Finally, it is seen that the goodness or badness of these aspects 
cannot be sought from harmonic reason is proved in this way: for 
'The Latin text has 'from Jupiter and Mars', but I have deleted 'Jupiter and', 
which does not seem to make sense. 
59 

===== PAGE 68 =====

the ratio of twelve to six establishes a very pleasing diapason of 
harmonies. Why then would it be appropriate for the opposition to 
be the worst of the aspects? Finally, the ratios of the individual 
aspects make harmonies. 
Why then are some aspects malefic and other benefic? Besides, 
if the ratio of twelve to six is inherently malefic, why does it make 
the sweetest harmony to the ears? Moreover, if it is not inherently 
malefic (which must necessarily be declared), why and from 
where will there be a malefic in the zodiac, where only is found the 
nature of these aspects, since that maleficence cannot be deduced 
from the signs, unless the sextile aspect should be pronounced to 
be inherently malefic, which is contrary to experience. 
Therefore, whatever things are physical in this matter, having 
been looked at with an attentive mind and not [found to be] satisfy- 
ing, not only is it plain that the greatest difficulty of that matter has 
been left to us, but I am compelled to declare its cause, which has a 
metaphysical, and not a marvelous cause; namely, because the 
generation of the aspects by determination as set forth in Chapter 
4, and the Planets' method of acting through their own aspects, 
would have nothing similar in Nature, and it would transcend all 
the other modes of Nature's acting. 
Therefore, with our intellect elevated to metaphysics, we shall 
try to contemplate a reason, which, if it has established itself for all 
of the aspects, [even] if it is not from God and is sufficiently alien 
to the fates of men, it can at least be received for a very true reason, 
until more subtle intellects will try to discover a tmer one; lest in 
this part we may seem only to disprove the opinions of the rest of 
the astrologers, and, having been terrified by the difficulty, be 
afraid to say nothing new. 
Therefore, since God explained the natures of the aspects in the 
zodiacal circle, it therefore occurred to us that the nature of a circle 
should first be considered. Therefore, although the simple es- 
sences of things represent most perfectly the simple nature of God 
60 

===== PAGE 69 =====

even in created things; and therefore God is said by the mystical 
theologians to reside in the essences of things, just as in His own 
throne, yet the circle has this more so than the rest, as it displays 
the same nature not only to the mind, but also marvelously to the 
senses. 
For of all the figures, the circle is the first, the simplest and in all 
ways the most similar to itself, knowing no beginning and no end, 
the most capacious of all, and the most abounding in countless 
properties, from itself especially recognizable by all, but by us 
scarcely comprehensible, as is witnessed by the so long sought and 
hitherto unknown squaring of the circle. 
o 
And all these true things are from the very nature of divinity, 
which is the first principle of all things, in which is the greatest 
simplicity, the greatest unity, the greatest infinity, the greatest ca- 
pacity and fecundity, as being that in which are the Three Divine 
Persons,1 and all things that are created and can be created; as far 
as its existence it is greatly recognizable, but as far as the essence 
of every creature it is incomprehensible. 
'The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. 
61 

===== PAGE 70 =====

But now, if a straight line equilateral triangle is described, 
which is the first of the right lined figures, this marvelously ex- 
presses the Trinity of Divine Persons in the unity of Nature before 
all the rest of [the figures] that could be thought up. For, as the 
three sides, or the three angles, of the triangle itself are greatly 
equal among themselves; nevertheless, with a numerical distinc- 
tion among themselves, the same thing is also found in the case of 
the Divine Persons; and as the three sides or the three angles are 
one triangle in number, and with one taken away the nature of the 
triangle ends, so the three Divine Persons are one God in number, 
and with one taken away it ceases to be God; otherwise it would 
not recognize itself, nor love itself. 
A 
And this cannot be said about any other straight line figure that 
either has unequal sides or that exceeds that of the the Divine Per- 
sons in number. Add that an equilateral triangle alone has this that 
is worthy of admiration—however it is drawn in the zodiac, its an- 
gles always fall in places of entirely the same nature, sex, and sect, 
which is the greatest and particular symbol of love. These two fig- 
ures therefore from curved lines and straight lines are the primary 
and simplest, rightly sacred to God, and created characters—the 
circle indeed of good and infinite simplicity, and the triangle [a 
figure] of emanation, union, and love. 
62 

===== PAGE 71 =====

Having said this, it is now certain that, as God embraces every- 
thing in Himself, so does the Primum Caelum, which is the prime 
physical cause, of which God Himself is the likeness, contain all 
bodies both locally, and all things eminently that are capable of 
generation and corruption, and their fates; it is therefore like the 
book of the fates of all things that can be generated, made in the 
likeness of prescience and God's providence for things that can be 
generated, but especially for men, which is confirmed by the daily 
experience of astrologers in nativities. 
Moreover, since the zodiac is the most efficacious part of the 
Caelum, in which the Planets by their perpetual motions and 
syzygies weave and dispense those fates; therefore the zodiacal 
circle is put here, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, etc., which, divided into 
12 equal parts for the 12 aspects, and having taken a particular 
point of Aries for the beginning of the aspects, rays are drawn from 
it to Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, and Libra, or the sub- 
tended [lines] of the aspects—Aries to Taurus for the semi-sextile, 
Aries to Gemini for the sextile, Aries to Cancer for the square, 
Aries to Leo for the trine, Aries to Virgo1 for the quincunx, and 
Aries to Libra for the opposition. Therefore, since these rays 
'The Latin text has the symbol for Scorpio by mistake for the symbol for Virgo. 
t 
63 

===== PAGE 72 =====

are certain emanations from the same basic beginning, I say that in 
their own origin, both by their way or their progress, they represent 
the six general ways of men, which, having arisen from the same 
source, namely God, embracing all things, in this World they after- 
wards leave [men] to their own liberty, and they choose their own 
way more suited to their own particular character, or voluntarily 
undertaken from some other cause. 
Therefore, the ray of opposition from Aries to Libra falling per- 
pendicularly in the middle of the periphery without any return by 
reflection to its origin, expresses the way of atheists and the rest of 
those impious men, who, opposing God and His influx by diamet- 
rical opposition, and spuming Him, indeed denying Him, from a 
return to its own beginning, namely God, [about whom] they care 
very little, but incapable due to the perseverance of their own fixed 
malice and inclination, they always remain averse to Him, which is 
merely diabolical and the abyss of all iniquity. 
And at first glance the reader should not be disturbed, that 
through the rays of the aspects we are expounding the ways of men 
and their piety with regard to religion, as if these ways have noth- 
ing in common with the Caelum or with the stars. For in its own 
place it will be demonstrated that the inclinations to religion and 
piety and their contraries are from the celestial bodies, nor is it in 
vain or beyond reason that the ninth house is the House of Reli- 
gion, in trine to the ASC. 
But the ray of the trine Aries to Leo, falling obliquely in the 
middle of the circle and on a point of entirely the same nature, sex, 
and sect as [the sign of] its beginning, is reflected by the same an- 
gle to Sagittarius and another point of the same nature and then, 
with an entirely equal reflection onto its beginning, it returns by 
the shortest path, pure and unmixed with other rays perfectly de- 
scribing an equilateral triangle that is established to be made sa- 
cred to God and the Divine Persons. 
And consequently it makes known a transformation to God and 
64 

===== PAGE 73 =====

the greatest and perpetual union with Him and the Divine Persons. 
This path, therefore, is the one of those that from the beginning to 
the end of life, with a pure and uncontaminated mind are disposed 
to God and cling to Him, and, transformed to Him, deserve to be 
said to be [worshippers] of the Son of God, and, by the shortest and 
simplest way as being by the way of love, are returned to their own 
beginning; whence it is plain that this way is the best of all and the 
truly divine one. 
Therefore, having already set down these two greatly contrary 
ways, let us now see how the rest [of the aspects] will related to 
these—that is, the rest of the rays to the rays of the trine and the op- 
position. And so, the ray of the quincunx from Aries to Virgo,1 
falling obliquely in the middle of the circle, is reflected by the 
same angle, but not onto the point on which a unique circulation of 
reflections can return to its own beginning; for only by a fifth revo- 
lution2 is it restored to the individual signs of its own beginning; 
and it is not first reflected to the trine or the opposition, but rather 
to the sextile. 
This way, therefore, is that of the Gentiles, the Heretics, and all 
those who are alien to the True Religion; nevertheless, on account 
of its reflection onto the dexter sextile, of those who are living well 
morally, who do indeed see their own origin, that is God, in the 
revolution of this life, but, deluded by false religion, they do not 
find it, and so they perish. 
Moreover, the ray of the square from Aries to Cancer, falling 
obliquely in the middle of the circle, is reflected by that same angle 
onto the point of the beginning of the opposition, and from that to 
its own opposition, and finally by another circuit to its own begin- 
ning. This way is therefore the way of those, who, following a de- 
praved inclination, are first converted to faults and offences, and 
they live in these, but finally from these, through punishment and 
the cross designated by the square and opposite rays, it is allowed 
'Again the Latin text has the symbol of Scorpio instead of the symbol of Virgo. 
2I suppose he means 5 X 360° = 1800°, which would include 12 X 150°. 
65 

===== PAGE 74 =====

to be returned to its own beginning. Persons of this sort are those 
who are punished in various ways for crimes in this World, and 
they are especially those who are afflicted with a public 
punishment by judicial sentence. 
But the ray of the sextile from Aries to Gemini is reflected first 
to the place of the trine and then to the place of the opposition, and 
then to the place of the other trine, and, having always avoided the 
places of the squares, it returns to its own beginning with a single 
circuit of reflections. And this is the moderate way of good men, 
who first entrust themselves from love to God and virtue, and who 
flee from associations with depraved men; nevertheless, they 
sometimes work on the diabolical way of sin, but immediately 
they return to God and virtues, and they return to their own begin- 
ning during the revolution of this life. 
Finally, the ray of the semi-sextile from Aries to Taurus is re- 
flected first to the place of the sextile, but from that to the places of 
the square, the trine, the quincunx, the opposition, etc., and so to 
all of the aspects dexter and sinister, and finally it is reflected to its 
own beginning with a single circuit of reflections. And this is the 
least way of good men, who certainly from the beginning are allot- 
ted some propensity for virtues, and who esteem good men, but 
then not fleeing from associations with depraved men, and fre- 
quently involved with them, they sometimes do good and some- 
times evil; nevertheless, inclined by the stars towards their own 
beginning, they seek that, and finally attain it. 
Moreover—and this is worthy of admiration—that the rays of 
the opposition, square, and quincunx split the triangular character 
of the Unitarian God, which the rays of the sextile and the 
semi-sextile venerate as it were, and they only pass by them rever- 
ently in the revolution of their own reflections. And that, as there 
are 3 depraved ways of men, of which the least evil is attributed to 
the ray of the quincunx, the worse evil to the square, and the worst 
of all to the opposition, so there are 3 ways of good men, of which 
namely the root inclination or the authorizer is disposed to virtues 
66 

===== PAGE 75 =====

and to God. The first of these is to beginnings, which refers to the 
semi-sextile; the second, of making progress, which refers to the 
sextile; and the third, of things completed, which refers to the trine. 
But now, since evil is connected to depraved ways and good to 
good ways; that is, because good is the genuine result of good, and 
evil of evil; therefore, from what was said above, it is at least very 
probably shown that the quincunx, square, and opposition are un- 
lucky aspects. But the semi-sextile, sextile, and trine are fortunate, 
some in fact more so but others less so. And the cause of the good- 
ness or the evil of the individual [aspects] is referred to the mode of 
inclination of their rays, which in the Primum Mobile subtend the 
individual aspects. 
But that which pertains to the conjunction, since it is seen sim- 
ply, is the basic ray of the Planet, which from its own nature is ei- 
ther good like Jupiter or evil like Mars. The conjunction will there- 
fore be inherently indifferent and determinable either to good or to 
evil, along with the nature of the Planet from which the basic ray of 
the conjunction comes forth. 
And in what has been said above, there is nothing that is alien to 
God and His wisdom or to the fates of men and the nature of the as- 
pects, and that is not uniformly established; and consequently, that 
does not also suffice for the very probable cause of the good and 
evil aspects; and if anyone does not approve this, let him expound 
something better. Besides, it comes to mind here that what Cardan 
says in his Book on Revolutions, Chapter 6, must also be noted: 
"All aspects of the good Planets are good, and all aspects of the 
evil Planets are evil." Which indeed if it is understood about the 
nature of the Planets, about the determination and state of the good 
ones, or in the same way of the evil ones, can be true, but otherwise 
it will be false. 
For the direction of the ASC to the opposition of Jupiter badly 
afflicted in the 8th house killed Cardinal Richelieu, and there was 
no other direction for that effect, and it was sufficient. And simi- 
67 

===== PAGE 76 =====

larly, the direction of the ASC to the square of Venus, ruler of the 
cusp of the 7th in the 12th, applying to Jupiter and the Sun, rulers 
of the 5th and the 8th, partilely joined together in the 12th, caused 
me to have very dangerous wounds and nearly death on account of 
a woman. And so it must be said that the aspects semi-sextile, 
sextile, and trine, are good per se, but by accident they can be evil; 
namely, by reason of the Planet of which they are the aspects, and 
by reason of the determination of that Planet. 
Which granted, if Mars is in the 8th house or the 12th, or if it is 
their ruler, its sextile and trine are made bad and unlucky for life, 
illnesses, imprisonment, etc.; and similarly, if Jupiter is in the 2nd 
or the 10th, or is their ruler, in a conformable house of the figure, 
and its square and opposition are lucky, they will be [indicators] 
for riches, honors, etc.; especially if the celestial state of Jupiter is 
fortunate. But if it is in the 12th or the 8th, and especially unfortu- 
nate, its square and opposition will be unlucky for health and life. 
Therefore, this is contrary to [the remarks of] Cardan above, 
and to Almansor's1 Aphorism 9; [and] we conclude that the 
semi-sextile, the sextile, and the trine aspects are benefic by their 
own nature, and the square, quincunx, and opposition are malefic 
by their own nature; but by accident, the latter can be benefic and 
the former malefic; namely by the Planet from which they are, 
namely by nature benefic or malefic, and by reason of its celestial 
state and its determination in the figure of the nativity, or some- 
thing else, to good or evil. 
For in general, every Planet that is malefic by nature, badly af- 
flicted by its celestial state, and determined to evil in the figure, es- 
pecially by body, harms that to which it is determined with all of 
'A collection of about 150 astrological aphorisms translated from the Arabic by 
Plato of Tivoli in 1136 and first printed in an astrological miscellany at Venice in 
1492 as Propositiones Almansoris [The Propositions of Almansor]. It is now 
available in an astrological compendium translated by James Herschel Holden, 
Five Medieval Astrologers (Tempe,Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2007). Almansor's Propo- 
sition 9 reads, "The trine and the sextile of the infortunes do not help, just as the 
square and the opposition of the fortunes do not harm." 
68 

===== PAGE 77 =====

its aspects. Moreover, every [Planet] benefic by nature, well dis- 
posed and determined to good, helps that to which it is determined 
with all of its aspects. Moreover, a malefic by nature well disposed 
and determined to good, at least by a trine or sextile is productive; 
but on the contrary, a benefic badly disposed and determined to 
evil, at least by a square or opposition will harm, as will be tull ex- 
plained in Book 22. Indeed, it can be the case that the same Planet 
may harm by one of its own squares or trines, but may benefit by 
another—not with regard to the same thing such as life, but with 
regard to different things, such as life and dignities, according as it 
has [a relation] to both by its nature and determination. 
Besides, the trine and sextile aspects are called benefic for this 
reason, because they are aspects of friendship, consensus, and af- 
fability. But the opposition and square are called malefic for this 
reason, because they are aspects of enmity, contrariety, and diffi- 
culty. And it must be noted that a malefic aspect to any significator 
is worse if it follows that significator, as the ASC for life, rather 
than if it precedes it, especially if it is a malefic aspect of a malefic 
Planet. Moreover, a benefic aspect, especially of a benefic Planet, 
is best if it follows the significator. And the aspect of a preceding 
malefic frees it from a bad influx, or it mitigates it. As, if the ASC 
is the 3rd degree of Aries, and the square of Saturn is in the 2nd de- 
gree of Aries, but Jupiter or its trine is in the 4th degree of Aries; 
the native will be freed as far as his life from the bad influx of Sat- 
urn. But if Saturn's square was in the 4th degree, and Jupiter's 
trine was in the 2nd degree, the square of Saturn would be very 
bad. And so in the case of the other significators and aspects. 
Chapter 11. Whether the Astrological Aspects differ 
from each other in Kind. 
This question must be understood to be about the simple aspects 
of each planet. And it will be seen to involve some difficulty. 
First, because through its individual aspects only the same basic 
virtue of the Planet is communicated; and therefore, not differing 
in virtue, they seem not to differ in kind. Second, because at least 
69 

===== PAGE 78 =====

the good aspects among themselves and the evil aspects among 
themselves seem only to differ by more or less, which is not a spe- 
cific difference; for thus in harmonies, the fifth, the twelfth, and 
the nineteenth, which pertain to the trine, sextile, and semi-sextile, 
are a single nature multiplied.1 
Nevertheless, it is certain that the conjunction, semi-sextile, 
[sextile], square, trine, quincunx, and the opposition differ individ- 
ually among themselves. And that the benefic aspects and the ma- 
lefic aspects certainly differ in kind; [and this can be] quite easily 
conceded, and also that the benefic force and the malefic force are 
not the same kind of force. Consequently, since the sextile and the 
trine, or the square and the opposition, do not otherwise have the 
same essence as the trine and the square; therefore, the latter differ 
in kind; and therefore, the former differ in kind. Moreover, that 
which was assumed is proved; for every aspect has its essence 
from its own proper ratio to the whole circle or to four right angles. 
Nevertheless, these ratios differ among themselves in kind no 
less than do the numbers; and the above said harmonies are even 
generically of one nature; and yet they differ in kind no less than 
their ratios, or than a single tone and a diapason differ. Add that the 
quincunx aspect, which is referred to a sesqui-ditone is of another 
order than the square and opposition, which are referred to the dia- 
pason and the double diapason, as the sesqui-di-tone is of another 
order than the diapason. 
But as for that which was said to the contrary above for the indi- 
vidual aspects, that they communicate only the same basic virtue 
of the Planet. I reply, they do of course only communicate the 
same virtue, but in a different manner. And the individual aspects 
have their own manner of communicating, in which the basic ratio 
of each one consists. The aspects are therefore the same materially, 
but not formally, and there is a different definition for each of 
them, as is [made] plain in Chapter 9. 
'These numbers refer to the musical harmonies discussed earlier. 
70 

===== PAGE 79 =====

Chapter 12. The Causes of the Astrological Aspects. 
The efficient cause of the aspects is the Planet, from which their 
basic ray flows, which is constantly located under some point of 
the zodiac, [and which] determines the other eleven places in that 
same circle with respect to us, as is shown in Chapter 4, which 
places are the aspects of the Planet. 
Moreover, it is no less wonderful in nature, than in experience it 
is certain and evident, that each Planet through its own place in the 
Caelum with respect to us determines eleven other places, materi- 
ally of the same nature and virtue among themselves, but formally 
different; and some of them are benefic and others are malefic. 
The final cause is the multiplication of the virtue of the Planet, 
and then extending it to all that which pertains to the subject expe- 
riencing it. Then, in a qualitative way, [they are] benefic, malefic, 
or moderate. For if a Planet only acts upon a man being bom by its 
basic ray, and that falls in the MC or the 10th house, it would only 
influence him in connection with his actions and rulership. But be- 
cause God made the Planets to be universal bodies for acting, He 
therefore gave to them a celestial force for acting in multiple ways 
by their own influxes. Certainly through their basic ray, through 
rulership, and through their aspects. 
And so, a Planet located in the MC, is found through its own as- 
pects in individual houses of the figure, and therefore it acts on ev- 
erything that pertains to the man being bom, and in some [of those 
houses] beneficently, or maleficently, or moderately according to 
the quality or nature of the aspect. 
The material cause is the place in the Primum Caelum, desig- 
nated by some aspect and determined basically to the nature of the 
influencing Planet. And finally, the formal cause is the proper ratio 
of each aspect to the whole circle, as is stated in Chapter 3. 
71 

===== PAGE 80 =====

Chapter 13. The Orb of virtue of the Stars, and the 
Semi-diameter of that Orb for the Planets and the Fixed [Stars]. 
A new and true Doctrine for the Recognition of the Aspects. 
However much each Planet emits its own forces onto the center 
of the World or the Primum Caelum, it indeed determines its cir- 
cumference at its own true place and at its aspects according to 
Chapter 4; and consequently it can be said that the Caelum itself is 
matched to the Orb of Virtue of each Planet. 
Nevertheless, it is established by experience that the influential 
force of a Planet does not adhere only to the first part of the Pri- 
mum Mobile, which the Planet subtends by its own visible diame- 
ter, but it is diffused from its orbit in the Primum Mobile, at some 
distance round that part, that is around the seen place of the Planet, 
so that in the center of its orb, which is the seen place of the Planet, 
the influential virtue of that planet is at its strongest, and it is grad- 
ually reduced up to the periphery of that orb, where it finally 
leaves off its influential determination. 
Therefore, that orb is commonly accustomed to be said to be 
the Orb of Virtue of that Planet, which not only coincides with 
the seen place of the Planet in the Primum Mobile, but also with 
its individual aspects, as experience proves, and it will be ex- 
plained more fully below; and the virtue of a Planet does not flow 
forth onto inferior things from just any point of the Caelum, but 
only from those points determined by the conjunction and the as- 
pects. 
Moreover, how great the diameter of this orb is for the individ- 
ual Planets has hitherto remained uncertain among astrologers, on 
account of the unknown fundamental of that quantity; whence, 
some attribute a greater orb to a particular Planet and others a 
lesser orb, although they do not seem to differ much in turn. For 
Ptolemy, in [Quadripartite] Book 3, Chapter 10 will have the 
semi-diameter of that orb to be 12 degrees for Jupiter, or the arc of 
the great circle drawn through the center of Jupiter, containing 12 
72 

===== PAGE 81 =====

degrees counted from the body or the center of Jupiter. For Venus, 
he will have it to be 8 degrees.1 
But he does not speak about the other Planets, and yet in Book 
1, Chapter 24, he says universally that there ought not to be a long 
interval in applications and separations. Moreover, Cardan in his 
Commentary, from that proportion of the semi-diameters of the 
orbs of Jupiter and Venus, will have these to be the semi-diameters 
for the rest of the Planets—for the Sun of course 17°, for the Moon 
12o30, for Saturn 10°, for Mars and Mercury 7°. But Porphyry On 
Ptolemy2 at the end of Book 4, and after him Schoner, Part 2, 
Chapter 17, give the Sun 15°, the Moon 12°, Saturn and Jupiter 9°, 
Mars 8°, and Venus and Mercury 7°. And Origanus,3 from the con- 
sensus of other astrologers, gives the Sun and the Moon 15°, Sat- 
urn 9°, Jupiter 10°, Mars and Venus 8°, and Mercury and the Node 
70.4 Moreover, none of these offers and fundamental reason [for 
them], but each one delivers his own opinion with regard to the 
limits of their experiences. 
Therefore, we shall try to give instruction on this facet of astrol- 
ogy with an independent explanation for the Planets and the fixed 
stars and a natural foundation for that semi-diameter, the concept 
of which has consequently pleased us greatly at the first glance, 
because it squares with astronomical observations, with physical 
'These numbers, 12° for Jupiter and 8° for Venus are simply the so-called least 
years of those Planets. They were never intended to be orbs, but Ptolemy mistak- 
enly mentioned them in that sense. 
Porphyry (233-C.304), Eisagogeeis ten Apotelesmatiken tou Ptolemaiou Intro- 
duction to Ptolemy's Apotlesmatic (Tetrabiblos)' ed. by Emilie Boer and Ste- 
phen Weinstock in Catalogus Codicum Astrologorum Graecorum CCAG 5.4 
(Brussels: The Belgian Academy, 1940). Chapter 55 "The Rays of the Planets" 
gives the orbs cited by Morin, but these are the same orbs given in Sahl ibn 
Bishr's Introduction to Astrology. It seems likely that Porphyry's Chapter 55 is 
actually a translation from the Arabic text of Sahl's book and not a part of 
Porphry's original Greek text. 
3David Origanus (1558-1628), professor of mathematics at Frankfurt. He was the 
author of ephemerides and Astrologia naturalis sive tractatus de effectibus 
astrorum 'Natural Astrology or aTreatise on the Effects of the Stars' (Marseilles, 
1645). It is probably that treatise to which Morin refers. 
"^The Latin text has the symbol for Leo instead of the symbol for the Node. 
73 

===== PAGE 82 =====

reasons, with the astrological experiences of the aspects, and it dis- 
plays semi-diameters not very different from those given above, 
from which four causes it seems to me it must be held to be true 
and certain. 
And so, for physical reasons, it is reasonable that the semi-di- 
ameters of the orb of both the fixed [stars] and the Planets 
should be established by the force of the light of each of them 
compared to the light of the Sun, not because a Planet's light 
and its virtue are the same thing, but because the orb of the ac- 
tivity in the Caelum perceptible from the Earth and of both 
those qualities is the same, and therefore the light can be taken 
for the measure of the virtue.1 For the more the Planet's light ap- 
pears to us, as when it is closer to us, the more effectively it acts 
upon us with its own other qualities. For the virtue of acting at a 
distance is weakened the further it departs from its own source, 
as was shown elsewhere. 
Moreover, I have said the same thing of the orb in the Caelum, 
namely that the orb should not be conceived to be anywhere else 
than in the body of the Primum Caelum, and just as a circular space 
in the center of which the virtue of the star flourishes at its maxi- 
mum, sensibly and proportionately decreasing down to the periph- 
ery of the space, as was already said above. 
Since therefore it is established from astronomy that the Sun ex- 
tends the force of its own light to the 18th degree around itself2; 
and consequently the smallest fixed [star] placed in the same verti- 
cal [circle] with the Sun cannot be seen unless the Sun has de- 
scended 18° below the horizon in its own vertical circle with the 
'in what follows, Morin states that the orb of the Sun is 18° because when it is that 
far below the horizon, none of its light is seen on Earth. He then determines the 
relative brightness of stars and planets by noting how far the Sun has to be below 
the horizon for it to be dark enough for the star or planet to be visible in the sky. 
2It is still agreed by astronomers that the limit of astronomical twilight is reached 
when the Sun is 18° below the horizon. See Tables of Sunrise, Sunset, and Twi- 
light (Washington: U.S. Naval Observatory, 1945), p. 10. This means that total 
darkness begins when the Sun has sunk 18° below the horizon. 
74 

===== PAGE 83 =====

star placed on the horizon; therefore, to the Sun itself 18° will be 
given for the semi-diameter of the orb of its own light, and there- 
fore of its influential virtue, concerning which this is especially the 
question. 
But if the fixed [stars] and the rest of the lesser Planets posited 
below the horizon, their own light, as the Sun above the horizon 
would sensibly extend its light, that is, the semi-diameter of their 
orb would be defined in the same manner as in the case of the Sun; 
but this not having been given, there remains the following way of 
comparison of their light to the light of the Sun. And so, for the 
stars and the planets there will only be given for the semi-diameter 
of their own orb, how much any star penetrates with its own light 
[the portion of] the semi-diameter of the orb of the Sun, so that that 
star can be seen above the horizon, when the Sun is sunk [that far] 
below the horizon. 
Moreover, stars of the 6th magnitude are seen in clean air, with 
the Sun sunk down 17° on the same vertical circle with them; and 
so, since they would penetrate the semi-diameter of the Sun's orb 
to 10 from the periphery of its orb counted towards the center; 
therefore, the semi-diameter of the orb of the fixed [stars] will be 
1°; similarly, the fixed [stars] of the 5th magnitude are seen with 
the Sun sunk down 16°; those of the 4th magnitude [with it at] 15°; 
those of the 3rd at 14°; those of the 2nd at 13°; and those of the 1 st 
ai\20.] 
But in the case of the Planets according to Ptolemy, and Kepler 
in the Rudolphine Tables, Mars is seen with the Sun sunk by 
1 lo30', Saturn by 11°, Jupiter and Mercury by 10°, and Venus by 
'The figures for the dimmest stars seem to be overly optimistic, since fixed stars 
of the 6th magnitude are only visible to the keenest-eyed observers in total dark- 
ness on nights of the clearest air. Also, it is now known that the difference in 
brightness from one magnitude to the next is about 2.5 to 1; hence, a 1st magni- 
tude star is 2.55 or nearly 100 times brighter than a 6th magnitude star. So, if we 
allow the orb of a 1 st magnitude star to be 6°, then the orb of a 2nd magnitude star 
should be 2024', a 3rd magnitude star's orb should be 0o57', a 4th magnitude star 
0o23', a 5th magnitude star 0o09'. And a 6th magnitude star 0o03', or virtually zero. 
75 

===== PAGE 84 =====

50.1 Therefore the semi-diameter of the orb of the stars of the 5th 
magnitude will be 2°, of the 4th magnitude 3°, of the 3rd magni- 
tude 4°, of the 2nd magnitude 5°, of the 1 st magnitude 6°; of Mars 
6o30, of Saturn 7°, of Jupiter and Mercury 8°, and of Venus 13°. 
From which it is established that Ptolemy did not pay attention to 
this fundamental fact when he gave Jupiter 12° and Venus only 80.2 
The Moon therefore remains. And that it is due a lesser semi-di- 
ameter than that of Venus, is demonstrated by two reasons. First, 
because Venus near the Sun is occasionally seen to sparkle even at 
the noon hour when the Moon could not be seen.3 Second, because 
when the Moon on the same day is seen as both old and new, it 
must necessarily be more than 5° from the Sun, since its diurnal 
motion is never less than 110; therefore, if it is distant from the Sun 
by 6°, the semi-diameter of its orb will be only 12°, as Cardan and 
Porphyry suppose; but if it is further distant, its semi-diameter will 
then be less than 12°. Therefore, its semi-diameter will be less than 
that of Venus, and it is properly established by us, along with 
Cardan and Porphyry, as 12°. 
And these semi-diameters of the orbs of the fixed [stars] and the 
'These figures are presumably based upon the experience of naked-eye observa- 
tions of the fixed stars and Planets by Kepler and Tycho Brahe. In the case of the 
Planets, they probably represent the elongations from the Sun when the Planet is 
at its brightest. But while the visible magnitude of Jupiter does not change greatly 
from one time to another, Saturn's magnitude does change from year to year due 
to the varying orientation of its rings. And the magnitudes of Mars, Venus, and 
especially Mercury vary considerably. This presumably means that the orbs of 
those planets should also be quite variable. But neither Morin nor any other as- 
trologer, so far as I am aware, has addressed that problem. Modem figures would 
give average maximum figures of about 7° for Saturn, 10° for Jupiter, 5o30' for 
Mars, 12o30' for Venus, and from 8o30' to 5° for Mercury. See for example Karl 
Schoch, Planeten-tqfeln fur Jedermann (Berlin: Linser Verlag, 1927), p. 14. But 
Mercury at its minimum brilliance is only about I /15 of its maximum brilliance, 
which would reduce its orb to about half a degree. And Mars's brilliance at mini- 
mum is roughly I /10 of its maximum brilliance. Since the distances of the Planets 
are now given in the astronomical ephemerides, a formula could be derived that 
would enable the orb to be calculated exactly on a daily basis. But whether these 
variations should be taken into account in astrological interpretation remains a 
largely uninvestigated question in astrology. 
2See the Note on the preceding page. 
3That is, if the Moon is close to the Sun, it cannot be seen at midday. 
76 

===== PAGE 85 =====

Planets, which are the complement of 18° (the semi-diameter of 
the Sun's orb) counted from the Sun itself, is the end of the com- 
bustion of each star, beyond which the star can no longer be said to 
be combust, which I want to be stated here incidentally only for the 
more exact understanding of the semi-diameters; for example, the 
semi-diameter of Venus is 13°, of which the complement to 18° is 
5°; therefore, 5° counted from the Sun's place in its orbit is the 
limit of the combustion of Venus; which being distant from the 
Sun by those 5°, she is no longer combust; namely, because with 
the Sun posited below the horizon at that distance she can be seen; 
and so with the rest [of the planets]. 
Furthermore, these semi-diameters ought to be retained for the 
whole globe of the Earth, determined by the exit of the stars from 
combustion, by reason of their own or changed light, and then of 
that end of combustion. For at this point, such as Venus being 
distant from the center of the Sun by 5°, she may be said not to be 
combust in the whole circle of the Earth, so it suffices that every- 
where she can be seen at that distance. Otherwise, as long as she 
would be said to be combust, that long she would not be seen to 
be impedited by the Sun, and so she would almost always be 
combust for us, and [she would be] almost the whole year in the 
frigid zone, which is absurd. Think the same thing about the other 
Planets. 
Besides, the above said semi-diameters of the orbs are varied 
somewhat, when the Sun and the Planets are in their apogee and 
perigee. For the closer a Planet is to the Earth, the larger and 
brighter it appears; and it is therefore allotted a larger semi-diame- 
ter of orb; and the more it is removed, the lesser they are. And it is 
possible to discover these differences, but the labor would exceed- 
ingly surmount the utility [of finding them]. About this, therefore, 
enough has been said.1 
'As mentioned in a preceding note, Morin acknowledges that the orbs are theoret- 
ically variable, but he does not think it worth the trouble to determine their pre- 
cise value at any particular time. 
77 

===== PAGE 86 =====

But if anyone should object that the light is neither appropriate, 
as in the case of the Sun and the fixed [stars], nor much less re- 
flected, as in the rest of the Planets, nor can it be taken for the mea- 
sure of the influential virtue, because the light and the influence 
are of a diverse order in their mode of acting. I reply that the astro- 
nomical and astrological observations serve our cause, because if 
the Sun and Saturn are 18° distant from each other, which is the 
semi-diameter of the Sun's orb, the effect of the conjunction of the 
Sun and Saturn will not be produced from them, unless by chance 
it is a weak and obscure one, because this conjunction is platic1 and 
incomplete, as will be said in the following chapter; and the rea- 
soning is the same for the other Planets. 
And it does not matter that the light of the Sun or of Saturn does 
not extend to the Caelum, to which the Planet's influence does ex- 
tend, determining parts of the Caelum-, but it is sufficient that with 
respect to us it is a measure of the influential orb of virtue of that 
Planet. 
Chapter 14. The Partile and Platic Aspects of the Planets; 
then the Dexter and Sinister Aspects. 
Having applied the semi-diameter of the orb of virtue of the in- 
dividual Planets from the previous chapter, it will not now be diffi- 
cult to define the partile and platic aspects, and then how to pre- 
scribe the appropriate limits for them for each of tthe individual 
Planets. 
And so, the partile conjunction of two Planets is when their 
places in the Primum Mobile are not distant between themselves 
wider in the circle drawn through both of their centers than the 
combination of the apparent semi-diameters of those Planets. 
Which semi-diameters we take here from Lansberge's 
Uranometria? For the Sun 17', for the moon 15', for Mercury 1, 
'The word platic means literally 'flat' or 'broad' and describes an aspect that is 
within orbs but is not partile or exact. It is strictly an astrological term. 
2Philip van Lansberge, Uranometriae libri tres... (Middelburg, Netherlands: A. 
Romanus, 1631.) 
78 

===== PAGE 87 =====

for Venus 1' 30", for Mars 45 for Jupiter 1' 15 and for Saturn 
50'.' 
And so, if the Sun and the Moon were centrally located in the 
ecliptic, and their combined distance was less that 32', those two 
Planets would be said to be inpartile conjunction -, and such a con- 
junction is called united or glued together by Porphyry and the 
Arabs.2 And the procedure is the same for the rest of the Planets 
with the Sun and the Moon, or among themselves.3 
But where the distance is greater than the combination of the ap- 
parent semi-diameters of both Planets, and less than the combina- 
tions of the semi-diameters of the orbs of virtue of those same 
Planets, they are said to be only platically conjoined. Moreover, 
this happens in two ways, and there are therefore two [kinds of] 
platic, namely, one that is incomplete, when the body of only one 
Planet is within the orb of virtue of the other, and this has only an 
obscure or an incomplete effect; but the other [kind of] platic is 
complete or mutual, when the bodies of both Planets are recipro- 
cally found under their own orbs; and this has an evident and 
complete effect. 
And consequently, since from Chapter 13 the semi-diameter of 
the orb of Jupiter is 8° and that of Venus is 13°, if both of them are 
distant by only 7° of the arc of the great circle drawn through both of 
their centers, they will be completely conjoined; for Jupiter will be 
within the orb of Venus, and she reciprocally within the orb of Jupi- 
ter. But if they are distant by 12°, they will be said to be only incom- 
"ihe current values for the semi-diameters of the Sun and Moon are 16' for the Sun, 
15 '33 " for the Moon; and for the Planets at their mean least distance from the Earth, 
for Mercury 5", for Venus 30", for Mars 9", for Jupiter 23", and for Saturn 10". 
2But those authorities defined the "gluing together" distance to be 1° or 3°— 
some using the smaller figure and others using the larger. 
3But this is not the original meaning of the term partite, which means literally 'by 
the degree'. It originally designated aspects (including the conjunction) that were 
in the same numbered degree, or later, that were within 10 of each other. And this 
is the definition used by most astrologers. Morin's definition would make partile 
conjunctions of the Planets exceedingly rare and for most of the Planets almost 
momentary. 
79 

===== PAGE 88 =====

pletely conjoined, because thus Jupiter is indeed within the orb of Ve- 
nus and conjoined to her, but she is not within the orb of Jupiter, and 
therefore she is not conjoined to him. Moreover, those things that are 
said here about the conjunction of two Planets, part He or platic, are 
also understood to be said about any one of their aspects, which in this 
matter follows the reasoning of the conjunction. 
But it must be noted that two Planets are never partilely con- 
joined unless they are in the place of the intersections of their own 
apparent orbits on the Primum Mobile, which was discussed in 
Chapter 9, and this is plain in the case of eclipses of the Sun and the 
Moon. But where they are thus conjoined, all of their own aspects 
will be platic with the exception of the opposition. And in turn, if 
the Planets were only platically conjoined, some one of their as- 
pects can bepartile, namely the one that for each Planet falls on the 
place of intersection of their [apparent] orbits, which will indeed 
be something necessary to take note of. Moreover, these individual 
[situations] will be most evidently plain from the longitude and lat- 
itude of the individual aspects of each of the Planets, taken by [the 
rules in] Chapter 9. 
Finally, a Planet will be said to be partilely conjoined to the 
ASC, if their [mutual] distance is not greater than the apparent 
semi-diameter of the Planet; but platically conjoined if it is not 
greater than the orb of virtue of the Planet, but only greater than its 
semi-diameter. Moreover, the distance must be taken in the great 
circle drawn through the center of the Planet and the point of the 
ecliptic that is rising. And the same thing must be thought about 
the trine and square aspects, etc. to the ASC or to the MC. 
Besides, it must be noted that the platic opposition, trine, 
square, and sextile aspects are of course effective, but the platic 
semi-sextile and quincunx are not effective, but only their partile 
aspects, at least to a distance of 2°. But in general, those who are 
born under a partile conjunction, opposition, trine, or square [as- 
pect] of the Planets have illustrious nativities for good or evil ac- 
cording to the determination of the aspecting Planets. But those 
80 

===== PAGE 89 =====

who are only bom with platic aspects, have from them nativities 
that are only mediocre; and finally, those who only [have nativi- 
ties] without any aspects are poor and obscure. 
But as for that which pertains to dexter and sinister aspects, here 
it is sufficient to know that those aspects of the Planets are called 
dexter that are to the right of that Planet, that is they go before it in- 
side the semi-circle against the order of the signs. But those are said 
to be sinister that are to the left of the Planet, that is they follow it in- 
side the semi-circle according to the succession of the signs.1 And 
therefore, with a Planet posited in the 2nd degree of Aries, its sinis- 
ter trine will be in the 2nd degree of Leo, and its dexter trine in the 
2nd degree of Sagittarius, and so with the rest [of the aspects]. 
Moreover, the opposition is neither a dexter nor a sinister aspect. 
Chapter 15. The Antiscions of the Planets. 
In Book 14, Chapter 14, there was a discussion about the signs 
and the degrees of the ecliptic that were antiscions to them.2 But 
here the discussion about the antiscions must be repeated. First, 
because from Ptolemy [Quadripartite], Book 1, Chapter 15, those 
places in the Caelum are antiscions of each other that are said to 
mutually look at each other; and therefore in a way the antiscions 
are referred to as aspects. Second, because since the places of the 
Planets (if you make exception for the Sun) are almost always be- 
yond the ecliptic; their antiscions do not therefore entirely agree 
with the antiscions of the degrees of the ecliptic.3 
'The easiest way to visualize dexter and sinister aspects is to view them from the 
center of the chart. Those that are to the right of a planet are its dexter aspects and 
those to its left are its sinister aspects. These are simply the Latin words for 
'right' and 'left'. 
2The classical plural of anliscion is antiscia, but in this translation I prefer to use 
antiscions as the plural. Ptolemy discussed the idea of the antiscions, but he 
never used that Greek word, which means 'opposite shadow'. However, Firmicus 
devoted a chapter to antiscions in Mathesis, Book 2, and says that they were dis- 
cussed by Dorotheus Sidonius (1st century A.D.). So they probably go back to 
the Alexandrian inventors of horoscopic astrology. 
3But what Morin says here and in what follows is contrary to the original theory 
of antiscions, which only considered the ecliptical longitude of the Planets and 
paid no attention to their latitude. 
81 

===== PAGE 90 =====

Moreover, the formal theory of the antiscions consists of this, 
that points of the Caelum are themselves in turn antiscions, revolv- 
ing through the same parallel, which intersects the ecliptic or the 
path of the Sun, the most effective of the celestial circles. For in 
other parallels drawn beyond the ecliptic there is no antiscion, for 
otherwise their individual points would be antiscions, since no rea- 
son can be offered for one more than for the other. And for either 
the Moon or Venus located around the beginning of Cancer with a 
northern latitude of 4°, consequently drawn around in a parallel not 
intersecting the ecliptic, to have countless antiscions in that paral- 
lel, or points of the same quality and nature as the Moon herself or 
Venus is absurd and contrary to experience. 
But from these [considerations], it follows First that whatever 
true place of a Planet has a declination, either north or south, 
greater than the maximum declination of the Sun, which is 23o30, 
that one has no antiscion; namely because it is moving around in a 
parallel that does not intersect the ecliptic; and the same thing must 
be thought about the Sun or another Planet in the beginning of 
Cancer or Capricorn without any latitude. 
Second, that whatever Planet's place is moving around in the 
same parallel with any point of the ecliptic has it for its antiscion, 
not as far as it is a point of that same parallel, for if so the points of 
the entire parallel would be mutual antiscions, which was rejected 
above, but as far as a point of the ecliptic existing in that same par- 
allel; and therefore, antiscions are properly points of the ecliptic. 
Third, that the Sun and any other Planet lacking latitude have a 
unique antiscion; certainly, another point of the ecliptic that is 
found in the same parallel with the Sun or with the true place of the 
Planet. 
Fourth, that the antiscion of a Planet affected by latitude is not 
that point of the ecliptic that is the antiscion of that same point of 
the ecliptic holding the longitude of the Planet; for otherwise, the 
true place of the Planet and its antiscion would not be in the same 
82 

===== PAGE 91 =====

parallel, which absurd [practice] was hitherto in use among astrol- 
ogers, confusing the true place of the Planet with its fecliptical] 
longitude, against the opinion of Cardan and Ptolemy, who in 
Quadripartite, Book 1, Chapter 15, will have only those points on 
the Caelum to be antiscions that arise and set on the same points of 
the horizon.1 
Add that in the directions of significators to the bodies of the 
Planets or to [points] situated near to them always by reason of 
their latitude; whence it is also established that the true place of a 
Planet affected by latitude is not the same as its [ecliptical] longi- 
tude, and consequently there is not the same antiscion for both of 
them. 
Fifth, that any Planet affected by latitude and brought down 
onto a parallel intersecting the ecliptic, has a two-fold antiscion in 
this. The reason is because since the Planet is beyond the ecliptic, 
and the parallel of the Planet intersects it, it will necessarily inter- 
sect it at two points, and therefore both of them will be the 
antiscion of that Planet, and both of them will be sinister antiscions 
if the Planet precedes its own antiscions, or both of them will be 
dexter antiscions if it follows them. But one of them will be dexter 
and the other sinister if the Planet precedes one and follows the 
other. And again, if the Planet precedes or follows both of its own 
antiscions, the one that is closer will be said to be the primary one; 
but if the Planet is between its own antiscions, the one preceding 
will be called the prime one. 
Furthermore, for finding the antiscions of a Planet affected by 
latitude, let its declination be taken with the distinction of North or 
South; then let the Tables of Declinations of the Ecliptic be con- 
sulted. And if, for example, the declination is 13053' North, both 
antiscions of the true place of the Planet will be 7o00' Taurus and 
23° Leo; but if the declination would have been South, both of the 
antiscions would have been 7° Scorpio and 23° Aquarius; but 
'But Ptolemy is not talking about planets with latitude, but only about points con- 
taining the Sun. 
83 

===== PAGE 92 =====

whether they will both be dexter or sinister will be plain from what 
was said above.1 
Besides, the virtue of the antiscion, that is of the point of the 
ecliptic so called, arises from the combination of the virtue of the 
ecliptic and of the true place of the Planet. For just as the Planet 
alone exudes its antiscial force, so the ecliptic alone is the receiver 
of that, through the points where it is intersected by the parallel of 
the Planet, as experience proves. For since that point goes across 
the horizon and the meridian in those very same degrees with the 
true place of that Planet; and so it agrees precisely with the place of 
that Planet in its diurnal motion, hence as that point it is deter- 
mined to the nature and quality of that Planet. 
Moreover, Cardan in his Commentary will have the antiscions 
to be more powerful around the tropics because they are closer, but 
weaker around the equator because they are remoter in turn. Add 
that around the tropics their declination varies imperceptibly, and 
consequently 10° Cancer is in almost the same parallel as 10° 
Gemini. But around the equator the contrary happens. But since 
the antiscions have their own force from the diurnal revolution in 
the same parallel with the true place of the Planet, it seems con- 
formable at least to reason that the sinister antiscions are stronger 
than the dexter ones. For in the former, the Planet preceding in the 
diurnal motion instructs that path by its own virtue, which the fol- 
lowing antiscion receives its determination more easily, especially 
if it is not distant from the Planet [by more than] the semi-diameter 
of that [Planet's] orb of virtue. 
Finally, the antiscions are different from the aspects. First, be- 
'Morin has found two places in the ecliptic that have the declination 13053' and 
termed them 'antiscions' of a Planet with that declination. The trigonometrical 
formula sin A = sin D / sin Obi, where A is the longitude of the 'antiscion', D is 
the declination, and Obi is the Obliquity of the Ecliptic, is the basis of the Tables 
of which he speaks. But Morin's 'antiscions' are not the classical ones unless the 
Planet has zero latitude; and they have not found favor with succeeding genera- 
tions of astrologers, who, if they used antiscions at all, have preferred to use the 
classical antiscions. And some astrologers have gone a step farther and have 
adopted parallels of declination as a sort of aspect. 
84 

===== PAGE 93 =====

cause for all of the Planets, with the exception of the Sun, the as- 
pects are taken beyond the ecliptic, but the antiscions only in the 
ecliptic. Second, because the aspects are inherently good or evil, 
whatever the quality of the Planet may be in that regard. But the 
antiscion always follows the quality of the Planet; that is, the 
antiscion of a benefic Planet is benefic, and that of a malefic Planet 
is malefic, according to the nature or properties of that Planet. 
Third, because in the case of aspects the distances are always the 
same, but not in the case of antiscions. Fourth, because aspects 
differ among themselves in kind, but antiscions do not. 
Nevertheless, it is common to both of them to affect these infe- 
rior things by rays issuing out towards the Earth; if in fact either 
from two Planets or from one only, and constituting an aspect from 
any part of the Primum Mobile or placed in antiscions, the rays em- 
anate by which these sublunar things are moved and generated; for 
we are not affected by those rays that the Planets transmit to them- 
selves in turn, unless they reach the globe of the Earth, as happens 
in an opposition; and we are not affected without the rays or 
otherwise than by the rays. 
Finally, it should be noted, that Cardan in Section 1, Aphorism 
46, explaining Ptolemy's isosceles figure, will have this to be 
nothing other than the site of two Planets in the ecliptic, in degrees 
that are mutual antiscions.1 
'Cardan, Aphorismomm Asironomicomm Segmenta septem, 'Seven Segments of 
Astronomical Aphorisms', Opera omnia (Lyons: Huguetan & Ravaud, 1663.), 
Aph. 46 (Vol. 5, p. 31, col. 2) "Isosceles figures are said to be those that are termi- 
nated at the same parallels from the circle of the equinox, for in their equal legs 
there would be all the Planets that have equal and the same latitude if equal arcs 
are drawn from the pole of the zodiac. But those which, drawn from the point of 
intersection of the meridian circle and the horizon, are equal, but cannot never- 
theless constitute an isosceles figure, since those star s do not move in one and the 
same circle; those therefore that lack latitude do constitute an isosceles figure, 
since in the case of antiscions they are equally distant from the tropics, and the 
others by the same reason." 
85 

===== PAGE 94 =====

Chapter 16. How the Usual way of Speaking 
about Aspects and Antiscions must be Successively 
Reshaped, or at least Understood. 
In Chapter 3 it was said that the Planets do not properly aspect 
each other, and that the term aspect in astrology is not taken for a 
line or for a ray that is projected from one Planet to another, except 
by accident from the aspect of the opposition; but only for the con- 
course of two rays emanating from two celestial bodies and com- 
ing together in the center of the World. Therefore, even if the usual 
forms of speaking can be retained as perhaps more convenient, 
they will nevertheless have to be understood thus—when Saturn is 
said to be in square to the Sun or to aspect the Sun by square, it 
should be understood that Saturn along with the Sun is located in a 
square aspect at the center of the World, with its own rays 
extending there. 
And when it is said that Jupiter is in trine to the MC, that same 
thing should be understood about Jupiter and that part of the Pri- 
mum Mobile that the MC occupies. Similarly, when it is said that 
Mars by its own square afflicts the Moon, it should be understood 
that Mars along with the Moon constitutes a square aspect at the 
center of the World, or that the Moon by her ray comes together 
with the ray of Mars by a square aspect, in which the things signi- 
fied by the Moon are rendered unfortunate. And the reasoning is 
the same in the rest of the cases. 
Let a similar judgment be made about the antiscions, namely 
because to the ray of each Planet there also concurs the ray of a 
point on the ecliptic of the same declination as the Planet itself, not 
indeed by reason of an aspect, but from the similitude of nature 
with the Planet itself, by which concourse the native is affected, 
and he receives a fertilizing impression of the effects in accor- 
dance with the proper determination of the ray from its site, as will 
be more fully said elsewhere from what was promised. 
86 

===== PAGE 95 =====

Chapter 17. Whether one Planet Aspecting another, or 
Located in its Antiscion, Transmits to it its own Nature 
and Virtue and that of the sign that it Occupies. 
That [it does so transmit] is commonly asserted by astrologers, 
and therefore that a Planet aspecting another from its own domicile 
bestows very much of its own nature on the one that it aspects; but 
if it is in a dignity of the latter, that one is as a result strengthened 
scarcely less than if it would have been in its own dignity, namely 
because it receives this from another transmission, in addition to 
its own force, which it receives in a similar manner. 
And consequently, that Planets seeing themselves from their 
own or mutual dignities, greatly strengthen each other in turn. As 
if Mars was in Aries' and Jupiter in Sagittarius, or Jupiter in Aries 
and Mars in Sagittarius; or similarly Jupiter in Cancer and Saturn 
in Libra, or the latter in Cancer and the former in Libra. 
In short by the same reason they will have it that if one Planet 
aspects another from its own exile or from that of the other, or if 
both of them aspect each other from their own exiles or from their 
mutual exiles, especially by an unlucky ray, the Planet that is 
aspected from that [combination] is very badly afflicted, as if Mars 
is in Libra and Saturn is in Cancer. 
Truly, although this should not be the place for saying whether 
Planets act on themselves mutually, and through themselves upon 
us reciprocally, nevertheless we now say incidentally that no 
Planet properly and formally confers its own force on another by 
which that one acts upon us, but only that each one by itself acts 
upon us by means of its own ray in accordance with its proper na- 
ture and its own determination by site to rulership in the figure. 
Otherwise, when the Sun aspects the Moon, she would act by 
virtue of the Sun, and the Sun in turn by virtue of the Moon; and so 
she would produce solar effects, but he would produce lunar ef- 
'The Latin text has the symbol £3 by mistake for the symbol T. 
87 

===== PAGE 96 =====

fects; and consequently, the Sun would be taken for the Moon, and 
she would be taken for the Sun, which would be the greatest confu- 
sion in astrology, contrary to reason and experience, and espe- 
cially manifestly false in directions. 
And so, when two Planets, either conjoined, or connected by 
some aspect concur on the same effect, these properly and per se 
must not be said to confer powers on themselves, but only by acci- 
dent. And in fact, they are acting through themselves by their own 
rays emitted toward us, even just as two men applied to pulling the 
same ship, neither of which is conferring his own force on the 
other, but each one is acting separately. Moreover, the motion or 
the pulling of the ship is common to both of those acting from the 
concourse of the actions of both of them. 
And the reasoning is the same in all the rest of those acting but 
not subordinated. For with both heat and cold happening together, 
neither does heat bestow its own force on the cold, nor cold on the 
heat, but from the concourse of both, mildness is generated. 
Therefore, in the case of Planets coming together by conjunc- 
tion or by aspect, let a similar judgment be made, and a not dissim- 
ilar one in the case of antiscions, for even if a point of the ecliptic 
which is the antiscion of some Planet receives its nature and force, 
that is not nevertheless by transmission from the Planet, but only 
by the simple determination of that point of the ecliptic, as was 
said in Chapter 15. 
But so that this thing may be explained more clearly, let us 
suppose that someone is bom with the Moon in Aries, and be- 
cause Aries from the beginning of the World was determined to 
the nature of Mars, according to Book 14, Section 1, Chapter 5, 
but the Moon determines the place of the Caelum that it occu- 
pies to the lunar nature for that native himself, which will last in 
that place during the life of the native, as experience proves. 
Therefore, from the Moon in Aries an effect will come forth of 
the mixed virtue of Mars and the Moon, and it can be said that 
88 

===== PAGE 97 =====

the Moon is acting in a martial manner, or Aries in a lunar man- 
ner. 
But if in addition, Mars aspects the Moon, the virtue of Mars 
will be multiplied in that place. Not that Mars transmits its own na- 
ture or virtue to the Moon, but that by its own aspect it determines 
that place again to its own nature, and it is intensely strengthened 
in that place. Therefore, the Moon does not formally receive in it- 
self, either from Mars or from Mars by mean of its aspect, or other- 
wise, the force of Mars itself, but rather from those individual 
things there is a mixture of virtues acting, as was said above. 
Someone might say: Jupiter exalted in trine to the ASC, or lo- 
cated in its own domicile, will more fortunately affect the things 
signified by the ASC than if it were dejected or in exile; therefore, 
it transmits to the ASC both its own nature and the nature of the 
place in which it is posited. 
But I reply, the whole Caelum, all the Planets, and their individ- 
ual aspects determine their radiation to the native, and they affect 
him by reason of the site of their rays to him, as has now very often 
been said. Therefore, all the rays of the Planets that constitute any 
aspect with the ray of the ASC do certainly concur in what is signi- 
fied, or in the effect on the ASC—that is on his person, his morals, 
and his intelligence, etc., but each cause acts as differently as it 
can, even though they all act together. And therefore there is no 
transmission of the cause of one to the virtue of another, at least 
properly and formally, although a trine from an exalted Jupiter is 
more fortunate than a trine from a dejected Jupiter. 
Someone else may say: in Book 21, Section 2, Chapter 8, we 
have said that a Planet located in its own exile acts according to its 
own nature and that of its ruler, and is the worse, the more that that 
ruler is in a worse state; therefore it acts [according to] the force or 
nature and state of its own ruler, which cannot be conceived [to be 
the case] without transmission. 
But I reply: when a Planet in its own exile or in an alien domi- 
89 

===== PAGE 98 =====

cile is said to act in accordance with its own nature and that of its 
own ruler, it must be understood that the Planet acts differently 
through its own nature and with the concurrent nature of its ruler, 
which is a concourse without transmission, as was said above. 
Think the same thing about the degrees of the ASC and the MC 
acting according to the nature and state of their own rulers. For 
those degrees, of the same nature as the whole sign, act through 
that nature, but with the Planet that is the ruler of the sign, which 
by means of its rulership is determined to the things signified by 
the ASC or the MC—it concurs to those things through its own 
formal nature and according to its own state, but always without 
any transmission to the degree of the ASC or the MC. 
Chapter 18. What Objections have been made by Pico 
Mirandola, Alexander de Angelis, and the rest against the 
Aspects of the Planets. And first, those by Pico. 
Certainly I am confounded by shame at how many times for the 
defense of astrology, the most divine of the physical sciences, it 
has been necessary for me to take up arms against its enemies. For 
when I contemplate Plotinus [205-270], Marsilio Ficino [1433- 
1499], Pico Mirandola [1463-1494], Alexander de Angelis [1562- 
1620], and other men of prime name posited adversely to me, I 
would willingly like to dye their errors with some pretext of hu- 
man weakness; but when I see them not incidentally, or kindly, to 
have sinned in this, but especially the last two to have devoted 
themselves with their whole mind and with whole volumes to re- 
viling and continually maligning astrology and all astrologers, my 
love of truth certainly incites me wholly to reproving them, not by 
raging furiously to do it, but by subjecting their reasons to be 
examined with what modesty it can be done. 
I confess that they have read some astrology books, but only 
with the intention of contradicting and not of understanding them, 
or of ever practicing this science (whose truth can be made plain 
from practice alone), as their books sufficiently indicate. But it has 
90 

===== PAGE 99 =====

already been very often said by us that nothing is more unjust than 
an ignorant man. I question whether he shouldn't be held for a fool 
who would now contend by authorities, examples, questions, and 
loud talk and the worthless words of the rhetoricians that there are 
no Sun spots, no comets generated in the region of the Planets, that 
the magnet does not attract iron, that a pin stroked by a magnet 
cannot be used for directing the course of a ship, etc., because he 
would not have had certitude of such things by experience? What 
therefore must be though about anyone, who not with valid rea- 
sons but with similar arms tries to overthrow a truth unknown to 
himself, and yet attested to by the greatest men, famous for their 
experience? But now let us return to our subject. 
Mirandola, therefore, and de Angelis thought that if they could 
disprove the experiences of astrology, take away the influences of 
the stars, and overturn the doctrines of the astrological houses 
from the signs of the zodiac and the aspects of the Planets, it was 
all over with astrology forever. And I agree with that. Moreover, 
how falsely they boasted about those first four things is plain from 
those things that I have set forth to establish them and to weaken 
their reasons in their own proper places [in this book]. 
And so, the last one remains, concerning which Pico and Alex- 
ander marvelously twisted themselves about in opposition to as- 
trologers with those same shadowy, as it were, reasons - namely, 
in order to persuade the ignorant, that there is no force in aspects of 
the Planets. But after experience (which in every science must be 
the first thing consulted), that doctrine of the aspects was enough 
and more than enough established by us in the preceding chapters; 
and consequently, it only remains for us to demolish their contriv- 
ances against this ultimate fortress of astrology. 
And so, Pico, in Book 6, Chapter 5, against the nonsense (as he 
calls it) of astrology,1 argues thus; 
'Pico della Mirandola, Disputationes adversus Astrologiam... (Bologna, 1495). 
See Lynn Thomdike, History of Magic and Experimental Science (New York: 
Columbia University Press. 1923-1958. 8 vols.), Vol. IV, Chapter LXI. for a cri- 
tique and a summary of Pico's book. 
91 

===== PAGE 100 =====

"Since they say that Mars will injure by square 
rays, and Venus will help by a trine to Jupiter, do 
they understand that these bodies of this kind of 
Planets are moved forward either to good or evil 
dispositions? Do these indeed experience nothing 
in return, feeling no change of this kind? But that 
they act on us, and, having done so, move the sub- 
jected bodies to be signified by such a manner of 
speaking?" 
Then he tries to show that the Planets do not act upon them- 
selves mutually by means of their aspects, which we have also 
clearly proved by more valid and simpler reasons. But he denies 
another of his arguments, or rather a part of his question (namely 
that the Planets change these inferior things by means of their as- 
pects) on the authority of Plotinus, saying: 
"that the influencing celestial rays cannot min- 
gle together in turn, so that a new virtue or form 
can come forth, since these are neither bodies nor 
liquids, nor qualities affixed to bodies, of which 
by custom that are not begot in their bodies, so 
that evidently or from this they may be colored, or 
they may be changed, in accordance with the con- 
dition of the substance, from their own character 
to another mode." 
In which text, only this is true, the celestial rays emitting influ- 
ences are not bodies, at least not material ones, nor liquids; but the 
rest is false; and it is not proved by Pico or by Plotinus. Moreover, 
the falsity is plain from the solar rays that are received in bodies 
and that affect and change them, when the Sun melts wax and 
hardens mud,1 it agitates the humors of the human body, especially 
at the beginning of spring and it excites the seeds of vegetation and 
reduces them from a potential to an actuality. 
'A favorite saying of Morin. It was stated in the 3rd cent, by Origen, On First 
Principles, 3. 1. 11. 
92 

===== PAGE 101 =====

But that he looks at the mixture of rays, even just as one of heat 
and cold coming together at the same time makes a temperate mix- 
ture of those qualities—a harmony from a diversity of sounds or 
dissonances—and so with colors, odors, tastes, and others, in 
which from the concourse of extremes there is made something 
that is medium, sharing formally in the extremes, or formally con- 
sisting of them, yet affecting the senses differently from any one of 
the extremes, as experience confirms; so, experience proves the 
same things, from the conjunction of Mercury with Saturn ruler of 
the ASC, there is produced in the human body dispositions for a 
solid and profound intellect by reason of Saturn, but one subtle and 
apt for inventions by reason of Mercury. 
But if it was also in square to Mars, that intellect will be still 
more subtle, but malign, by reason of the square to Mars, and all 
the more if Mars is ruler of the conjunction, but that would happen 
neither from Saturn alone, nor from Mercury alone, nor from the 
ruler of the ASC. Similarly, from a conjunction of Venus and 
Mars, the latter being ruler of the ASC and ruler of the conjunc- 
tion, an ardent appetite for amorous pleasures is produced, also 
one addicted to disgraceful acts, as is plain from various nativities. 
And when the celestial influxes are of the same kind among 
themselves, as tangible qualities are among themselves, sounds 
among themselves, odors among themselves; if these can be mixed 
together, it seems that no reason can be offered, why the former 
cannot be mixed together, especially because the mixture is recog- 
nized in its effects, which will be discussed in its own place. Now 
let us return to Pico. 
He, therefore, full of distrust by reason of Plotinus,1 supposes 
the rays to be mixed together, and only requires from astrologers 
that they demonstrate how the rays may be mixed together in one 
way by this—that is, by different powers—because they emanate 
from the stars, and they are distant by various degrees from one an- 
'Plotinus was opposed to astrology. 
93 

===== PAGE 102 =====

other, since he is unable to apprehend any diversity here other than 
that the rays emanating among themselves from neighboring bod- 
ies are mixed together better and more intimately; but by more dis- 
tant bodies, as in the case of an opposition, either in no way or at 
least with more difficulty. 
The contrary of that opinion was embraced by Jofrancus 
Offusius in Chapter 1, attributing more force to the opposition 
from the mixture of rays than from the conjunction, namely be- 
cause one of the partilely conjoined Planets holds together the rays 
of the other. Moreover, Pico ought to have perceived the different 
mixture by virtue, not in his own imagination, where he did not 
want it to be found, but in practice in connection with the effects of 
nativities and conjunctions and oppositions of the Sun and the 
Moon, along with those of the rest of the Planets, where he reluc- 
tantly would also have detected it, and he would not have inferred 
it, as follows: 
"If the reason (he says) of either the diametrical 
opposition or of the square or the triangular figure 
makes a contrariety in the property of the rays, 
this cannot be defended, unless we should say that 
the bodies of the Planets change their condition 
because of the variety of the figures, since the vir- 
tue and property of a ray do not arise from any- 
where else than the nature of the radiating body." 
But I reply, the reason for that diversity is not from any intrinsic 
mutation or alteration of the virtue that happens to be in the Plan- 
ets, but from a concourse of rays and the ratio of their distance to 
the whole circle, as was explained by us in Chapter 3. For the 
greater evidence of this thing, let there be two singers diverse in 
their sound, from the concourse of their sounds in the ear, there is 
made a harmony or a disharmony affecting the hearing in a pleas- 
ing or displeasing manner, which certainly neither voice [alone] 
could effect differently. Moreover, this diversity does not happen, 
because in singers or even in the voices that come forth from those 
94 

===== PAGE 103 =====

singers, any mutation may happen, but rather from the concourse 
of the voices and the mutual ratio between them. 
But as for that which Pico offers as a confirmation of his own 
opinion, I respond that a ray is seen in two ways. First, as a solitary 
thing. Second, as something mixed or concurrent. In the prior 
way, its virtue and property is not from anywhere else than from 
the nature of the ray-emitting body; in the latter way, it draws to- 
gether the properties common to both rays, which in its action and 
formally is not from the nature of the ray-emitting body, but only 
from its power and materially; and the same thing [is true] in the 
case of the voices mentioned above. 
But finally, Pico Mirandola philosophizes a little more subtly, 
saying: 
"the rays descending to us, even if they flow 
forth from opposite sources, yet grown together in 
unity flow into us as united; and therefore, since 
they are mixed together, the ratio of the opposi- 
tion, the trine, and the square already leaves off; 
therefore, there also leaves off the diversity of 
property by reason of the figures of the trine, the 
square, etc. Therefore, astrologers must be turned 
away from this—to say that such a property is in 
the rays, because the stars from which they ema- 
nated were putting together such a condition of 
figures among themselves; and so finally, either 
they say that the stars vary their nature in accor- 
dance with the variety of the figures, which was 
refuted, or if they are not varied, also the same vir- 
tue of the rays coming forth from them they will 
reluctantly acknowledge to be unchanged." 
But I reply, of course it is true that the rays descending to us are 
mixed together and that they flow together in a unity of mixture. 
But it is false that the ratio leaves off in the mixture with the oppo- 
95 

===== PAGE 104 =====

sition, the trine, the square, etc. and the diversity of their proper- 
ties, as Pico says, but does not at all prove. For astrologers may say 
that with the rays mixed there is such and such a property, because 
the stars from which they emanated were configured thus among 
themselves. Not that the stars vary their own nature in accordance 
with the variety of the figures, and not that the virtues of the rays 
are varied in their emanation, but because in their concourse they 
draw together a difference of mixture and a diverse property in ac- 
cordance with the diverse ratio of their distance to the whole circle, 
as it was explained above about voices. 
But when Pico tries to show in Chapter 7 that astrologers, in es- 
tablishing the aspects of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mer- 
cury were deceived by the light of the Moon, he himself is de- 
ceived. For the sum of his argument is this: astrologers looking at 
the Moon for its different position and distance with respect to the 
Sun to vary the figure of its own light and in various ways to alter 
these inferior things, have transferred the same [consideration] to 
the rest of the Planets at similar distances, and from that emerged 
the sextile, the square, the trine, and the opposition. 
"Now indeed the Moon does certainly in ac- 
cordance with its various distance from the Sun 
change both its figure and thus its properties of in- 
fluencing, because receiving its light from the 
Sun, more or less of it from which part it sees us, it 
is illuminated according to the circumstances of 
its position and condition with respect to it. And 
from that it is made by natural reason, in accor- 
dance with an increase or a decrease in its light, 
not only to exhibit itself to us in another likeness, 
but otherwise also of ours and of others, it also 
changes the corporal qualities of bodies. For who 
is unaware that the moistness of bodies is de- 
stroyed by heat? Who again is unaware that light 
is the cause of heat?" (and he says further down) 
"But in truth about these changes of the Moon, 
96 

===== PAGE 105 =====

which alone is subject to this kind of alteration 
from places, to transfer them to the Planets shin- 
ing with their own and always unchanging light, 
is very completely outrageous." 
However, we can turn this argument around against Pico thus. 
Since all the Planets, with the exception of the Sun, are opaque 
bodies devoid of any light of their own, as is now the common 
knowledge of learned men, and it is plainly evident in the case of 
Venus, which exhibits to us the same phases of light as the Moon; 
and it was plain in the case of Mercury observed on the disc of the 
Sun by Pierre Gassendi in the year 1631 on the 7th of the month of 
November, which appeared as a small very black little spot, just as 
is set forth in his published observation.1 
Therefore, as the Moon, in accordance with its diverse distance 
from the Sun, changes its figure, so does it change the properties of 
its influence (which Pico states above), thus it will have to be 
judged to be the case with the rest of the Planets. And conse- 
quently it should be held, [but] Pico disagreed, that the diversity of 
the virtue of the rays will stand [as a fact]. 
But since light only illuminates, and does nothing else, as was 
most plainly proved by us in Book 11, Chapter 13, therefore those 
diverse effects should not be ascribed to the light, neither in the 
case of the Moon, nor in that of the lesser Planets, especially since 
all of them reflect not a diverse light, but only the same light of the 
Sun; but rather they should be ascribed to the characteristic nature 
of the Planets or to their distances. 
But now their nature is not varied, but only their distance; there- 
fore, those different effects can only be ascribed to the rays of the 
Planets, just as they exist in this or that ratio of distance to the 
whole circle, as was frequently set forth [above]; and here and ev- 
erywhere, we are obliged to fall back upon both reason and experi- 
lThis transit of Mercury occurred shortly after sunrise and was observed through 
a telescope by Gassendi. 
97 

===== PAGE 106 =====

ence. But now, let us have done with Pico Mirandola, and let us 
deal with his disciple, patiently exhibiting his invectives. 
Chapter 19. Those Objections made 
by Alexander de Angelis. 
Therefore, de Angelis, in Book 4, Chapter 30, after he has set 
forth the names, definitions, intervals, and the number of the as- 
pects, from the understanding of the astrologers (which also, in 
that part, where it was necessary, was plainly refuted by us in the 
previous chapters), rises up against the hypothesis of the aspects 
and their powers in his usual manner. 
"Furthermore, we cannot sufficiently marvel at 
the everywhere cormpt judgments of the astrolo- 
gers. And first, the stars that divide the almost in- 
finite intervals of space they make by the greatest 
madness to look at themselves from the same cir- 
cle, and they are thought to establish the aspects 
in one and the same circle. Therefore, those Plan- 
ets that are the farthest distant from the zodiac, 
they place in their hexagons and squares in the zo- 
diac, rather than in none of the other circles? 
Therefore, the Moon which is the nearest to the 
Earth, and Saturn, which wanders the farthest 
from us, and the Sun, which moves in the middle 
of the wandering stars, equally join in making 
squares and hexagons. Should not the incredible 
magnitude of the Planets have recalled astrolo- 
gers from this insane astrology?" 
Truly, what does he accomplish with his invectives and ques- 
tions devoid of reason? Certainly nothing else than if some general 
of the army besieging a fortress, with towers within and without, 
with military weapons, greatly supplied with food, and very well 
supplied with soldiers would attack the enemy day by day. "There- 
fore, would you want to open the gates of your fortress to me? 
98 

===== PAGE 107 =====

Would you therefore decide madly to resist my power stubbornly? 
Would not the terrible magnitude of my attacks call you back from 
that madness?" and so on. Thus certainly in great part Alexander 
de Angelis tries to overthrow astrology with just these individual 
chapters of his five books. 
But in order that we may respond seriously to his words, I say 
that he has ignored what not only astrologers but also astronomers 
see as the true places of the Planets, not in their own circles or or- 
bits, but in the Primum Mobile under the zodiac, although those 
Planets are a long ways away from the Primum Mobile. The as- 
tronomers' reason [for this] is because it was decided by them to 
define the true site of a Planet or a fixed [star] with respect to the 
ecliptic and the equinoctial points, namely because the ecliptic is 
the circle of the Primum Mobile that all the stars observe in their 
own motion. 
Moreover, the astrologers' reason is because the Primum 
Caelum is the prime physical cause concurring in the actions of all 
the others, and therefore with the Planets that are lower and subor- 
dinated to itself. And a Planet acts with that part of the Caelum into 
which a line from the center of the Earth drawn through the center 
of the Planet leaves off, which part is therefore also said by astron- 
omers and astrologers to be the true place of the Planet. 
Then, especially because that part through the Planet's site at 
the very time of the nativity is determined to the nature of that 
Planet with respect to the native, and to him as long as he lives, it 
acts like that Planet—that is, not only the site of the Planet, but also 
its nature—are means between the Primum Caelum and the terres- 
trial bodies, which are joined in a fatal connection with the parts of 
the Primum Mobile by the line that is drawn from the Earth 
through the body of each Planet to the Caelum itself, as will be 
demonstrated in its own place. 
Therefore, if the places of two Planets in the Primum Mobile are 
distant from each other by 60,90,120, or 180 degrees with respect 
99 

===== PAGE 108 =====

to the Earth, those Planets are said to be in sextile, square, trine, or 
opposition aspect to each other, with respect to the Earth; and so, 
all the aspects will be in the Primum Mobile, not by rays drawn 
from one place to another, or reciprocally from those to their own 
places in the Primum Mobile, but instead by the rays or the lines 
drawn from the Earth through the centers of the Planets to the Pri- 
mum Mobile with the distance suitable to the aspect. 
After this, de Angelis, considering Saturn, (says) it is ninety 
times greater than the Earth, but the Sun is a hundred sixty-six 
times greater,1 and again he asks twice, "What angle in so great a 
size of a star can be thought to be the side of a square or a concoc- 
tion of a triangle?" And content with marveling at this, he does not 
go further forward; that is, not knowing that among astrologers as- 
pects are of two kinds, namely partile and platic, and in the Pri- 
mum Mobile. And the latter do not lay claim in the Primum Mobile 
to a size of fewer degrees than the semi-diameter of the orb of vir- 
tue of each Planet; but the former terminate precisely not [just] at 
the bodies, but rather at the centers of the Planets. 
And although they would have terminated at the bodies, yet the 
place that Satum with its own body occupies in the Primum Mo- 
bile with respect to us is scarcely two minutes [of arc]; and conse- 
quently by that to the effect, the same is the partile aspect to termi- 
nate at the body, and at the center of Satum, since the limits of the 
partile aspect are 16', which is the semi-diameter of the body of the 
Sun. But finally he adds this reasoning: 
"Let us make the sidereal angles such as math- 
ematics will prescribe for the aspects that I am 
calling momentary, whether they last for any cer- 
tain time? If at some point in time they vanish, 
they can do none of those things that are done at 
another space of time, of which sort are all the ac- 
'These ratios may have been the best available to de Angelis, but they are exces- 
sive. Satum is only a little more than 9 times greater in diameter than the Earth, 
and the Sun is about 109 times greater. 
100 

===== PAGE 109 =====

tions of mortals about which the Planets proph- 
esy, if [they are] temporary and moral, they can 
hardly agree with the hindrance of those things 
that are done here. It is said, for example, that 
John of Austria [1545-1578],' the brother of 
Philip II [1527-1598], King of Spain, in the year 
1571, with good fortune fought in the Aegean Sea • *2 • • against the Furies from a direction of the MC or 
the Moon to the sinister trine of Jupiter. If this 
configuration persisted for less than 6 or 8 hours, 
a great part of the war was completed without the 
aid of the trine; if it lasted longer, its whole force 
was in vain and without effect, because the victo- 
rious part was still requiring the war." 
Truly, de Angelis is deceived here in many ways, not surpris- 
ingly. For First, he did not know that the places, conjunction, and 
aspects of the Planets at the moment of the nativity of living per- 
sons remain fixed in the Primum Mobile, and their efficacy with 
respect to the native remains throughout his whole life, as is 
proved by experience, when in subsequent years the Planets transit 
through those same places. Second. He thought that the force of 
any direction begins and leaves off at the same time as its own ef- 
fect, of whatever duration it is, yet since on account of the princi- 
ples recognized by astrologers, the moment of the completed di- 
rection will sometimes anticipate its effects and sometimes follow 
them. 
And it does not follow that if for someone from the direction of 
the ASC to the square of Mars his hand is cut off, the force of the 
direction would last, as long as that man will be deprived of his 
hand; or vice versa, as long as the force of the direction lasts, that 
'Don John of Austria (bom at Regensburg 25 Feb 1547 3:03 AM according to 
Junctinus). 
2A reference to his command at the great naval battle at Lepanto (Ndvpaktos, 
Greece), in which the Spanish coalition fleet crushed the Turkish fleet on 7 Octo- 
ber 1571. The last great battle between galleys. 
101 

===== PAGE 110 =====

man's hands are repeatedly cut off. But it is sufficient that the di- 
rection be allotted its own effect once and for all at that time in 
which it is in force, which is sometime 1,2, or 3 years, and until an- 
other significator occurs. 
Moreover, some effects are completed in the blink of an eye, as 
when someone is suddenly killed, but others last as long as the 
force of the direction—such as a quartan fever or an exile. And 
that reasoning like Alexander's above is not valid. Either the 
forces of John of Austria lasted less than 6 or 8 hours, and so did 
not beget victory, or they lasted longer, and so were totally in vain 
and without effect. 
Third, he though that conjunctions and aspects of the Planets 
happening at the time of birth produced their own effects from the 
very moment of the nativity, and that those only last as long as 
those temporary aspects last, which is also something absurd, 
arisen from Alexander's imagination, and contrary to the decrees 
of astrology. 
To pursue further his other questions and vain words concern- 
ing this matter would be too tedious and useless, and it is sufficient 
to have already exposed his ignorance of astrology. And we, from 
his and Pico's shafts, jeers, and invectives, have defended the di- 
vine science of the stars, as was proper, by experience, by influ- 
ences, by houses, by signs, and by aspects, which are its 5 principal 
defenses. 
Chapter 20. Those Objections that are made 
by Plotinus and Marsilio Ficino. 
Plotinus, in Enneads 2, Book 3, has a little chapter against the 
astrological aspects, which consists of only 7 vain questions with- 
out any reason, which we therefore judge to be unworthy of refuta- 
tion. But his commentator Marsilio Ficino offers some reasons 
against the aspects, that in Regiomontanus's Celestia there is no 
contradiction, and that is free from all generation and corruption; 
but this already is no less false than that the stars effect everything 
102 

===== PAGE 111 =====

by their own light, and that every Planet, with the exception of the 
Moon, shines by its own light, as Ficino and Plotinus here and 
there suppose against the astrologers; and so those reasons col- 
lapse from being mixed with that kind of fundamental [errors]. 
Besides, Ficino, deserting the opinion and the very experience 
of astrologers, will have it that each Planet sees another, wherever 
both of them are located, namely by a ray that flows from one to 
the other, which was rejected by us in Chapter 1, since terrestrial 
things are not affected by those rays, except in the case of 
oppositions, for they do not face toward the Earth, that which nev- 
ertheless those rays do effect, that constitutes the astrological 
aspects. 
Ficino does have one item worthy of consideration. It does not 
pertain to the figure or number, the action or endurance [of the as- 
pects], but rather to their forms and qualities. From which he wants 
to infer that the astrological aspects are incapable of action. 
But I reply. The active force of the aspects should not be re- 
ferred to the figure of a square or a triangle, or to the numbers 90 or 
120 degrees, but to the real or physical ratio of the concurring rays 
to the whole circle, as was explained by us. For thus the effect con- 
stituting a harmony must be referred to the physical reason of 
sounds that are concurring in that same ratio, but not to an arithme- 
tic ratio or to the numbers by which that physical ratio is 
expressed. 
Add that to be sure it is credible that Marsilio Ficino in his Com- 
mentary on Plotinus only wrote in his favor against the astrologers, 
since in the appendix to his Epidemia, Chapter 2, the plagues of the 
years 1408 and 1479, for which he was writing an antidote, he re- 
fers rather to Saturn and Mars and their unlucky aspects; whence, 
it can be discerned how badly he establishes it for himself in this 
connection. But about these things, let it have already been men- 
tioned sufficiently now. 
103 

===== PAGE 112 =====

Chapter 21. The Aspects of the Planets 
and the Fixed Stars among themselves. 
The Planets differ from the fixed [stars] in this—that the Planets 
move with respect to us by their own motion in great circles that 
are oblique to the ecliptic onto which they project their aspects. 
But the fixed [stars], at least those situated beyond the ecliptic, 
only move in lesser circles or parallels to the ecliptic, which is 
plain from itself, because by their own motion they do indeed 
change their own longitude but not their latitude.1 
And so, even though they would project their aspects onto those 
parallels, nevertheless they would not be effective with respect to 
us, because they would not be directed toward the Earth, which is 
beyond the plane of that parallel under which those fixed [stars] 
move with respect to the Earth. Therefore, we need pay no atten- 
tion to the aspects of the fixed [stars]. 
For even though they determine to their own nature a point on 
the Primum Mobile under which they are seen by us, yet they do 
not determine the point that is diametrically opposite with respect 
to us; namely, because they are not moved in that great circle with 
respect to us in which that opposite aspect would fall, but they are 
moved in a lesser circle beyond whose plane is the Earth; and 
therefore, a fourth part of that circle does not subtend a similar an- 
gle at the Earth—that is, a right angle—but a lesser right [angle], 
and it is lesser, the nearer the fixed [star] is to the pole of the eclip- 
tic, or the lesser that its parallel is; therefore, they do not determine 
the Caelum to any other aspects with respect to us—that is because 
all aspects ought to be in the same great circle and not in different 
ones, as was shown in Chapter 9. 
As to whether the Planets and the fixed [stars] make any aspects 
among themselves that are effective with respect to us, it must be 
noted that the Planets do not project their own effective aspects 
'in general, the fixed stars appear to move forward in the zodiac at the rate of 
about 1024' per century due to precession, but their latitudes hardly change. 
104 

===== PAGE 113 =====

with respect to us from their orbits in parallel circles, as we have 
said contrary to Regiomontanus in Chapter 8, but only in the great 
circles under which they are seen by us to move, as was said in 
Chapter 9. 
When, therefore, Mars for example, appearing in its own orbit, 
projects its own aspects for the sake of determination, if it happens 
that in its opposition or square in that orbit, some violent fixed 
[star] falls, such as the Heart of Scorpio, or the Eye of Taurus,1 it is 
certain that the opposition or the square of Mars will be much 
worse from that [influence]—namely, because it is corrupted by 
the presence of the violent fixed [star]. And it can be said in the 
common manner of speech that Mars aspects that star by its own 
opposition or square, because it falls in the path and within the 
limits of the aspects of Mars. 
But that fixed [star] cannot be said to aspect Mars by square or 
opposition, because Mars is not in the parallel on which that [star] 
would project its own aspects. And it must be noted in this connec- 
tion that the Earth is of course in the plane and the center of the ap- 
parent orbits of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury. But it 
is not in the plane of the apparent orbit of the fixed [stars], or the 
circle in which they are seen to move by us, which is only a circle 
parallel to the ecliptic, or a lesser circle. With the exception of 
those fixed [stars] that are located in the ecliptic. 
SECTION II. 
The Applications and Separations of the Planets. And also 
the Translation and Abscission of their virtue, etc. 
Chapter 1. What an Application and a Separation are, 
and to which Planets they are properly Appropriate. 
Since the Planets are in continuous motion under the zodiac, it 
results that some may be seen to move towards others to be con- 
'These are the stars a Scorpii or Antares, and a Tauri or Aldebaran. 
105 

===== PAGE 114 =====

joined to them, and to recede from others. Moreover, according to 
Ptolemy the Planets are not said to be conjunct, square, opposite, 
etc. unless those [aspects] are partile; that is, unless their centers, 
or the rays of their centers, are in such a distance from each other in 
turn that does not exceed the semi-diameter of each body. 
And such conjunctions are usually called unitings and aggluti- 
nations by Porphyry and some of the Arabs, which must be under- 
stood to be the same in the case of the aspects. But where the dis- 
tance is more,1 the astrologers say that the Planets are conjoined or 
configured platically, provided that that distance does not exceed 
both of the semi-diameters of the orb of virtue of the conjoined 
Planets. And enough was said about this in Chapters 13 and 14 of 
the first Section. 
Furthermore, when any Planet is approaching another and co- 
mes to the orb of its virtue with its own orb of virtue, it is said to 
apply to it until it is partile, or at least to the zodiacal conjunction 
of both of them, which the same circle of latitude drawn through 
the centers of both Planets would determine. Moreover, when it is 
receding from that conjunction, from that same Planet, it is said to 
be separating from it, until they separate from each other by no 
more than both orbs of virtue. So that an application is the same 
thing as access, and a separation is the same thing as departure, 
within precisely the stated limits. 
But since it was said above in Chapter 14 that we makeplatic to 
be two-fold, namely complete and incomplete; therefore, for a 
more investigative doctrine of both, new terms must be introduced 
here by us; and it must be said that a Planet moving toward another 
until its own orb of virtue touches the other's orb of virtue, must be 
said only to adhere to it; but its body, or the circle of latitude touch- 
ing the orb of its own virtue; or, entering the orb of its virtue with 
its own body, is properly said to be applying to it, until the partile 
conjunction of both [Planets] is made; and then, when it goes past, 
lThe Latin text has minor 'less', but this must be a mistake for maior 'more', so I 
have changed it. 
106 

===== PAGE 115 =====

it is said to be separating from it, so long as it does not cover it with 
not more than its own orb of virtue, or it is not covered by the orb 
of the other [Planet]. 
Moreover, it is then said to be separating from it so long as they 
do not pass through more than both of their orbs of virtue. But now 
the Planet immediately applies its own force [and] mixes it to- 
gether with the force of that Planet to which it applies; moreover as 
soon as it takes its own body away from the orb of that [other 
Planet], it recovers its pure force of acting, at least if it is in its own 
domicile; but not absolutely until the orbs of both are separated; 
for that part of the Caelum, in which the common segment of the 
orbs is not yet separated, with the mixed influence of both Planets 
is still tainted, and it retains it, especially in the line that is drawn 
through the intersection of the orbs, and that is worthy of note, but 
in that line the force of that Planet flourishes that has the smaller 
orb. 
Nevertheless, it must be noted that if the central distance of the 
two Planets, whose orbs of virtue intersect, exceeds 18 degrees for 
the Sun and 15 degrees for all the other Planets, those Planets will 
have to be said to be in the semi-sextile aspect, rather than in con- 
junction; for each syzygy must be named for the nearer terminus, 
which in the case of the semi-sextile is 30 degrees, in the case of 
the sextile 60 degrees, in the case of the square 90 degrees, etc., 
and that is both before as well as after that terminus; and therefore, 
a central distance of 25 degrees or of 40 degrees pertains to the 
semi-sextile; and so with the rest. 
Besides, it must be noted that two Planets only seen in the 
Caelum at the instant when they are applying to each other, join to- 
gether in the effect of their conjunction, and their force [applied] to 
that effect begins at the beginning of that application, reaches its 
peak at their uniting, and leaves off at the end of their separation. 
And that effect is universal for the whole Earth, but [it is one] that 
is received and determined in various ways by different places and 
subjects on Earth. 
107 

===== PAGE 116 =====

But if that conjunction is seen in a [particular] house of a natal 
figure—for example, the 10th—the universal effect of that con- 
junction for the whole Earth is determined to actions, dignities, 
etc. with respect to that native. And because those Planets are con- 
joined, although by directions to the individual [Planets], individ- 
ual effects may arise by reason of the nature and rulerships of the 
Planets, still those effects on things, persons, or the public, will be 
of the nature of both Planets, so that both of them always seem to 
concur. 
So, for me, the direction of the MC to Mercury ruler of the 2nd, 
gave me the dignity of Regius Professor of Mathematics through 
[the good offices of] Queen Marie de' Medicis, because Mercury 
would apply to the exalted Venus. And the direction of the MC to 
Venus ruler of the Part of Fortune caused [me to receive] a gift of 
2,000 livres? on account of the trigonometry2 that I published be- 
cause Venus is separating from Mercury. And that gift was made 
by a man who was the supreme Magistrate of the Royal Treasury, 
because Venus was applying to the Sun and Jupiter partilely con- 
joined. And this must be understood [to apply] not only to con- 
junctions but also to any kind of aspects in similar fashion. 
Besides, both an application and a separation are made by the 
motion of the Planet both direct and retrograde; namely because 
one Planet can approach another Planet [either] directly or when 
retrograde. And an application is more effective than a separation, 
at least in an equal distance of the bodies, because since this effi- 
cacy depends upon the uniting of the bodies or the aspects, and the 
more one of them comes to the uniting, the longer they will remain 
united, and the more it shares the force of the uniting; however, 
this suits the one applying and not the one separating, in which the 
force of the uniting is already diminished and is continually de- 
creasing, although in the one applying it is continually increasing. 
'About $12,500 in today's money. 
2Probably a reference to Morin's Trigonometriacanonicae libri tres...Adjungitur 
liber quartus pro calculu tabulis logarithmaruin (Paris: J. Libert, 1633). A ver- 
sion in French was published in the same year. 
108 

===== PAGE 117 =====

Therefore, if for example the ruler of the ASC is applying to 
Mars the ruler of the 7th or the 8th house, there will be strongly 
signified fevers, bums, lawsuits, dangers to life, or a violent death. 
But if the ruler of the ASC is separating from that same Mars, the 
same things will be signified but more weakly; and therefore either 
the accidents will be milder, or there will be a greater hope of evad- 
ing them, unless while separating it will at the same time apply to 
the other malefic. 
But since it was said above that to apply is the same thing as to 
approach, and to separate is the same things as to depart; from this 
it evidently follows that both of these [modes] only pertain to the 
Planet that is swifter in its motion (which they commonly call the 
lighter Planet), and to Planets that are both direct or that are at the 
same time retrograde; but with one of them direct and the other be- 
ing retrograde, both the swifter or the lighter and the slower or the 
more ponderous can mutually apply and separate. 
But with both of them being direct, the more ponderous or the 
slower preceding the swifter, it will not properly be said to apply to 
it, because it does not approach it. And the following one will not 
be said to separate from it, because it does not recede from it, or it 
is the one that is more remote. But when the slower one is preced- 
ing, it will properly be said to accompany the lighter one; but when 
it is following to expect that one. And consequently, each Planet 
will be either partilely united by body or by ray, either applying or 
separating or accompanying or expecting, or finally solitary if 
none of [configurations] above suit it. 
Nevertheless, it must be noted that Ptolemy, in Quadripartite, 
Book 4, Chapter 5, where he is discussing marriages, admits the 
application of Saturn and of the other Planets to the Moon,1 which 
must be understood not of the body of the Moon, but of its place in 
the Primum Mobile, which is fixed. And consequently, a two-fold 
'Morin has stated this backwards. Ptolemy mentions the application of the Moon 
to Saturn and the other Planets. Since the Moon is the swiftest Planet, it applies to 
the others. 
109 

===== PAGE 118 =====

application and a two-fold separation will have to be noticed, 
namely with respect to the body of the moving Planet and its fixed 
location. And any Planet can apply to the place of any other Planet 
or it can separate from it. 
Chapter 2. The Modes and the Ejfects of the 
simple Applications and Separations 
of the Planets among themselves. 
The application or the separation of a Planet is said to be simple 
when only two Planets come together according to approach or de- 
parture. And so the Planets apply or separate in four ways. For ei- 
ther they are both direct, or they are both retrograde; or the preced- 
ing one is retrograde, but the following one is direct; or finally, the 
preceding one is direct, but the following one is retrograde. 
In the fourth mode, there is a mutual application of both Planets 
coming together mutually; and above all the rest, this application 
is the most effective, and of greater and quicker effect, since they 
are more rapid, and without any disturbed agreement of the 
sublunar causes according to the nature of both Planets, on account 
of their mutual [configuration] in this concourse of Planets. 
But in the third mode there is a mutual separation, by which the 
force of uniting of the Planets that are moving away from each 
other in turn is dispersed and weakened—that is through their mo- 
tion to opposite parts of the World the mixture of forces is torn 
apart—and from that as for the most part nothing except contrari- 
eties, or to disperse [those things that] are apparently signified 
along with a dissension of sublunar causes and with mutual disrup- 
tions. Even though Ptolemy and many others concede an effective 
force to retrograde Planets but one that is slow or impedited. 
Which diversity of opinions, however, must be reconciled thus. 
For example, Jupiter in retrogression applying to the MC will 
promise honors and fortunate undertakings, unless perhaps it is 
more apparent [but] without effect. Thus [also] when the ruler of 
the ASC and the ruler of the MC are mutually separating, no hon- 
110 

===== PAGE 119 =====

ors are conferred; and the reasoning is the same with the rest, ac- 
cording to the analogy of virtue. 
Furthermore, a Planet applies in two ways. First, com- 
pletely—namely when it is united in power to the one to which it 
applies, that is when it is going to overtake it, uniting with it with- 
out any retrogression until [it has begun its] separation from the 
orbs of virtue. Second, incompletely—when the Planet is not 
united in power to the one to which it applies. But now, having 
completed its application, it signifies the future effect of the con- 
junction according to the nature of the Planet to which the applica- 
tion is made; but being incomplete, it presages only the appearance 
for the effects, and particularly the beginning [of them], but not 
their perfection; for the effect will be destroyed or impedited by 
that which is signified by the Planet that interrupts the motion to 
the uniting by its conversion to direct or retrograde [motion]. 
Similarly, a Planet separates in two ways. First, com- 
pletely—namely from a preceding conjunction down to the sepa- 
ration of the orbs. Second, incompletely—when before the separa- 
tion of the orbs, the Planet that is separating returns to being con- 
joined, and again unites with that Planet, or does not. But now, the 
completed separation signifies the future effect of the conjuno 
tion,1 even though it is less than [the effect of] the application. 
Moreover, [when it is] incomplete, it signifies the confirmation of 
the effect, or even its repetition, especially if the [Planet] that is 
separating is united again with the conjunction. And these things 
must be understood about a Planet applying or separating, both 
direct, and retrograde in motion. 
Again, moreover, an application must be understood, both to 
the moving body of a Planet, and to its fixed place in the erected 
figure, in which a three-fold difference occurs. For a Planet may 
apply to completion to the place and body of another [Planet], or 
only completely to its place, or only incompletely to its place. The 
'The Latin text has the symbol for Mars by error rather than the symbol for a con- 
junction. 
Ill 

===== PAGE 120 =====

first mode certainly produces an effect, and a notable one, and it 
only pertains to the swifter Planets. Ihz second [mode] produces a 
moderate effect in the case of the swifter [Planets], but a greater 
one in the case of the slower [Planets]. That is, it pertains to all of 
the Planets, with the exception of the Moon, which never retro- 
grades, and always comes to the body of the following Planet to 
which it applies. The third [mode] scarcely produces any effect, 
but only the useless and confused appearance [of one]. 
And these things are not only said about conjunctions, but also 
about the sextile, square, quincunx, and opposition, and not only 
about [the configurations of] the Planets among themselves, but 
also about their individual [configurations] with respect to the 
principal places of the nativity. For example, if in that year in 
which from the direction of the ASC to Mars ruler of the 8th house 
there is fear of a danger to the life, it happens that Mars applies to 
completion to the radical place of the ASC,1 the danger will cer- 
tainly occur, and it will be all the more certain if Mars, after it has 
come [exactly] to the ASC, [comes] to that same ASC again by ret- 
rogression, especially since it is going to make still a third uniting 
with it; therefore, during that whole time the native is in grave dan- 
ger, which he can scarcely evade without the most careful caution 
and pmdence. 
Finally, a Planet separating from another and not applying to 
any other, either in the same or in another sign (although the 
Arabs, Cardan, and Origanus think only from the same sign)2 is 
called void of course. But a [Planet] is said to be feral or isolated 
that neither applies nor separates. But such [a Planet] if it is alone 
in the 1st house, or if it is the ruler of the 1st, makes men who are 
solitary or fleeing from the comfort of others; and if it is malefic in 
nature, [or in] exile and retrograde, it will signify a man with wild 
habits, a countryman, a strange person. 
'Here Morin is talking about a transit that occurs in the year of the direction. 
2And this is the restricted definition that is in general use among astrologers to- 
day. 
112 

===== PAGE 121 =====

But for a more precise acquaintance still with the preceding 
doctrine, the following should be noted. If there are two Planets lo- 
cated within the limits of application, with the following one direct 
and the preceding one retrograde, and before the separation from 
the orbs, the preceding one becomes direct and comes to the fol- 
lowing one, the effect that was only hoped for will come to pass; 
and it will be the quicker and the more effective and with mutual 
consent of the sublunar causes if the following one retrogrades to 
the direct preceding one. The effect will therefore begin, and after- 
ward it will be given up, and then finally, contrary to the hope or 
opinion of all, it will be completed 
If two Planets that are united mutually separate, the motion of 
one of them having been interrupted in that uniting, the effect of 
the uniting is indeed signified, but also its prompt and hasty disso- 
lution, on account of something marvelous happening or interven- 
ing. 
If Saturn and Venus are mutually separating in the 12th house, 
the effect of their conjunction will certainly be frustrated, but not 
their determination to illnesses, imprisonment, etc.; and the rea- 
soning is the same with the rest of the houses—namely, under- 
stand it from the completed influence. 
Furthermore, it must be noted that conjunctions produce their 
own effects by retrogression by extraordinary and unexpected 
means, and the more so if both Planets are retrograde and the 
swifter one overtakes the slower preceding one. And the reasoning 
is the same about separations by simple or mutual retrogression. 
And a Planet applying, either directly or by retrogression, must 
be diligently noted, for the latter case is said to overtop the former, 
and it is of especial virtue for the completed effect if a uniting is 
made; that is, through things or persons signified by it the effect 
will occur. Similarly, a Planet should be especially noted that sep- 
arating by retrogression impedes the uniting—in fact, by things or 
persons signified by it the effect will be impeded. 
113 

===== PAGE 122 =====

Moreover, it is best if the applying Planet is in an angle, espe- 
cially that of the MC or the ASC, and if the one to which it applies 
is in a cadent [house]. For applying from an angle promises great 
strength and a great effect, which will however be very much 
greater if the other one to which it applies is also in an angle. 
And applications to Planets corresponding to the signified ef- 
fect are the most powerful for that same effect. As, if for dignities 
the ruler of the MC will apply to the Sun, especially by a trine as- 
pect, the native will acquire the dignities. Moreover, if for the 
spouse the ruler of the 7th house will apply to the ruler of the 9th, 
which is [the House] of Religion, or to the [ruler of] the 12th , 
which is [the House] of Imprisonment and Servitude, the native 
will not marry a wife. As happened to me, for whom Venus ruler of 
the 7th cusp applies to Jupiter, ruler of the 9th and the 12th in the 
12th itself with Saturn. 
But someone will object: the constitution of the present Caelum 
does not signify the status of the future Caelum', otherwise, there 
would be no certitude in astrology; therefore, no attention should 
be paid to a Planet applying or separating [for] what is going to be 
its status later,1 namely from a complete or an incomplete 
application or separation. 
I respond that what a Planet completely or incompletely applies 
to or separates from does pertain to the present constitution of the 
Caelum', and it is therefore useful to have known that, because both 
effects are not the same. 
Besides, the causes of the modes of those effects must be 
sought not only from the proper strengths of the Planets, but also 
formally from the analogy of their own motions, by which the 
modes of the effects are represented in the Caelum, concerning 
which analogy we have spoken of in Book 13, Section 3, Chapter 
3. For just as [when] two men are necessary for the same effect, if 
"Reading inposterum 'in the following', i.e. 'later', rather than imposterum 'a de- 
ceiver'. 
114 

===== PAGE 123 =====

they combine mutually they can do it, but not if they mutually 
avoid each other, or when one comes forward, the other goes 
away; just so are the sublunar effects of the Planets [indicated] in 
the Caelum; that is, the ones that are first in the Caelum causally or 
potentially and representatively are more actually or effectively 
[acting] on the Earth. 
For terrestrial things are affected and marked by the celestial 
bodies, both by reason of their influence and by reason of their mo- 
tion, that is the different conjunctions or separations among them- 
selves, so that consequently those bodies practice their own effects 
on Earth beforehand in the Caelum. 
Finally, in the case of aspects that are not partile, it is always 
worse for a Planet to apply to a malefic than to separate from it. 
Chapter 3. The Modes and Effects of the Combined 
Applications and Separations of the 
Planets among themselves. 
The application or the separation of a Planet is said to be com- 
posite when at least three Planets come together among them- 
selves according to application or separation. Concerning which, 
the following things are noted that were handed down by the old 
[astrologers] but not explained. First, 
"Whenever three Planets are connected among 
themselves by body or by ray, so that the middle 
one is swifter than the rest under its orb of virtue 
from which it separates, and with its own orb it 
reaches the one to which it applies to completion; 
then that middle one is commonly said to transfer 
the light from the one from which it separated to 
the one to which it is applying, even if the orbs of 
the outer ones are distant among themselves." 
But because the virtue of the Planets does not consist of their 
light, as we have taught elsewhere, and in Section I, Chapter 17, it 
115 

===== PAGE 124 =====

is said that the Planets do not even transmit their own force to oth- 
ers, [so] much less would they transfer [the force] of another. For 
they cannot transfer that unless they have first received it; and they 
cannot receive it unless it is transmitted by that Planet, whose force 
it is, against [what we have said in] Chapter 17; and it would be a 
more tolerable saying if the middle one were said to transmit its 
virtue from the one from which it separated. 
Therefore, it would be better to say that the middle one unites 
the force of the extreme ones that are not connected among them- 
selves. And the reason is because when the middle one is con- 
nected to both of the extreme ones, it therefore concurs with the 
one to which it is applying; it therefore concurs with the one to 
which it is apply for the effect and per se and by reason of its own 
state; therefore, also by reason of the connection with the one from 
which it has separated, which is almost the same as if the extreme 
[Planets] were united.1 
Furthermore, this state of the Planets signifies either that the ef- 
fect of the connection of the extremes will be perfected by things 
in the middle, or by persons signified by that middle [Planet], or 
that the effect signified by the conjunction of the middle one with 
the one to which it is applying will arise from the causes signified 
by the one from which it separated, and it will leave off in the ef- 
fect signified by the one to which it is applying, or finally as long 
as the things or the persons signified by the extremes concur with 
the effect signified by the one in the middle. 
As in my nativity, Mercury is in 27055' Aquarius in partile 
sextile to the ASC, Venus is in 1 Pisces, the Sun in 4019' Pisces, 
and Jupiter in Pisces. Therefore, Venus separating from the 
place of Mercury, applies completely, both to their places and to 
the bodies of the Sun and Jupiter. Therefore, when the MC came 
by direction to Mercury in the year 1629,1 was made the Regius 
Professor of Mathematics; when it came to Venus ruler of the 1st 
'Morin does not disagree with the fact of transmission, but he doesn't like the 
term 'transfer the light'. 
116 

===== PAGE 125 =====

and the Part of Fortune, I received 4,000 livres1 from two mag- 
nates, on account of my Trigonometry and my Solution of the 
Problem of the Earth's Motion2 that were published by me; and 
when it came to the Sun and Jupiter in the year 1635,1 received 
1,000 livres,2 and I acquired great fame, even among foreigners, 
on account of the Science of Longitudes4 invented by me and pub- 
lished, but also acquired many secret enemies from that same 
thing—that is, I provoked Commissioners, and a magnate of the 
first rank against me, namely Cardinal Richelieu—because endan- 
gering my fame and the promised remuneration, to protect my 
honor and the justice of my cause, I would have wanted to ex- 
pound it publicly with a steadfast mind. 
And consequently, the four things said above are verified here. 
For First, the celebrity of the name in astronomy, then enemies 
signified by Mercury and the Sun, advanced through Venus, 
which unless it had contributed aid for the printing necessities, I 
would not have provoked any enemies, because those injuries that 
were brought to me would have been borne patiently, but having 
been exposed to derision by their envy and injustice, I would have 
suffered a loss of fame. 
Second, good things signified for me on behalf of magnates 
from the conjunction of Venus with the Sun and Jupiter were 
caused by Mercury through the monuments of intelligence and the 
mathematical works. 
Third, the good things signified by the conjunction of Venus and 
Mercury ended in secret enmities and fear among the magnates. 
'About $25,000 in today's money. 
2This refers to his book, Famosi et antiqui prohlematis de telluris motu vel quiete, 
hactenus optata solutio... [The hitherto longed-for Solution of the famous and 
ancient Problem of the Motion or Stillness of the Earth] (Paris: The Author, 
1631). 
3About $6,250in today's money. 
4His book, Longitudinum terrestrium nec non coelestium nova et hactenus optata 
scientia... [The New and hitherto longed-for Science of Terrestrial and Celestial 
Longitudes...] (Paris: J. Libert, 1634). 
117 

===== PAGE 126 =====

Fourth, the works of intelligence and then the magnates ought 
to concur with the good things signified by Venus, on account of 
the Sun and Mercury for this reason—from their being conjoined 
to Venus; therefore, in every way the event corresponds to the con- 
stitution of the Caelum. 
Besides, the virtue of the extreme [Planets] is not united with 
the middle one, unless it will apply to completion, at least to the 
place of that Planet to which it is said to be applying, and this either 
by direct motion or by retrograde motion, as it was said elsewhere 
that if the middle one, mutually departing from one of the ex- 
tremes, will apply mutually to another, a perfect uniting of the vir- 
tue of the extremes will not be made, with the extreme separating 
as a hindrance, by which the effect will be upset. 
But to the first of the things noted above there will also pertain 
what is commonly accustomed to be said—with two Planets 
partilely conjoined and applying to another slower [Planet], the 
swifter of those conjoined transfers the force of the other one to the 
slower [Planet]. For this is not a transmission of virtue, as was said 
above, but only that the effect of the slower ones is begun by the 
swifter one of those that are united. 
2. The ponderous or slower [Planet located] between the two 
swifter ones and connected to them will prohibit their virtues from 
being communicated or united. But this is contrary in every way to 
what was noted first. For even though the separation of the follow- 
ing extreme is of weaker virtue than its application; nevertheless, it 
does not destroy the force and effect of its conjunction with the 
middle one, which will consequently concur in the effect of that 
conjunction, both per se and by reason of its state, and therefore by 
reason of its conjunction with the preceding extreme. 
Therefore, the forces of the extremes will be mixed among 
themselves and united, and much more so if the preceding extreme 
comes to the following extreme within its own orb of virtue, and 
they are mutually applying. Nevertheless, the effect of the simple 
118 

===== PAGE 127 =====

conjunction of the extremes will be impedited or retarded by 
things or persons signified by the middle one, if that one by its own 
nature is contrary to the effect, such as Saturn between the rulers of 
the ASC and the 7th for marriage, or between the rulers of the ASC 
and the MC for honors, especially with Saturn unfavorably posited 
and inimical to the 7th or to the MC. And so with the rest [of the 
configurations]. 
3. With three Planets connected by body or by aspect; if the one 
of the extreme ones by the velocity of its own motion comes to the 
other extreme one sooner than the middle one, it is said to cut off 
the force of the middle one from that extreme one. But this is also 
contrary to what was noted first. For the swifter one of the ex- 
tremes, when it overtakes the one in the middle, will transfer (as 
they will have it) its force to the following extreme, or it will unite 
their virtue from the middle.1 
And so, with Jupiter posited in the 20th degree of Cancer, Ve- 
nus in the 25th, and the Moon in the 10th, since the Moon comes to 
Jupiter before Venus does, it must be said that not from that is the 
effect signified by the conjunction of Jupiter and Venus destroyed; 
but they will be completed or thrown into disorder by the things 
signified by the Moon. Which granted, surely the greatest reason 
would always be that of the Moon, for it per se and its own aspects 
would very often complete or throw into disorder the effects of all 
the other Planets connected platically in turn, but it would not cut 
off the force of the preceding from the following [Planet]. 
4. If one Planet applies to another slower one. And before it co- 
mes to it, another third one with contrary motion overtakes that 
same one, it is said to frustrate the forces of the previous ones. That 
is, it suppresses and destroys the effect signified by their uniting. 
The reason is, because the third [Planet] by its own mutual applica- 
tion with the two previous ones, produces its own effect with them 
more surely than those produce their own [effect] among them- 
'The Latin text has ex Me, which I take to mean ex medio. 
119 

===== PAGE 128 =====

selves by the simple application; whence, the proper effect of these 
among themselves is warded off or suppressed. 
5. If the preceding Planet does not come to the one to which it is 
applying before that one comes to the third or its strong ray, the pre- 
ceding one (as they will have it) is frustrated by its own force. That 
is, its effect with the following one is warded off. But this is contrary 
to what was noted first. For the second one would transfer the force 
of the preceding one to the third following one, as was already ex- 
plained above. Besides, that third Planet or [its] strong ray can be 
conformable to that effect. Why, therefore, would it ward it off? 
Therefore, it can only hinder it, if it is not conformable or contrary. 
6. A swift Planet, applying to two slower ones that arepartilely 
united, concurs more effectively with the slower of those, because 
it attains its union with it first. But on the contrary, a slow [Planet] 
preceding and applying to two lighter ones partilely united, con- 
curs more effectively with the slower of those. But note that this 
application is to the places, not to the bodies of the swifter 
[Planets]. 
7. An application that is near by body to a slower Planet sup- 
presses the force of the remoter aspects. Especially if they are con- 
trary to that application, which [is something that] must always be 
taken into account. 
8. An aspect among conjoined Planets disturbs their conjunc- 
tion if it is strong and contrary to the effect of the conjunction. 
Moreover, there should also be carefully noted the nature and 
quality both of the bodies and of the disturbing aspects, as things, 
persons, and good and bad luck become known. 
9. A Planet separating j'rom another by aspect and applying 
corporally to still another, by rights, at least by its distance, acts 
more effectively on the latter. And the reason is clear per se, indeed 
even if it is further distant, since an application is more powerful 
than a separation, and a [configuration by] body is more powerful 
than one by aspect. 
120 

===== PAGE 129 =====

10. One Planet located between two others and connected to 
them is said to be besieged by the extremes. And if benefic Planets 
surround it, it is good; if malefic Planets surround it, it is very bad. 
If a benefic and a malefic [Planet], namely by nature or by determi- 
nation [surround it]; the judgment must be made for the one to 
which there is an application, especially if it is the one that is 
nearer and stronger. Moreover, there will be a more notable effect 
if the extremes are corporally under the orb of virtue of the middle 
one, or their own orb of virtue; or if the middle one applies mutu- 
ally to the other one [of the extremes]. Judge the same thing about 
one Planet between two aspects. 
11. If there are two Planets under the mutual orbs of their own 
virtue, however many and whatever kind of Planets or their as- 
pects [there are] placed among themselves, they will not prevent 
their conjunction from being able to produce an effect, even if a 
mutual separation of the middle one but not of the extremes is 
present. Nevertheless, the interposed Planets or aspects would try 
to disturb the effect of the conjunction of the extremes if they 
would be contrary to it, as was said at Number 8, but not to 
suppress it. 
12. When there are two Planets not aspecting each other,and a 
third one, lighter than both of them, applies at the same time to 
both of them, or at the same time separates from both of them, ei- 
ther only by aspect, or by body and aspect; that third one is said to 
collect the force of the others, that is. it is said to unite that force in 
itself So that it can produce [effects] both from its own virtue and 
from the combined virtue of the others. 
Besides, all of the above said modes can happen among the 
Planets, either those that are both benefic by nature or determina- 
tion, or those that are both malefic, or [when] one is benefic and 
the others are malefic, or the contrary; likewise, [when] all are ei- 
ther partly well or evilly disposed, all of which will have to be dili- 
gently noted - just as also the nature, quality, state, and determina- 
tion of the one that is in the middle between the external ones. 
121 

===== PAGE 130 =====

Chapter 4. The Doryphory of the Planets or their Attendance. 
The doryphory of the Planets pertains to their applications or 
separations; indeed, it is nothing else than a uniting, either by ap- 
plication or separation of the Planets, but with a particular and 
more important consideration. Moreover, there are two kinds of 
doryphory—namely, by body and by aspect—and both kinds must 
be looked at, both in the case of the Lights and in the case of the 
lesser Planets, at least those of primary virtue or authority in the 
figure. 
The dotyphory of the Lights' by body is when one, two, or more 
Planets attend the Sun or the Moon, so that the Sun or the Moon is 
not distant from the one attending it or from the nearer one of those 
attending beyond both semi-diameters of the orb of virtue; but oth- 
ers [define] those attending among themselves similarly; although 
the old astrologers admit a Planet distant by 30 degrees as an atten- 
dant, which however is not a doryphory by body, but by a 
semi-sextile aspect. 
Moreover, the more Planets there are attending both the Sun 
and the Moon and the nearer they are among themselves [but] out- 
side the limits of combustion, the more notable the dotyphory will 
be, and the greater or rarer an effect will it produce if it is released 
from all the following numbers. 
And First, if the attending Planets are oriental to the Sun, and 
especially visible before its rising, or if they are occidental to the 
Moon [and visible after it sets]. Second, if they are of the same sect 
and sex as the light; that is, masculine and diurnal with the Sun, but 
'The word doryphory is Greek and means literally 'spear-bearer'. Its extended 
sense was 'personal body-guard' of the king or queen. The Sun and the Moon 
were considered to be the king and queen of the Caelunt, so the term referred to 
Planets that were seen to accompany them in the Caelunt. Originally, the astro- 
logical doryphories were the 'morning stars' that appeared between the eastern 
horizon and the MC before sunrise, and the 'evening stars' that appeared between 
the MC and the western horizon after sunset, and in particular after both Sun set 
and Moon set, but various definitions of the term are given by the old astrologers, 
and Morin prescribes his own. 
122 

===== PAGE 131 =====

feminine and nocturnal with the Moon. For, with all these agree- 
ing, the doryphory will be notable and powerful, and one that 
promises great things in connection with the particular things sig- 
nified by the Light that has the doryphory rules over by its own de- 
termination, especially if the Light is in the angles. 
But if everything that happens is contrary, the doryphory will be 
very evil, and it portends a huge evil, especially in unlucky houses 
of the figure. But when there is a mixture of the superior [Planets], 
there will also occur an effect that is moderate in its substance, and 
in the quality of the fortune or misfortune, which nevertheless al- 
ways inclines to the predominant part. 
As in my nativity, Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Jupiter, and Saturn 
are conjoined in the beginning of the 12th house. And Venus ruler 
of the 1 st and Mercury ruler of the 2nd are oriental to the Sun, with 
Jupiter and Saturn as occidental1; but Saturn ruler of the MC is oc- 
cidental2 to the Moon, and the rest are oriental. In this connection, 
Jupiter, Venus, and Mercury are benefic and well disposed, but 
Saturn is malefic by nature, but partly well and partly evilly dis- 
posed by determination. Finally, Mercury alone is in a masculine 
sign, all the rest of the Planets are in feminine signs, and especially 
Venus, which is feminine by sex. 
Moreover, from this it resulted that the history of my life and 
fortune is extraordinary and not at all common. Indeed, it is distin- 
guished with many evils and good things of the fortune of the body 
and the mind and with many dangers that will be more fully set 
forth at another time. 
The doryphory of the lesser Planets is by the body, especially 
when a Planet posited in its own domicile or exaltation, and of pri- 
mary or important signification in the figure (as if it is the ruler of 
the nativity, or of the Sun, the Moon, the Part of Fortune, or the 
'The Latin text has accidentales 'accidental', but this must be a typographical er- 
ror for accidentales 'occidental'. 
2Again the text has accidentalis 'accidental' instead of occidentalis 'occidental', 
but Saturn is not occidental to the Moon, but rather oriental like the other Planets. 
123 

===== PAGE 132 =====

MC), one, two, or more Planets, as was said above, are attending. 
And this doryphory also presages great and outstanding things; 
good insignia indeed if the attending Planet is well disposed, and 
of the same sex and sect. 
But if a Planet of primary dignity in the figure located in its own 
exile or fall is attended by 1, 2, or more Planets that are malefic by 
their nature or determination, badly afflicted, and contrary by sex 
or sect, that doryphory will forebode huge evils. Moreover, the 
doryphory of those Planets that rule the 12th and the 8th houses 
must also be taken into consideration, for by them notable calami- 
ties and famous deaths are signified. 
Finally, every concourse of the Planets in any house of the fig- 
ure makes the native distinguished and celebrated in those things 
signified by that house. First, when a Planet that is in its own do- 
micile or exaltation and angular is seen by another Planet also pos- 
ited in its own domicile or exaltation by a ray rising before the pre- 
vious Planet; and this doryphory makes a famous and great nativ- 
ity; it will be outstanding, especially if the angular Planet is in the 
ASC or the MC and is a benefic associate. 
Second, if a Planet posited in the ASC or the MC is attended by 
a Planet of the same sect casting a ray onto the part [of the Caelum] 
before the rising for the Sun or after the rising for the Moon. 
Third, when, with a Planet posited in the ASC or in the MC, 
and in a diurnal nativity, diumal [stars], and in a nocturnal nativity, 
nocturnal [stars] attend, with a preceding or a following ray, just as 
a Planet of itself is diumal or nocturnal. And the Sun and the Moon 
can also be attended by Planets of their own condition or sect pos- 
ited in the angles. Moreover, a contrariety or a contradiction will 
occur in the signified effect if nocturnal Planets attend diumal 
ones or diumal Planets nocturnal ones, unless the attendants are 
benefic and well disposed. 
Besides, of the two kinds of doryphories mentioned above, a 
third or a middle one can be brought about, namely when some 
124 

===== PAGE 133 =====

Planets attend another Planet by body, but others attend it by as- 
pect. 
But in addition to the above said doryphories, there is still an- 
other one unknown to the ancients, which is like this. If a Planet 
that is the ruler of the ASC or the MC, or the Sun or the Moon, or 
their rulers, or even some Planet of principal signification in the 
nativity - and especially one of the superior Planets—is found to 
be attended by three or four bright fixed [stars], and particularly in 
the 1 st or the 1 Oth house, that attended Planet will produce aston- 
ishing effects, as in our Practice of Astrology we shall prove with 
astonishing productive examples of marvels of this age.' And 
therefore, even solitary Planets, or their aspects, or solitary bright 
fixed [stars], or a mixture of them, can create marvelous things by 
means of doryphories. 
SECTION III. 
Planets Combust by the Sun. 
Chapter 1. Why is a Planet Combust by the Sun. 
The status of the Planets is three-fold, according to how they are 
connected to the Sun, the First [of these] is when the Planet is 
partilely united to the Sun in longitude and latitude, or at least 
when both centers are not distant from each other by more than 16 
minutes [of arc], which amount is namely the semi-diameter of the 
Sun; and then the astrologers say that the Planet is in cazimi,2 or 
the Heart of the Sun. 
Second is when the Planet's center is more than 16 minutes dis- 
tant from the center of the Sun, but not beyond the complement of 
the semi-diameter of the orb of virtue of that Planet to 18 degrees, 
'it is a great pity that Morin did not live to write that book and cite some of these 
marvelous examples. 
2The Latin text has the word Cazini, by mistake for cazimi. The latter word is the 
usual medieval Latin transcription of some Arabic word or phrase derived from 
the Arabic word samim 'core' or 'heart' of something (in this case, of the Sun). 
125 

===== PAGE 134 =====

or the semi-diameter of the orb of virtue of the Sun, which semi-di- 
ameter is different in the individual Planets, and was defined by us 
in Section I, Chapter 13. But then the Planet is said to be combust 
by the Sun; namely because, posited in the same vertical circle 
with the Sun, it cannot be seen, even with the Sun lying hid below 
the horizon, because the Planet has not yet emerged from the limits 
of its own combustion, as was explained in that same chapter. And 
from that it is established that there is not the same limit of com- 
bustion for all the Planets, but a personal one for each of them, 
[which was] unknown to the ancients. 
The Third and final [mode] is when a Planet's center is distant 
from the Sun's center by more than the complement but it is never- 
theless still under the orb of virtue of the Sun; and then the planet is 
only said to be under the Sun beams.1 But as soon as the body of 
the Planet goes beyond the orb of virtue of the Sun, it is said to be 
free from the Sun beams. 
Chapter 2. Every Planet is always Somewhere—in the 
Heart of the Sun. Combust, or Under the Sun Beams; 
or rather, the Aspects of the Planets with respect 
to the Earth are often Burnt up. 
For, having drawn two straight lines touching the Sun and a 
Planet on each end continued to the parts of the Planet, the Planet 
itself will be in the Heart of the Sun with respect to the place in 
which those lines or the cone intercepted by them extends, either to 
the Earth, or to another Planet, or to ethereal spaces or to sublunar 
spaces, and in that place it would be said to be combust or under 
the Sun beams. But from that it follows that the Planet Earth is not 
combust. Just as if a line drawn through the centers of the Sun and 
Jupiter leaves off in the place of the square aspect to Jupiter, that in 
the place of its own square will be said to be combust, and yet a line 
or ray coming forth from that place onto the Earth is free from 
combustion. 
'Literally, sub radiis Soli 'under the rays of the Sun', but the usual English ren- 
dering (now obsolete) of the phrase is 'under the Sun beams'. 
126 

===== PAGE 135 =====

Besides, even so the bodies of the Planets, within the orb of vir- 
tue of the Sun in the Primum Mobile, falling with respect to us by 
the distance that was mentioned above, they are also said to be 
combust with respect to us. Also, reason says that must certainly 
be thought about the aspects of the Planets; namely, whose places, 
if they would be seen by any light, those surely would fall into the 
orb of virtue of the Sun, impeding the brightness of the Sun itself, 
they would be invisible to us. And consequently, with the Sun in 
trine to Jupiter, the trine to Jupiter bums with respect to us; and so 
with the rest [of the configurations]. 
Chapter 3. Whether Combust Planets are of no Virtue 
[for acting] on these Inferior things, as the Ancients thought. 
This great difficulty occurs to us, and the dispute must be 
ended. For many astrologers, along with Junctinus in his Treatise 
on Revolutions, p. 1134, allow combust Planets no force. Ptolemy 
himself in Quadripartite Book 3, Chapter 14, discussing 
anaeretas says: 
"But in general, it is proper to accept no [force] 
from those Planets that are covered over by the 
rays of the Sun, neither to killing, nor to aiding, 
except when the Moon is the prorogator of life; 
but the Sun is also a killer [when it is] wounded by 
any malefic (as Cardan says in his Commentary) 
which comes to the Moon before the Sun itself." 
For then, when the Sun or its square or opposition ray would 
come to the Moon, [the native] would more surely die on account 
of that malefic. 
But again, Cardan in his Commentary on book 3, Chapter 18, 
says as follows about combust Planets: 
"But now, what the stars that are under the rays 
promise is plain from this. For not utterly, as the 
Arabs think, but in the fall of life as was seen 
127 

===== PAGE 136 =====

above (namely, in Chapter 14), they can do noth- 
ing; neither by harming, nor by helping. Moreover, 
in the qualities of mind, they seem to be able to do 
something; for they make stupider persons and 
those inclined to repentance, also of reserved and 
secret counsel, and apt to handling secrets. But in 
the case of children, the Planet that is under the 
rays denies them. Therefore, a three-fold rule is in- 
ferred about them in this manner. A Planet under 
the Sun beams, in the greatest things, such as life or 
dying, or children, provides nothing, nor can it do 
so. But in the rest of things that pertain to actions, 
hardly anything; but in those things that are now 
(to be understood in time of birth) it signifies weak 
effects, as in the qualities of the mind and body. 
Moreover, in the temperament and qualities of the 
body, it signifies burning; and similarly in habits, 
and especially [in the case of] Mars." 
These things to the word are confirmed by that same Cardan, in 
his Commentary on Book 2, chapter 13, where he sets forth this 
rule about combust Planets: 
"When a Planet is under the Sun, the Sun itself 
disposes the place of that Planet; that is, it claims 
for itself the force of acting of that Planet; be- 
cause, by itself the Planet can do nothing." And in 
Book 2, Aphorism 13, "when all the Planets are 
under the Sun" (he says) "that nativity will have 
only one Planet endowed with the powers of all 
the others," 
which will therefore be the Sun, according to Cardan's preced- 
ing remarks. 
Besides, this doctrine of the ancients has arisen from this—that 
they thought that all the stars produce their own effects on 
128 

===== PAGE 137 =====

sublunar things by [their] light; and it had not become known to 
them that not only the Moon, but also Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Ve- 
nus, and Mercury are lacking their own light and are only illumi- 
nated by the Sun, whose light they reflect upon these lower things. 
Based on that, it is not surprising that comparing the huge and 
very potent light of the Sun (which, equally extended, they also 
thought to be productive of the heat of the Sun) with the meager 
and dull light of the rest of the Planets, they judged their force to be 
overwhelmed, weakened, and burnt up by the virtue of the Sun. 
But because in Book 11 we have proved that by itself the light only 
illuminates and does nothing else; therefore the falsity and ruin of 
that fundamental principle of the ancients is now plain. 
Therefore, for the solution of the question that was proposed, it 
must be noted that a Planet can be burned up by the Sun in two 
ways. First by body, namely when the body of the Planet falls in 
the orb of virtue of the Sun. Second, by aspect, and this again is 
two-fold. First, if for example a trine of Jupiter falls within the orb 
of virtue of the Sun. Second, if the line drawn through the centers 
of the Sun and Jupiter would terminate in the Caelum at the place 
of the trine of Jupiter. But that combustion, since it happens with 
respect to the Caelum, and not the Earth, that trine therefore cannot 
be harmful with respect to the Earth. 
But about the two previous modes, it is asked whether the Sun 
would dissipate or weaken the force of a Planet or aspect that it is 
said to bum up, as was believed by Ptolemy and the rest of the as- 
trologers hitherto, but especially in the case of the bodies of the 
Planets. 
However, I think the solution must be distinguished thus. In 
each Planet there is formally a two-fold nature or virtue, that is an 
elemental one and a celestial one, as was said by us in Book 8, Sec- 
tion I. But in the aspects of the Planets, only the influential virtue 
flourishes formally, which however contains the elemental virtue 
eminently. 
129 

===== PAGE 138 =====

Therefore, the Sun conjoined to any Planet represses and weak- 
ens its elemental force by the excess of its own heat and the vast- 
ness of its body, especially if it would be contrary to [the nature of] 
that same Planet. Which it would certainly not do if it were more 
distant from us, as Satum is less, or it would not appear to be more; 
or if Satum, for example, would approach closer to us, so that it 
would then equal the visible magnitude of the Sun, or even exceed 
it by ten or one hundred times. 
For then, Satum partilely joined to the Sun would rather sup- 
press the latter's elemental force, which is evidently apparent in 
total eclipses of the Sun by the Moon and with a delay, in which we 
also experience not the Sun's heat, but the Moon's cold even in 
summer; then, from the Sun under the Earth (which is a daily total 
eclipse of the Sun by the Earth), in which, not the Sun by its own 
heat, but the Earth by its own cold, affects us. 
But the Sun by its own combustion does not dissipate or weaken 
the force of a Planet, as the ancients thought, although it is much 
superior to it by its own excellence and rulership over the rest of 
the Planets and then by the magnitude of its body. 
[There is no Chapter 4 in this Section.) 
Chapter S. Reasons against the Opinions of the Ancients. 
Let this be the First reason. A Planet conjoined to the Moon is 
in no ways said to be deprived or stripped of its virtue by the Moon 
herself, even though the virtue of the Moon would be far superior 
to the force of that Planet with respect to us, on account of the near- 
ness of the Moon, according to the common consensus of astrolo- 
gers, who attribute the primacy of virtue among the Planets to the 
Sun and the Moon. 
And the reason cannot be because the Planet is seen to be con- 
joined to the Moon, but not conjoined to the Sun; otherwise, by a 
similar reason no Planet above the horizon by day would be of any 
virtue for those by whom it could not be seen. Similarly, therefore, 
130 

===== PAGE 139 =====

the forces of the Planets, at least the influential forces, are not sup- 
pressed or weakened by conjunction with the Sun. 
Second. Concerning the common consensus of astrologers dif- 
fering among themselves here, the Sun conjunct Mars or Saturn is 
said to be especially hurting, namely because from the concurring 
rays of the Sun and Saturn or Mars a hurtful effect is produced on 
these inferior things; and that is so certain that nothing in astrology 
is more certain. But now that would not happen if the Sun by its 
own conjunction with Saturn or Mars would dissipate the hurtful 
influx of these [Planets]; that is, by that dissipation a mixture of the 
concurrent rays would be prohibited. 
No, the astrologers declare that there are different effects of the 
individual Planets [resulting] from their conjunctions with the 
Sun; but if from that conjunction different effects are produced, 
from that, therefore, there will arise different influxes as the causes 
of those effects; therefore, at least the influential virtue of those 
Planets are not suppressed by the conjunctions with the Sun, nor is 
it restrained or destroyed. 
Third. All the old masters of astrology will have a Planet that is 
in cazimi or in the Heart of the Sun—that is, united partilely with 
the Sun—to have maximum force and to unite its own virtue then 
with the Sun, and to act as it were by one ray and by the same virtue 
on these inferior things, as Origanus says in his Introduction, Part 
3, p. 434. 
But [to suppose that when] the Planet Jupiter is joined platically 
to the Sun, or distant from it by 9 degrees, it is combust and it has 
gone out of its own powers because of the stupendous virtue of the 
Sun, but when it is partilely conjoined it is not combust and it has 
not gone out of its powers—that is ridiculous to believe, since with 
the combustion applied, just as it grows faint towards the periph- 
ery of the orb of virtue of the Sun, where it leaves off altogether; so 
on the contrary it grows stronger towards the center, where it 
flourishes the greatest. Therefore, if combustion suppresses the 
131 

===== PAGE 140 =====

forces of the Planets, a central combustion would suppress them 
most powerfully, the contrary of that which all the ancients 
thought. 
Fourth. Mercury, for the greatest part of the time is combust, to 
which nevertheless all the astrologers attribute the greatest forces 
both in the air and in nativities of men; indeed, Ptolemy in Quadri- 
partite, Book 4, Chapter 4,' selects an example of rulership, espe- 
cially from Mercury, Venus, and Mars, to which all other astrolo- 
gers subscribe. Indeed Cardan himself also in his Commentary, 
even though he had said previously that Planets under the rays rule 
hardly anything among those things that pertain to actions, such as 
art, nevertheless he does not make an exception of Mercury's com- 
bustion, because it does not seem to have been made an exception 
of by Ptolemy. 
But it should have been made [an exception], and at least rare 
and meager effects are attributed to Mercury on account of that 
cause; from which it is plain that the ancients have contradicted 
themselves about this matter. And a nice response to those things 
is not sufficient, because Mercury is customarily combust. For it 
would follow: First that at the beginning of the World it would 
have been of less virtue than now with regard to these inferior 
things, since combustion would have been less common then; and 
at least from Ptolemy down to us any increment of its virtue would 
have been noticed, which however was never done. Second. Of the 
other Planets, especially the Moon, Venus, and Mars, it cannot be 
said that from the founding of the World down to now they are not 
sufficiently accustomed to combustion. Third. If Mercury is ac- 
customed to combustion, and by that is less injured [now] than in 
ancient times, it would surely follow that the virtue of the Sun for 
Mercury is now lessened; that is, it is lessened for the least of the 
'This is the chapter entitled 'Of the Quality of Action', in which the Ruler of Ac- 
tion is chosen from one of the Planets Mars, Venus, or Mercury. He speaks of a 
Planet that has made its morning appearance closest to the Sun (engista pros 
helion in the Greek) as if it was thus the most powerful, but he says nothing spe- 
cifically about combustion. 
132 

===== PAGE 141 =====

Planets—how much more [then] would it be lessened for the rest 
of the greater Planets? 
Fifth. If the forces of no Planet were combust, it would follow 
that in individual lunations the Moon would have no virtue with 
respect to these sub-lunar things, which can be proved to be false 
by two reasons. First. Because of the lunar syzygies none is com- 
monly observed to be more effective than the New Moon. Second. 
Because an eclipse of the Sun is supposed to occur at the [time of] 
New Moon, to which [event] all astrologers attribute the greatest 
force, it is certain that that force of the eclipse is not principally 
from the heat or the light of the Sun that was diminished or ham- 
pered. Otherwise, the effect of the eclipse would be very brief, 
which would begin and leave off with the eclipse; and conse- 
quently, its effect would be lesser and lighter than the Sun's daily 
stay below the horizon. 
Therefore, the force of the eclipse necessarily consists of the 
partile—and therefore the most powerful—coming together of the 
Sun and the Moon and of their corporally mingled influences, even 
as the force of the quarters of the Lights consists of the mixture of 
those same influences by the square aspect. For there is not a phi- 
losopher of sane mind who would deny that the rays of the stars, 
either from their light, or from their elemental qualities, or from 
their influences exerted upon these inferior things, are mixed 
together in common concourse. 
The common astrologers, along with the ancients, will say that 
either the Sun itself, or the ruler of the Moon's place, or the Planet 
that aspects them more partilely, acts in place of the Moon and 
takes on the rulership of the things pertaining to the Moon; that is, 
it produces the lunar effects, with her doing nothing and not being 
powerful enough to act. If in fact with regard to the other one of the 
three already mentioned, they are referring to the force of any par- 
ticular combust Planet, and not which of those should be selected, 
that far among themselves they will be able to agree. 
133 

===== PAGE 142 =====

Truly, how absurd it would be to attribute the force of the Moon 
to the Sun from this. For, because the Sun and the Moon are sup- 
posed to be partilely united and in the same site with respect to the 
Caelum and to the Earth, if the effect of the New Moon is said not 
to be from both Lights acting simultaneously, it should moreover 
be conceded that the forces of the Sun and Moon concur; namely, 
because the Sun conducts the functions of the Moon, and it will not 
be deprived of its own virtue. 
By which experiment, Cardan proves that the forces of the 
Moon come forth from the Sun, which forces are lacking them 
from itself, but not from the Moon, which cannot be lacking them, 
unless it leaves off being the Moon, and since the Sun cannot act 
with the powers of the Moon unless it has them; but these can no 
more migrate from the Moon into the Sun than the Sun's powers 
can migrate into the Moon, which must also be thought [to be true] 
of any other combust Planet. 
We may speak similarly about the Moon's ruler. First, if the 
Moon is in Cancer, it will not be subject to any ruler. Therefore, 
however many times New Moons happen in Cancer, will they be 
void and of no virtue with respect to these sub-lunar things due to 
the lack of a ruler for the Moon? This is opposed to experience, 
which proves that in these things the Moon's force appears more 
effectively and purer. And the same thing must be said about any 
Planet that when it is in its own domicile will be conjoined to the 
Sun. 
Second, if when the Moon is combust and doing nothing, its 
ruler as a ruler performs its functions, by that same cause it could 
perform the function of the Sun; and so, both Lights conjoined 
would do nothing, whenever they were subject to the rulership of 
another Planet, which no astrologer has said. 
Third. The Planet that is the Moon's ruler cannot supply the 
forces with its own forces, nor with that of any other Planet which 
it rules, for the influential forces of the individual [Planets] differ 
134 

===== PAGE 143 =====

in kind, but it cannot receive them from the Moon or from another 
Planet, because they do not transmigrate, neither by combustion 
nor by any other mode; for the combustion of a Planet does not 
transmit force to the combust Planet, but it only suppresses, hin- 
ders, or weakens it, as they assert. Therefore, it will not supply 
forces to the Moon. 
Fourth. Either the Moon's ruler performs its functions even if it 
is not combust, or [else] only when it is combust, if this is directed 
by some [Planet] [it is] the ruler itself of the combustion of the 
Moon, either then and not in another way will it be excited to act- 
ing. If that [is the case], then the same thing is appropriate to any 
Planet whatever as ruler. And consequently, when no Planet is in 
its own domicile (which often happens), during that whole time 
none of the 7 Planets would act upon these sub-lunar things. 
For if Mars is the ruler of the Sun, Mars performs the functions 
of the Sun, but if Mars is not even in its own domicile, its ruler will 
also supply its own functions. And so with the other [Planets], and 
consequently either no Planet would act, which is false, or one 
would act but not for another but [instead] for its own self, but with 
the forces conjoined and mixed together, which is very true. 
Finally, that a Planet aspecting the Moon more partilely acts for 
her in a weakened condition is thus also proved to be false. First, 
because if there is one acting as a proxy of the Moon or of another 
combust Planet, by natural right it pertains to the Planet more 
partilely aspecting; therefore, if no Planet aspects the Moon united 
to the Sun (as frequently happens), then also such a New Moon 
will be of no virtue throughout the whole circle of the Earthly 
Lands, which the astrologers will not acknowledge [to be true]. 
Second, because the Planet more partilely aspecting the Moon 
at New Moon, either does not do more by its own aspect than [it 
would] if the Sun were not conjoined to the Moon, or it does do 
more, [and] if that is the case, then it is not said that the Moon be- 
ing distant from the Sun performs the functions; and so it does not 
135 

===== PAGE 144 =====

perform its functions when conjoined to the Sun. If that [is so], I 
ask from whence comes its virtue of doing more? 
For if anyone has said that that Planet is excited and fortified by 
the Sun's aspecting it (since that will be the specious subterfuge 
for those who, defenseless in the presence of the support of reason, 
and trying everywhere to stab the pretexts of such a little worth as 
themselves), he will certainly not escape [censure]—that is, be- 
cause if not even the Sun has its own virtue, which it transmits it by 
aspect to another Planet, so much less would it transmit the virtue 
of the Moon, which it does not have, and which nevertheless is en- 
tirely necessary for a Planet aspecting to act with the powers of the 
Moon, or to perform with its function; that is, those which the 
Moon must have to produce its effects. 
But it is universal, for the sake of an example, that Jupiter 
combust in Aquarius and in the 10th house must from that [situa- 
tion] produce effects of the nature of Jupiter, to the extent that it is 
in Aquarius and in the 10th house. But why should such an effect 
rather be attributed to the Sun, or to its ruling Planet, or to one 
more partilely aspecting, than to Jupiter itself, which itself is [still] 
in Aquarius and in the 10th house? Surely, after the other causes 
rejected by us above, this is very absurd; and the genius of the an- 
cients in this matter is proven to have been at the least very much 
obscured by the rays of the Sun. 
But the same thing that is said about the bodies of the combust 
Planets should also be judged to be true about their aspects that fall 
within the orb of virtue of the Sun—namely, because the force of 
their influential virtue does not perish from combustion, nor is it 
weakened. Otherwise, [the aspect] of Satum or Mars square the 
Sun, malign as it is, would not produce effects. 
Chapter 6. Experiences against the Opinion of the Ancients. 
Experiences that are contrary to the doctrine of the ancients oc- 
cur here and there among those things, for which the nativities of 
men will be scrutinized according to astrological principles, both 
136 

===== PAGE 145 =====

in general judgment, and in particular in the case of the directions 
of significators. 
I had Mercury combust in Aquarius and in partile sextile to the 
ASC, applying to Venus which was also combust and ruler of the 
1st house,1 and Mercury's ruler Saturn is in the 12th house and 
also combust; and I have no celestial cause of my intellect that is 
truer than Mercury itself, which, weak as it was, conferred on me 
an intellect for investigating the more sublime sciences, which will 
be witnessed by the Astronomy Restored by me,2 and by this 
Astrologia Gallied. 
Similarly, I had Venus ruler of the 1st in her own exaltation, 
conjoined to the Sun ruler of the 5th, and Venus combust trine 
Mars ruler of the ASC; but elsewhere, Jupiter and Saturn rulers of 
the 9th conjoined to that same Venus, trine Mars, and also 
combust. 
It can scarcely be said how contrary to the spirit and the flesh 
such a constitution produced [events] for me through the whole 
time of my life till now, since I was in almost perpetual servitude 
down to my 46th year, on account of Saturn ruler of the MC being 
in the 12th, with bad and daily illnesses on account of the Planets 
in the 12th house, which is [the House] of Illnesses, and more than 
16 [instances] of the greatest dangers of violent death on account 
of Jupiter ruler of the 8th cusp, which the violent fixed [star] the 
Heart of Scorpio3 occupies, and the site of Jupiter itself in the 12th, 
which is surrounded on the right by the Sun and Venus, but on the 
left by the Moon and Saturn, and also the square aspect of these 
Planets to the cusp of the 8th. 
But [also] by directions. In the year in which the MC came to 
'Morin's ASC degree was in Aries, but Taurus was intercepted in the 1st house, 
so Morin sometimes considers Venus to be the ruler of the 1 st house. 
2He refers to his book Astronomia jam afundamentis integre et exacte restitua... 
'Astronomy now Completely and Exactly Restored from its Fundamentals...' 
(Paris: The Author, 1640. 4to 361 pp.) 
3The star Antares or a Scorpii, which was at 3057 Sagittarius at Morin's birth. 
137 

===== PAGE 146 =====

Mercury, there was obtained for me, neither thinking of it nor hop- 
ing for it, the dignity of Regius Professor by the particular favor 
and kindness of the Most Serene Queen Mother Marie de' Medicis 
[1573-1642], on account of Venus following in her own exalta- 
tion. And in the year in which the MC came to Venus ruler of the 
1st and of the Part of Fortune, I had [received] almost 4,000 livres] 
from two magnates for the two books that I had published, along 
with personal fame, on account of the Sun and Jupiter following. 
The same thing can be proved from a thousand other nativities; 
namely, that combust planets are not deprived of at least their in- 
fluential virtues, but that they act per se by reason of their own na- 
ture, and both of the sign and the house that they occupy and the 
one that they rule, and [also] by reason of the aspects which they 
make with the other Planets or signiflcators; but not by proxies, as 
was hitherto supposed, although the influx of the Sun must be 
principally taken into account on account of the reason stated 
above. 
Nevertheless, it must be known that the things signified by a 
combust Planet—either habits and intelligence, or actions, 
etc.—are not conspicuous entirely, at least to everyone, and for the 
great part they are unnoticed. And so, those persons for whom 
Mercury is combust, and the significator of intelligence, do not 
disclose to all either their own intelligence, or what they have in 
mind, but something is always reserved, or revealed in the smallest 
things they keep back for themselves. And the reasoning is the 
same for the rest [of the Planets]. 
Finally, if the virtue of a combust Planet is not restrained or sup- 
pressed, much less would the force of its aspects be suppressed, 
which the ancients also thought would not be suppressed—again 
contradicting themselves here, because the force of the aspect 
would have no other origin than from a combust Planet. 
And therefore in this year 1641, in which Mars ruler of the ASC 
'About $25,000 in today's money. 
138 

===== PAGE 147 =====

in my nativity came to the opposition of Venus ruler of the Earth; 
after a lengthy and difficult solicitation, I had [received] 200 livres 
of the increase of the payments, on top of only 600 that I was re- 
ceiving annually1 hitherto, wretchedly and laboriously from the 
king, which certainly from such a great work that I had undertaken 
would in short distract me, unless the super-astral influx would 
powerfully excite me, and, would from somewhere else relieve 
me, since I was rejecting gain from astrology.2 
Chapter 7. In which Lucio Bellantio's Reason 
for the Opinions of the Ancients are discarded. 
So that the truth of the doctrine set forth by us may be made 
more plainly evident, let us discuss the reasons that Lucio 
Bellantio contributed for the contrary [opinion] against Pico 
Mirandola, opposing the opinion of the ancients. Therefore, 
Bellantio says in Question 7, Article 3, "It is most manifest in a 
change of the air that when Planets exit from [under] the rays of the 
Sun they receive powers. Therefore, [when they are] in conjunc- 
tion with the Sun, they have lost them." 
But I reply. The argument can be true about the elemental forces 
and the power of illuminating these inferior things, but not about 
the influences that differ immensely from the light and the elemen- 
tal qualities. As we have said elsewhere, their semi-sex tile comes 
to these with the Sun. 
Again, it follows that Mercury assumes3 the property of the 
Planet to which it is conjoined on account of its own weakness. 
But the individual Planets are weaker with respect to the Sun than 
Mercury is with respect to any other [Planet]. 
But I respond First. The preceding [statement] is of course false 
that Mercury, when it is conjoined to another Planet, assumes its 
'About $1,250 and $3,750 in today's money. 
2He apparently means that he was not charging fees for astrological consulations. 
3Reading induit 'assumes' instead of the iuduit (no such word) of the Latin text. 
139 

===== PAGE 148 =====

nature. And neither Bellantio nor any other astrologer has proved 
that or will ever prove it, even though it may be commonly be- 
lieved by the more credulous astrologers. For even if Mercury as- 
sumes the nature of Saturn, while retaining its own; and so from 
the mixture of Saturn and Mercury, they are both said to act ac- 
cording to our opinion, or else it assumes [the nature of] the for- 
mer, while leaving behind its own; and so in [the case of] Saturn 
and Mercury together, only the virtue of Saturn will re- 
main—weaker even when so divided than when united in Saturn. 
Whence, in the effect of the conjunction of Saturn ruler of the 
ASC with Mercury, not only will there be no influences of Mer- 
cury on the intellect, but also its effect per se will be less than that 
of Saturn alone, which however is opposed to experience, by 
which it is known that Mercury conjoined to Saturn ruler of the 
ASC bestows an excellent, subtle, and profound intellect, which in 
the absence of Mercury would be dull, slow, and very stupefied. 
Second, in order to infer the previous conclusion, that hypothe- 
sis of Mercury alone is not sufficient, which hypothesis we have 
already shown to be false; but in addition a much greater proposi- 
tion is required—namely, that every Planet that is weaker than an- 
other assumes its nature if it is conjoined to it—which hypothesis, 
just as that about Mercury above, will also be proved to be false. 
Again, the argument is thus. In the conjunctions of the other 
Planets, the force of the conjunction is attributed to the stronger 
[Planet]. Therefore, the Sun would leave a Planet conjoined to it- 
self devoid of virtue. 
But I respond. Of course it is true that the principal foxes of the 
conjunction should be attributed to the stronger [Planet]; but it is 
false that the total force should be attributed to it. And so in the 
case of the Sun and the Planet conjoined to it, the same thing must 
surely be judged to be the case. 
Finally, he says that the virtue of the conjoined Planet is either 
the same as that of the Sun, or else it is different; if the first [is 
140 

===== PAGE 149 =====

true], the effect will be attributed to the Sun; if the second [is true], 
the Sun will be overcome. 
But I respond. I concede that if the first [is true] the effect will 
be attributed only to the Sun; but because that first is false, there- 
fore that which follows from it is also false. If the second [is true], I 
discern then that the Sun will be overcome. If the Sun is more pow- 
erful in the place of the conjunction, I concede that it will predomi- 
nate. But if the Planet with which it is conjunct is more powerful, it 
will predominate. But if in the place of the conjunction neither one 
is stronger or weaker than the other, the Sun will predominate due 
to its planetary dignity and magnitude; that is, the effects of the 
conjunction will be more powerful from the Sun. 
And so, therefore, it is plain that Bellantio's reasons are of no 
moment; and the doctrine set forth by us above is confirmed as be- 
ing more valid than his reasons. Therefore, let what has already 
been said about combust Planets suffice; and if anything else is de- 
sired here, let it be sought in Books 21 & 25, where there is a fuller 
discussion about the conjunctions of the Planets. 
The End of the Sixteenth Book 
141 

===== PAGE 150 =====

Index of Persons 
Ancients, 4,18,125-139 
Argoli, Andrea, astrologer, 28,30 
Astrologers, ix,x,3,4,9-14,23,27,28,31,35,37,45,56,57,60,63,72, 
73,83,87,90,91,93,95,96,98,99,100,101,103,106,122,125,127, 
129,130,131,132,133,135,140 
Astronomers, x, 11,15n. 1,26,36,99 
Bellantio, Lucio, astrologer, 14,34,139-141 
Bianchini, Giovanni, astronomer, 27-28,31,33,35,38,45,52,54,56 
Brahe, Tycho, astronomer, 36,49 
Cardan, Jerome, M.D., astrologer, 
14,18,19,23-27,28,50,51n.l,52,53,54-58,67,68,73,76,83-85,112, 
127,128,132,134 
De Angelis, Alexander, Father, critic of astrology, 90-91,98-101 
Ficino, Marsilio, translator, 10,90,102-103 
Giuntini, Francesco, Th.D., astrologer, 14 
Hiibner, Wolfgang, Ph.D., scholar, 18n.l 
John of Austria, Prince, lOln.1,102 
Junctinus {see Giuntini, Francesco) 
Kepler, Johann, astronomer, 4,15,19,20 
Kunitsch, Paul, Ph.D., scholar, 19n.l 
Lansberge, Philip van, astronomer, 78 
Leowitz, Cyprian, 27 
MacKenna, Stephen, translator, lOn.l 
Maestlin, Michael, astronomer, 15 
Magnates, 117,118,138 
Magini, Giovanni Antonio, scholar, 14 
Marie de' Medicis, Queen of France, 108,138 
Mersenne, Marin, Father, 20 
Naibod, Valentine, astrologer, 14 
OfTusius, Jofrancus, M.D., astrologer, 4-9,94 
143 

===== PAGE 151 =====

Origanus, David, mathematician, 33,54,73,112,131 
Origen, theologian, 92n.l 
Page, B. S., translator, lOn.l 
Plotinus, philosopher, 10,90,92-93,102-103 
Pontano, Giovanni Gioviano, astrologer, 14,58,59 
Ptolemy, Claudius, science writer, 2,7,9,12 
Regiomontanus. Johannes, astronomer, 
4,14,15„ 18,19,23,24,25,35,36,37,51,52,57,72,73,75,76,81,83,85, 
109,110,127,129,132 
Reinhold, Erasmus, scholar, NOT FOUND 
Richelieu, Armanddu Plessis de, Cardinal, 67,117 
Robbins, F. E., Ph.D., editor & translator, 18n.l,25n.l 
Schoch, Karl, astronomer, 76n.l 
Schoner, Johann, astrologer, 28 
144 

===== PAGE 152 =====

Bibliography 
Almansor 
Almansoris Astrologi Proposition ad Saracenorum Regem. 
[The Astrologer Almansor's Propositions addressed to the 
King of the Saracens] on pp. 93-110 of the astrological 
miscellany published at Basel: lohannes Hervagius, 1533. 
(See also the book by Holden cited below.) 
Cardan, Jerome, M.D. 
Aphorismorum astronomicorum Segmenta septem. 
[Seven segments of Astrological Aphorisms] 
in his Opera Omnia, Vol. 5 
Clavdii Ptolemaei Pelvsiensis Libri quatuor, 
De Astrorum ludiciis cum expositione Hieronymi Cardani. 
[Claudius Ptolemy Pelusiensis's Four Books 
On the Judgments of the Stars with Jerome Cardan's 
commentary] in his Opera Omnia, Vol. 5 
Liber de Ivdiciis Genitvrarvm. 
[Book on the judgments of Genitures] 
in his Opera Omnia, Vol. 5 
Lyons: I. A. Hvgvetan & M. A. Ravavd, 1663. 10 vols. 
New York & London: Johnson Reprint Corp., 1967. 10 vols. 
facsimile reprint 
Giuntini, Francesco, Th.D. 
Speculum Astrologiae Universam Mathematicam Scientiam, 
in certas classes digestam, complecteus... 
[The Mirror of Astrology Embracing the Whole Mathematical 
Science Divided into Certain Classes...] 
Lyons: Symphorien Beraud, 1583. 2 vols. folio 2nded. 
xxxxvii,2483 pp. 
145 

===== PAGE 153 =====

Holden, James Herschel 
A History of Horoscopic Astrology... 
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 1996. paper xv,359 pp. diagrs. 
tables 21 cm. 
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2006. paper 2nd ed. rev. xvii,375 
pp. diagrs. tables. 21 cm 
Five Medieval Astrologers. 
[an astrological compendium containing translations of the 
Centiloquies of Pseudo-Ptolemy, Hermes, and Bethen, and 
the 150 Propositions of Almansor] 
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2008. paper 154 pp. 21 cm. 
Kepler, Johann 
De Stella nova in pede Serpentarii. 
Prague, 1606. 
Ephemerides novae motuum coelestium ab anno 1617 ad 
annum 1628...Sagan, 1630. 
Kunitsch, Paul, Ph.D. 
Mittelalterliche astronomisch-astrologische 
Glossare mit arabischen Fachausdriicken. 
[Medieval Astronomical-Astrological 
Glossary with Arabic Technical terms] 
Munich: Verlag der Bayerischen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften, 1977. 59 pp. 
Lansberge, Philip van 
Tabulae motuum coelestium perpetuae. 
[Perpetual tables of the Celestial Motions] 
Middelburg, 1632. 
Uranometriae libri tres in quibus lunae, solis, et 
reliquorum planetarum et inerrantium stellarum 
distantiae a terra et magnitudines hactenus 
ignotae perspicue demonstrantur... 
146 

===== PAGE 154 =====

[Three Books of Uranometry, in which the Distances 
of the Moon, the Sun, and the Fixed Stars that were 
hitherto unknown are clearly Demonstrated...] 
Middelburg, Netherlands: Z. Romanus, 1631. 4to 135 pp. 
Mersenne, Marin, Father 
Traite de I'harmonie universelle (1627). 
[treatise of Universal Harmony] 
Preludes de I'harmonie universelle (1634) 
[Preludes to the Universal Harmony] 
Morin, Jean Baptiste, M.D. 
Astrologia Gallica... 
[French astrology...] 
The Hague: Adrian Vlacq, 1661. folio xxxvi,784 pp. port, 
diagrs. tables 
Famosi et antiqui problematis de telluris motu vel quiete, 
hactenus optata solutio... 
[The hitherto longed-for Solution of the famous and ancient 
Problem of the Motion or Stillness of the Earth] 
Paris: The Author, 1631. 
Trigonometriacanonicae libri tres...Adjungitur liber quartus 
pro calculu tabulis logarithmarum... 
[Trigonometry Tables in three Books. ..to which is added a 
Fourth Book for calculation with tables of Logarithms...] 
Paris: J. Libert, 1633. 
Longitudinum terrestrium nec non coelestium nova et 
hactenus optata scientia... 
[The New and hitherto longed-for Science of Terrestrial 
and Celestial Longitudes...] 
Paris: J. Libert, 1634. 
Astronomia jam a fundamentis integre et exacte restitua... 
[Astronomy now Completely and Exactly Restored from 
147 

===== PAGE 155 =====

its Fundamentals...] 
Paris: The Author, 1640. 4to 361 pp.) 
Tabulae Rudolphinae ad meridianum Uraniburgi 
supputatae a Joanne Baptista Morino,.. .ad accuratum 
et facile compendium redactae. 
[The Rudolphine Tables, Calculated by Jean 
Baptiste Morin for the Meridian of Uraniborg... 
Reduced to an Accurate and Easy Compendium] 
Paris: J. Le Brun, 1650. 4to. 117 pp. tables 
Morin, Jean Baptise 
Astrologia Gallica, Books Thirteen, Fourteen, Fifteen, and 
Nineteen. 
trans, by James Herschel Holden 
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2006. paper iv,300 pp. diagrs. 22 
cm. 
Astrologia Gallica, Book Twenty-Two/Directions, 
trans, by James Herschel Holden 
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 1994. paper xv,292 pp. diagrs 
tables 22 cm. 
Offusius JoFrancus, M.D. 
De divina astrorum facultate facultate in larvatam astrologiam. 
[On the Divine Power of the Stars Against a Bewitched 
Astrology] 
Paris, 1570. 
Origen 
Peri Archon 'On first Principles' 
trans, by Trannius Rufinus into Latin as 
De Principiis 'On the Principles' 
trans, into English as 'On the First Principles' 
by G. W. Butterworth 
New York" Harper & Row, 1966. 
148 

===== PAGE 156 =====

Pico della Mirandola, Count 
Disputationes adversus Astrologiam divinatricem, 
quibus penitus subnemata corruit. 
[Disputations against Divinatory Astrology, 
in which he has Heaped up thorough Refutations.] 
Bologna, 1495. 
Plotinus 
Enneads. 
trans, into Latin by Marsilio Ficino 
Florence, 1492. 
trans, into English by Stephen MacKenna 
revised by B. S. Page 
London: Faber, 1969. 4th ed. lxx,638 pp. 26 cm. 
Pontano, Giovanni Gioviano 
De rebus coelestibus. 
[Celestial Matters] 
Basel, 1530. 
Ptolemy, Claudius 
Tctrabiblos. 
ed. & trans, by F.E. Robbins, Ph.D. 
London: William Heinemann; 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1940. xxiv,466 
pp. tables 
AFIOTEAEIMATIKA 
Apotelesmatics (revised title) 
[Greek text with Latin notes] 
ed. by Wolfgang Hiibner 
Stuttgart & Leipzig: B.G. Teubner, 1998. lxxv,439 pp. diagrs 
tables 20 cm. 
149 

===== PAGE 157 =====

Regiomontanus 
Tabulae directionum profectionumque... 
in nativitatibus multum utile. 
[Tables of Directions and Profections... 
Very Useful in Natvities.] 
Augsburg: Erhard Ratdolt, 1490. 4to. tables often reprinted 
Schoch, Karl 
Planeten-Tafeln flir Jedermann. 
[Planetary Tables for Everyone] 
Berlin-Pankow: Linser Verlag, 1927. xlv,15 pp. diagrs. tables 
25 cm. 
Schoner 
De judiciis nativitatum libri tres. 
[Three Books on the Judgments of Nativities] 
Niimberg, 1545. 
150