===== PAGE 1 =====

(EAN-BAPTISTE MORIN 
ASTROLOGIA GALLICA 
BOOK TWENTY-TWO 
DIRECTIONS 
Translated from the Latin 
by 
I AMES HERSCHEL HOLDEN, M.A. 
Fellow of the American Federation of Astrologers 
Second Edition 

===== PAGE 2 =====

Contents 
Section 1 
The Definition, Terms, and Division of Directions. 
Chapter 1. What an Astrological Direction is: and what its Termini are; and how many 
Kinds of it there are. 
Chapter 2. The Kinds of Future Events, both Universal and in the Human Species, arising 
from Celestial Causes; and what Future Events the Astrologer should Announce. 
Chapter 3. The Significators of Things that will take place for a Man, and their General 
Definition and Number. 
Chapter 4. The Promittors of Future Things from the Stars for a Man; their Definition 
and Number. 
Chapter 5. The Formal Difference between a Significator and a Promittor, and their 
other Differences. 
Chapter 6. Which Significator Ought to be Directed for Which Things. 
Chapter 7. How many Kinds of Directions there are; whether Planets and the Cusps 
of Houses ought to be Directed against the Succession of the Signs; then, which 
of the Termini of a Direction is said to be the Significator and which the Promittor, 
and why. 
Chapter 8. In which the Various Methods of Artificial Directions Used by Astrologers 
are Set Forth, and the False ones Rejected. 
Chapter 9. That the Way of Directing by Ascensions given by Ptolemy is Natural and True, 
but Hitherto Understood by Few. 
Section 11 
The Latitude of Significators and Promittors in Directions. 
Chapter 1. Whether it is Right to use the Latitude as well as the Longitude of Significators and 
Promittors in Directions. 
Chapter 2. How the Aspects of the Planets may be Corrected for Directions both with Longitude 
and with Latitude. 
Chapter 3. In which a Table of Corrections of Aspects of the Planets for Directions that we have 
Constructed is Set Forth and Explained. 
Chapter 4. Whether the Aspects of the Planets ought to be Considered in the Equator as well as 
in the Ecliptic. And what should be Judged about the Direction of Aspects that are 
Distorted in the Equator by the Long or Short Ascensions of the Signs. 
Chapter 5. Whether Directions to the Antiscions of the Planets and to the Nodes of the Moon 
are Efficacious. 
v 

===== PAGE 3 =====

Chapter 6. Whether the Directions of the Fixed [Stars] and the Part of Fortune are Efficacious. 
Chapter 7. That Judgment should not be Rendered on a Given Nativity without having 
Considered the Directions. 
Section 111 
The Motion or State of Rest of the Termini of a Direction; and the Measure of a Direction. 
Chapter 1. Whether a Direction and its Effect are made by any Physical Motion of one 
Terminus to the Other. 
Chapter 2. How by means of Termini that are Quiescent or Fixed in the Caelum their Effects 
may be Produced on Earth through their Concourse in Directions. And how their Effects, 
which Remain in Force for so Long, Finally Burst Forth into Action. 
Chapter 3. The Various Opinions of the Old and Modem [Astrologers] on Converting the Measure 
of the Arc of Direction into Time. And which of these seems Truer to Us. 
Chapter 4. In which the Tables of Naibod and Magini are set forth for the Conversion of Time into 
Arc of the Equator and vice versa. 
Chapter 5. Whether the Arcs of Direction of all Significators or Promittors Should have the Same 
Common Measure; and what the Logic of that Measure is. 
Chapter 6. Whether the Effects of Directions are Brought Forth at the Precise Time when the Arc 
of Direction Corresponds Precisely to their own Measure. 
Section IV 
The Effects of Directions. 
Chapter 1. How Difficult it is for a Man to Predict the Kind of Effect Signified by any Direction. 69 
Chapter 2. How it may be Known Whether a Given Direction is Going to Produce any Effect, 
and what Kind it is Going to be. 71 
Chapter 3. By what Means as Astrologer can Arrive at an Understanding of the Type of Effect 
from the Direction Producing it. 76 
Chapter 4. From what [Sources] the Certitude and Intensity of Effects may be Chosen through the 
Directions of the Significators. 81 
Chapter 5. Some things Universal as well as Particular that must be Noted in Connection with 
Directions. 83 
Chapter 6. The Extraction of Figures from the Figure of the Native for other Persons Related to 
Him. Then, the Directions of Significators of these Persons, and their Effects. 87 
Chapter 7. Whether at the Native's Death there is a Cessation of the Celestial Influx from his 
Natal Figure upon his Parents, Brothers, Spouse, Children, and other Persons Belonging 
to him and Surviving him. 100 
vi 

===== PAGE 4 =====

Section V 
In Which Objections against the Doctrine of Directions arc Considered and Disproved. 
Chapter 1. Pico Mirandola's Objections to Astrological Directions and the Refutation of those 
Objections. 103 
Chapter 2. In which Alessandrode Angelis's Reasons against Directions are Proposed and Refuted. 107 
Chapter 3. In which Sixtus ab Hemminga's Reasons against Astrology, and especially against 
Directions are Refuted. 109 
Chapter 4. In which the Truth of the Doctrine of Directions is Demonstrated in the Chart of Sixtus 
ab Hemminga. 115 
Chapter 5. In which We Propose and Resolve Objections of no small Import. 120 
Appendix 1. Jerome Cardan on the Latitude of Aspects. 
Appendix 2. J. B. Morin on the Mundane Position of Aspects. 
Appendix 3. The Solar Eclipse of 8 April 1652. 
Appendix 4. Some Horoscopes Mentioned in the Text. 
Appendix 5. Regiomontanus Primary Direction Formulae. 
Addenda 
Book II. Chapter3. How Many Years Passed between the Creation of the World and the 
Incarnation of Christ; and from then to this Year 1648 according to the Method of 
Numeration used by the Church. 
Book XIII. Table of the Universal Rulerships of the Planets. 
Book XV. 
Chapter 6. The Triplicities of the Planets, or the Trigons and the Trigon Rulers According to the 
Opinions of the Old [Astrologers]. 
Chapter 7. Trigons and Trigonocrators According to Our Opinion. 
Chapter 8. To Which Regions of the World the Trigons Pertain; and Consequently Which 
Regions of the World the Trigonocrators Principally Rule. 
Chapter 9. Some Things about these Trigons that should be Especially Noted. 
Chapter 10. The Faces or Persons or Almugea of the Planets. 
Chapter 11. The Thrones, Seats, or Chariots of the Planets. 
Chapter 12. The Joys of the Planets. 
Chapter 13. The Terms, Novenas, Decans, Duodecatemories, etc. of the Planets in the Several 
Signs of the Zodiac. Then, the Light, Smoky, Pitted, and Empty Degrees of the Signs, 
vii 

===== PAGE 5 =====

their Monomoiriai, etc. 
Book XVII, Section 1 
Chapter 3. The Special Division of the whole Caelum into Twelve Astrological Houses with 
respect to the Person being Bom. 
Chapter 6. Things to be Particularly Noted about the Significations of the Houses. 
Book XVIII 
Chapter 7. The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets arising from their Reception in the Signs 
of the Zodiac. 
Book XX, Section 3 
Chapter 7. The Action of the Constellations and of the Fixed [Stars] on these inferior Things; 
and the Dependence in Action of some of these on the Twelfths and the Planets. 
Book XXIII 
Chapter 18. The Universal Laws of Judgments on Solar and Lunar Revolutions of Nativities. 
Chapter 19. Compendiously Embracing General Things that must be Looked at in Revolutions, 
with a Directory of Judgment. 
Chapter 20. A Caution of no Small Importance that Must be Observed in Judging Revolutions. 
Book XXIV 
Chapter 12. Whether the Planets act upon the Native through their Syzygies outside of the 
Places of the Geniture through which their Transits are Customarily Made; and How 
and When. 
Chapter 13. Aphorisms of the Principal Laws of Transits. 
Chapter 14. How, from What has been Explained so far. Future Events can be Predicted from 
the Stars with Regard to the Type, the Year, Day, and Hour. 
Index of Persons 
viii 

===== PAGE 6 =====

List of Illustrations 
Figure 1. Aspect Latitude 
Figure 2. The Horoscope of Marie Louise of Gonzaga, Queen of Poland 
Figure 3. The Nativity of Louis XIV, Most Christian King of France and Navarre 
Figure 4. The Combinations of Termini 
Figure 5. The Horoscope of Giovanni Pico della Mirandola 
Figure 6. The Horoscope of Sixtus ab Hemminga 
List of Tables 
Table I. Table of Corrections of the Planetary Aspects 
Table 11. Naibod's Table for Converting Years into Degrees of the Equator 
Table II. Magini's Table for Converting Degrees of the Equator into Years 
Table IV. Magini's Table for Converting Minutes of the Equator into Time 
ix 

===== PAGE 7 =====

Acknowledgments 
My friend, Robert C. Donat, Ph.D., then Editor of Research Publications of the A.F.A., very kindly of- 
fered to convert my word processor files for the first edition of this book into a printed format. His effort was 
much appreciated. 
My friend Kris Brandt Riske, M.A., Publications Manager of the A.F.A., has now reformatted the book 
into this larger size and revised the Table of Contents and the Index of Persons. Readers of this second edi- 
tion will join me in thanking her for making the text easier to read. 
J.H.H. 24 February 2005 
x 

===== PAGE 8 =====

Translator's Preface 
This book contains a translation of an important treatise on primary directions by Jean-Baptiste Morin, 
M.D. (1583-1656), who was a native of Villefranche, France. Morin studied at Aix and later at Avignon, 
where he took his degree in 1613. He practiced medicine successfully for some fifteen years, numbering 
many important persons among his patients. In 1630 he was appointed Regius Professor of Mathematics at 
the College de France, and thereafter devoted most of his time to astrology. It would be fair to characterize 
him as a Court Astrologer. 
Towards the end of his life Morin completed a massive astrological treatise which he called Astrologia 
Gallica 'French AstrologyUnfortunately, he never saw it in print. It was published posthumously at The 
Hague in 1661: a thick folio volume of 850 pages. The main text occupies 784 double-columned pages and 
is divided into 26 books, of which the first nine are devoted to philosophy, religion, and science, and the re- 
mainder to astrology proper. The text is in the scholarly Latin of the 17th century. Not much of it has ever 
been translated into modem languages. 
The author's autobiography, which forms one of the prefaces, is available in French.1 Book 21 on deter- 
minations is available in both French and English,2 Book 25 on mundane and meteorological astrology in 
French,3 and the portion of Book 26 dealing with elections in French.4 In addition, there is a German para- 
phrase of Book 21.5 Aside from some short extracts from a few of the other books, that is the lot. Little more 
than 100 pages out of 850! 
Actually, the situation is not so bad as it might seem, for the 21st Book contains the essence of Morin's 
astrological theory. And the present translation adds another 100 pages, consisting of Book 22 on directions, 
with some important chapters from Books 13,15,16,17,18, and 20, and two sets of precepts from Book 23 on 
revolutions (solar and lunar returns) and Book 24 on progressions and transits. Thus, a core subset of 
Morin's theory of natal astrology is now available in English. 
Book 22, which is translated here, follows naturally after Book 21.1 strongly advise those who take up 
this translation to prepare themselves by reading Book 21 first. Of the available English translations, I per- 
sonally prefer the one by Richard S. Baldwin, The Morinus System of Horoscope Interpretation, published 
by the American Federation of Astrologers at Tempe, Arizona. French readers can use Selva's translation, 
which I believe is still in print. 
But now to Book 22 itself. 
It is not an easy book. Its language is often intricate, and it forces the reader to think. It cannot be 
skimmed. Many passages require rereading and pondering. There are frequent cross-references, some of 
which cannot be followed up because they refer to passages in the Astrologia Gallica or in the works of 
1 Ma vie devant les astres, trans, by Jean Hieroz (Nice, 1943). 
2 La theorie des determinations astrologiques, trans, by Henri Selva (Paris, 1902); Cornerstones of Astrology (Dallas, 
1972), trans, from the 1945 Spanish version of Friedrich Schwickert's and Adolph Weiss's Bausteine der Astrologie, vol. 2, 
Die astrologische Synthese (Leipzig, 1925-27), which contains a paraphrase of portions of Book 21 (apparently based upon 
Selva's translation) embedded in a text on the Morin method by Schwickert and Weiss; Astrosynthesis, trans, by Lucy Little 
(New York, 1974); and The Morinus System of Horoscope Interpretation trans. by Richard S. Baldwin (Washington, 1974). 
3 L 'astrologie mondiale et meteorologique, trans, by Jean Hieroz (Paris, 1946). 
4 La doctrine des elections de Morin, trans, by Jean Hieroz (Nice, 1941). 
5 By Schwickert and Weiss. See note 2 above. 
xi 

===== PAGE 9 =====

other authors that have not yet been translated. Some of the base-building in the earlier part of Book 22 is te- 
dious. And the author occasionally digresses into theological considerations that are of less interest to 20th 
century readers than to those of the 17th century. He continually employs logical arguments to prove his 
points and uses axioms and illustrations that must have been familiar to his learned contemporaries but 
which are unfamiliar to us. 
His method is that of a private tutor. He conducts a dialogue with the reader, often anticipating his ques- 
tions and objections and answering them as he goes along. His goal is to teach the reader how to correlate the 
directions in a chart with definite timed events in the life of the native. Combined with the method of deter- 
minations, explained in Book 21 and reviewed in Book 22, it enables the reader to "read" the chart and make 
predictions. The method is straightforward but demanding, for its user must learn how to analyze the indi- 
vidual determinations and combine them. A tricky business. 
The author provides a firm theoretical foundation for primary directions. He takes as his astrological ba- 
sis the theory of accidental significators and determinations set forth in Book 21. His mathematical basis is 
the so-called Rational System of Regiomontanus. He does not simply hand these bases to the reader, but he 
explains why he believes they are correct. He cites previous astrologers who held other opinions and oppo- 
nents of astrology who argued that the whole thing was false. He lists their arguments and refutes them sys- 
tematically by a process of logic. He raises objections that might occur to a reader, along with some more 
subtle ones of his own, and refutes all of them. And last, but by no means least, he deals with the question of 
whether astrology is in conflict with religion. 
Morin was a master astrologer. Anyone who has the patience to read what he has to say and who makes 
an honest effort to understand it will surely gain an insight into astrological theory that would be difficult to 
acquire elsewhere. 
Our modem astrological tradition is a blending of the Arabian version of Greek astrology with the vari- 
ants introduced by Claudius Ptolemy. Morin and his contemporaries did not know this. They supposed that 
the features of Arabian astrology that were not present in the Teirabiblos were invented by the Arabs them- 
selves. For example, Morin criticizes the Arabs for using the triplicity rulers as an important tool, not know- 
ing that this was a standard feature of Greek astrology, already fiilly developed at least a century before 
Ptolemy. 
Morin refers to the Tetrabiblos from time to time—sometimes citing Ptolemy's authority for something 
and sometimes disagreeing with him. Like Jerome Cardan (to whom Morin refers most frequently), he was 
too important an astrological figure to ignore. 
One other point that should be emphasized is that Morin used the Regiomontanus system of houses and 
directions. The modem favourite is Placidus. They are different. They produce different timing—some- 
times, especially in higher latitudes, considerably different. If the results Morin obtained from the 
Regiomontanus system were as good as he leads us to believe, this casts the Placidus system into doubt. On 
the other hand, Morin's younger contemporary, Placidus, and some of the latter's more recent followers 
claim excellent results from Placidian methods. Placidus leaned towards Ptolemy; Regiomontanus and 
Morin (without realizing it) leaned away from him. Who was right? 
For the benefit of the reader who might like to try his hand at Regiomontanus primaries, I have given the 
necessary mathematical formulae in Appendix 5.1 might mention that primary directions can be calculated 
for the zodiacal positions of the planets and their aspects, or they can be calculated for the mundane posi- 
tions, i.e., for their actual positions on the celestial sphere rather than their projections onto the zodiacal cir- 
cle. Morin preferred the mundane positions and criticizes his predecessors for using zodiacal positions. He 
even developed a means of determining the latitude of aspects by means of which the mundane positions of 
xii 

===== PAGE 10 =====

the aspects can be found. His techniques and results are thus at variance with those employed by the small 
number of twentieth century astrologers who use primary directions. 
Finally, a few words about the present translation. I have tried to change Morin's Latin into English as 
faithfully as possible without writing English sentences that are totally unreadable. My main goal was to 
preserve the content of his text; my secondary goal was to preserve something of his style. Wherever possi- 
ble I have avoided paraphrase. This has made the translation more faithful to the original but somewhat 
harder to read. Morin had a sizable vocabulary and seems to have been fond of using every particle in the 
lexicon. My translation uses a smaller vocabulary than the original; consequently, I have dulled his style to 
some extent. I have done this deliberately rather than stud the English sentences with seldom-used words. 
It was considered stylish to write complicated sentences in Latin. Morin had learned this lesson well. He 
not infrequently launches into a sentence and turns it into a lengthy paragraph. I have sometimes broken 
these monsters up, but usually I have kept them together with a liberal use of commas and semicolons. Here 
and there I have inserted one or more words in square brackets to bring the thought into better focus. And I 
have added footnotes where I thought the reader might need some help. 
I have generally retained Morin's technical terms, even though some of them are old-fashioned or obso- 
lescent. Thus, I have retained "revolutions," "geniture," "figure," and "nativity" instead of rendering them 
as "solar return" or "horoscope." But thema 'theme' (horoscope) was too much. And I have altered his us- 
age of horoscopus 'horoscope' (which he uses in its original sense) and domus 'house'. For horoscopus I 
have constantly written 'Ascendant', and I have translated domus as 'house' where it means celestial house, 
and as 'domicile' where it means 'sign' (a word he seldom uses). He occasionally uses the word 
duodecatemoria for 'signs'; I have rendered this as 'twelfths' with an explanatory footnote to avoid confu- 
sion with the same word in its most common sense of 'twelfths (of a sign)'—the IVi degree subdivisions, 
A few everyday words give trouble. The Latin morbus is a malady of undesignated type, severe enough 
to make the sufferer at least uncomfortable. I translate it uniformly as "sickness." (British readers may pre- 
fer to make the mental substitution "illness.") It is all the same thing: morbus 'sickness' can be a bad cold or 
a fatal illness. In French it is maladie, in German Krankheit, in Spanish enfermedad, and in Italian malattia. 
The word\filius is sometimes "son" and sometimes simply "child." The word Us means "quarrel," "dispute," 
or "lawsuit." All are ruled by the 7th house. Sometimes the context offers a clue as to which one Morin had 
in mind, but more often not. I have generally favoured "lawsuit,"but Morin's intent is not always apparent. 
Other bothersome words occur in connection with the 2nd house, where it is not always clear whether his 
choice of words is intended to emphasize "wealth" as distinguished from "money," or whether he just got 
tired of using one word and switched to another for stylistic relief. The same thing is true of "dignities" in 
connection with the 10th house. It can mean simply a title of some sort, but more often it designates an office 
of some importance. The reader will have to sort this out for himself. Finally, for the sake of uniformity, I 
have used the same English equivalents for a few words as those Baldwin used in his translation of Book 21, 
e.g., ingenium 'mental qualities' and mores 'moral nature'. 
Any translation is a crutch, but I hope this one takes the reader where he wants to go without too much 
pain. 
James H. Holden 
9 May ] 990 
xiii 

===== PAGE 11 =====

Preface to the Second Edition 
The first edition has been nearly sold out, so a second edition is called for. Translations of two additional 
books of Morin's Astrologia Gallica have recently been published in the larger format, so it was decided to 
reissue this translation in that same format. The content of the first edition is largely unchanged, but I have 
corrected a few minor errors in the translation and revised a few of the footnotes. 
James H. Holden 
24 February 2005 
xv 

===== PAGE 12 =====

Astrologia Gallica 
Book Twenty-Two 
Directions 
Preface 
This is the principal and most divine book of all astrology. The one by means of which the times of the 
events that happen to a man after his birth are discovered, which is the supreme apex of natural prophecy, 
and the science that before all other physical sciences partakes of divinity. But the opinions of the old and 
the modern astrologers testify to how difficult and confused it has been hitherto, for they differ much among 
themselves, since the true principles of astrology were unknown to them. But we, to whom these principles 
have become known, are propounding this entire doctrine so very clearly from its proper and evidentfunda- 
mentals, with contrary opinions and objections soundly refuted, that there will be no one hereafter who is 
able to call it back into doubt. 
Section I 
The Definition, Terms, and Division of Directions. 
Chapter 1, What an Astrological Direction is; and what its Termini are; 
and how many Kinds of it there are. 
We are entering upon the principal matter of all astrology, but, Lord knows, the most difficult, shrouded 
in fog and frightening in its difficulties, which, unless I am deceived, so terrified the old astrologers, that 
their chief, Ptolemy,1 however much he now and then philosophizes about the other things of this science, 
yet concerning directions seems to have been lacking in all calculation, content merely to expound two 
methods of directions, one following the succession of the signs and one against it, which we shall examine 
below. 
Nor did the rest of the old astrologers inquire into this matter any more deeply than Ptolemy, however el- 
oquent they are in their distinguished ideas, but each one of them merely embraced the tradition of the pre- 
decessor that he chose to follow. Since the ancients handed down various modes of directions, which 
1 Claudius Ptolemy {2nd Century), the most famous astronomer and science writer of classical antiquity. His astrological 
handbook, the Tetrabiblos, contains the fundamental instructions for calculating what are now called primary directions (in 
Book 3, Chapter 10). His instructions were misunderstood by most of his readers (including Morin). 

===== PAGE 13 =====

Junctinus2 reviews in his Commentary on Ptolemy, Book 3, Chapter 12, pp. 379 ff., a major confusion was 
introduced into astrology. But finally Lucius Bellantius3 Against Pico Mirandola, Question 16; and 
Cardan,4 in his book Commentary on the Quadripartite, Book 3, Chapter 14, then in his Book on the Judg- 
ment of Genitures and other places, tried to discuss this subject with true philosophical reasons, so that at 
least in this one part they might defend faltering Astrology against the fiercer onslaughts of its adversaries. 
But they said too little about a matter of such moment, and what they did say was partly contrary to the truth, 
as will be plain in what follows, since indeed this treatise is the principal one of all astrology, not only in the 
breadth of its doctrine, but also in its necessity and its utility. 
Since therefore so great a burden has been left to us: to look into this part of astrology more deeply, to un- 
tie its knots, to dissipate its fog, and to eradicate its difficulties, we shall try to the best of our ability, both 
with reasons and with cases, at least to open the road to those who come after us, to investigate more pro- 
foundly and to expound more clearly the truth of these matters, if anything which will be said in what fol- 
lows may be less pleasing to them than to us. For in so arduous a subject I have striven chiefly to satisfy 
myself, because I am very fond of the truth, but not unaware that no one can please all, since Christ Himself 
with the infinite wisdom of God the Father saw His own doctrine spumed by the Scribes and the Pharisees, 
and He bore it patiently. 
And so Cardan, in the "Peroration of the Work" at the end of his Aphorisms, says [p. 91]: "a direction is a 
reduction from that which is potential through the significator and the promittor to an action through the 
force of the Sun." But this definition states the effect of a direction rather than what a direction is: just as if 
someone defined a genethliacal figure of heaven to be the impression of the celestial influx upon the child 
being bom. For as the celestial influx which is imprinted at the moment of birth is the effect of the 
genethliacal figure of heaven, so the reduction from potentiality to its act, which it signifies by a direction, is 
merely the effect of the direction properly said. Nor does this reduction begin from the moment of birth; oth- 
erwise, one who, because of a direction, is going to die from a burning fever in the 63rd year of his age, 
would begin to suffer from that sickness from birth and would grow steadily worse up to age 63; and conse- 
quently that native would never be healthy. Similarly, one who is going to be killed by a direction would be- 
gin to be killed from birth, which is plainly absurd, and so is the reasoning about the others. What in fact 
Cardan says, but does not prove, that the reduction from potentiality to action is through the force of the Sun, 
we shall subject to examination in its own place below. But here it is sufficient to know this much from what 
was said above: the definition given by Cardan is not legitimate, although it may agree in this with others, 
because there are two bounds or termini of a direction with a distance intermediate between them, of which 
1 Francesco Guintini, Th.D. (1522-1590?), a famous Florentine astrologer who spent the latter part of his life in Lyons, 
Prance, where his great Speculum Astrologiae [Mirror of Astrology] was published in 1573 and again in 1583. It contains the 
Greek text of Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos with a Latin translation and commentary, a systematic treatise of astrology based upon 
the Arabian tradition, and over 400 natal horoscopes used as exemplifications of the astrological roles. 
3 Lucio Bellantio, A.D., M.D. (d. 1499), a native of Siena, who was in exile in Florence when Pico della Mirandola's 
book against astrology was published (1496). Bellantio composed a formal reply to Pico, Responsiones in disputationes 
Johannis Pici adversus astrologicam veritatem. [Reply to the Disputation of Giovanni Pico against the Truth of Astrology], 
and a more general treatise, De astrologica veritate, [The Truth of Astrology], which were published together at Florence in 
1498. 
4 Girolamo Cardano, M.D. (1501-1576), famous physician, mathematician, astrologer, and miscellaneous writer. Most 
of his astrological works appear in Vol. 5 of his Opera, published in 10 volumes at Lyons, France, in 1662. Morin refers here 
to Cardan's elaborate commentary on the Tetrabiblos or Quadripartite, as it is called in Latin. The reader should be aware 
that the division into chapters of the Quadripartite differs substantially from the division in P. E. Robbin's edition and 
translation of the Tetrabiblos m the Loeb Classical Library, which in turn differs slightly from the Teubner edition. How- 
ever, those who have access to J. M. Ashmand's translation of Proclus's paraphrase of the Tetrabiblos will find that the divi- 
sion is nearly the same as that of the Latin Quadripartite. 
2 

===== PAGE 14 =====

one terminus is called the significator, and the other the promittor. 
But all others think that an astrological direction is a certain reduction or progression, by which one ter- 
minus is transferred or is conceived to be transferred by the motion of the primum mobile to the location of 
the other to determine the years of the native's accidents. I add here what the function of directions [is] on 
account of the other progressions thought up by astrologers, designating months and days to their ef- 
fects, which they usually call properly not directions but progressions,5 of which we shall speak elsewhere. 
Moreover, the location of the second terminus is the circle of position passing through that same terminus 
by agreement of all the learned astrologers, who assert that "to direct" is nothing other than to find the arc of 
the equator that ascends above the circle of position of the significator, or the preceding terminus, when the 
following terminus is borne to this circle by the motion of the primum mobile. 
Since therefore from the moment of birth, and during life, and even after the native's death, such direc- 
tions ofsignificators are accustomed to be made to their own promittors, so that the years of the accidents of 
this native are discovered by finding the above said arcs, and since "to direct" is nothing else among all of 
them than to find that arc, it follows that among all astrologers up till now a direction is nothing else than 
finding that arc, by whatever way it may be sought, either through the revolution of a material sphere or 
through suitable tables. 
But looking a little deeper into this doctrine in order to dispel its fog, we say here that a direction is in 
some respect the designation of an arc of the equator ascending above the circle of position of the 
significator when the promittor is borne to that circle by the motion of the primum mobile, or it is an arc of 
the equator intercepted between two circles of declination, of which one passes through the place of the 
promittor in its own location, and the other through the same place of the promittor when it has been trans- 
ferred by the motion of the primum mobile to the circle of position of the significator. But in appearance a di- 
rection is twofold-—one artificial, and the other natural; hence the twofold designation of the arc. 
An artificial direction is the designation or finding of the said arc, either through the revolution of a ma- 
terial sphere or through suitable tables, which we shall first undertake to teach. But natural is the designa- 
tion of the said arc by the reduction of the promittor to the circle of position of the significator through the 
natural primary revolution of the primum caelum, which begins at the moment of birth. And this is a direc- 
tion, properly said, which will be explained more fully in Section 3, Chapter 2. 
Chapter 2. The Kinds of Future Events, both Universal and 
in the Human Species, arising from Celestial Causes; 
and what Future Events the Astrologer should Announce. 
Before we explain the doctrine of directions more fully, it seems to us that this chapter ought to be put 
first, because according to the definition given in Chapter 1, the proper function of directions, at least of 
natural directions, is to presage future events to the native from the celestial bodies, and to discover the 
times of these, or the years, as will be taught in what follows. And consequently, with the suppositions al- 
ready stated in Book 5, Section 3, Chapter 1, concerning the possibility, the contingency, and the futurity 
of things; then, in Book 12, Section 3, Chapter 24, about Divine Providence, fate, cause, and fortune, we 
5 By "progessions" Morin means what we would call "profections," i.e., symbolic directions that proceed at a fixed rate 
and are not dependent upon the actual motions of the planets. The most common type was the 12-year profection that begins 
with the Ascendant and moves forward in the zodiac one sign per year. This was used by the classical Greek astrologers and 
passed down to us through the Arabs. William Lilly explains it in his Christian Astrology, but it is virtually unknown to mo- 
dem astrologers. 
3 

===== PAGE 15 =====

have already said that of those future things arising from the celestial bodies some are inevitable, but others 
are contingent. 
Inevitable future things are those that follow from natural necessity when their causes have been put in 
place, and they are of two kinds. Some in fact arise solely from the motion of the celestial bodies, such as 
equinoxes, solstices, conjunctions and configurations of the stars, eclipses, new Moons, full Moons, etc. 
Which motion, since it is regarded by all astronomers as being entirely regular and naturally inviolable, is 
certain because if its laws have become exactly known the true times of all these [phenomena] will be pre- 
dicted with great certainty. But others are also [caused] by the active qualities of the celestial bodies, such 
as the various conditions of the year, the month, and the day—rains, winds, fair weather, comets, 
pestilences, floods, famines, and such like, which are caused by the stars according to their diverse loca- 
tion in the sky, and their diverse mutual configuration, and also by their diverse location on the globe of 
the earth or its parts. For since the celestial causes of these effects, namely great conjunctions, the annual 
revolutions of the Sun, eclipses, etc., act inevitably, they never lack an object on which to act, namely the 
globe of the earth; therefore, having postulated such causes, their effects may then be postulated as inevi- 
table, unless they are involved in free causes, which are war, sects, and such like, about which [we will 
speak] below. 
And that which we have said about the universal subject of the influence of the celestial bodies should 
likewise be understood about a particular subject, like a man, about whose generation when the caelum acts, 
his temperament, bodily form, mental qualities, and characteristics are necessarily [derived] from the stars, 
having taken into account the individual disposition of the seed and the womb. For in these things the 
caelum cannot be impeded, lest it act very like the disposition of the subject on which it acts. And although 
the effects of some particular celestial cause, such as Saturn, are said to be capable of being impeded by an- 
other cause of contrary virtue, such as the Sun; still, because the Sun will be conceded to be impeded just as 
much by Saturn as Saturn is by the Sun, it may more rightly be said that each planet does act, but in con- 
cert—one of them being either weakened or distorted by the other with respect to the effect that is necessar- 
ily produced in the passive subject by the concourse of both. The same thing is true of two or more other 
planets acting together in the same effect: they help or impede or distort each other with respect to their ef- 
fect when they are determined toward the same thing. 
But contingently future things are those which, even when their causes have been put in place, do not in- 
evitably occur, at least in happening or being done, because the causes themselves can in fact be impeded. 
And such things are, for example, wars, sects, and such like, whose causes, even though they are in the 
caelum pouring out the seeds of such effects on those below, and indeed, even though they are rarely frus- 
trated in their effect because of the greater propensity of man towards evil than towards good; yet, because 
they depend on the free will of men as the cause per se and the immediate cause, and because the will is the 
master of its own acts, consequently they can come to pass or not, according as the will determines itself ei- 
ther to compliance with the celestial influx or to prudently averting its effects; and therefore they can be pre- 
dicted only conjecturally. Nevertheless, from a universal disposition of the caelum for wars, a war of some 
kind can safely be predicted, for a universal disposition will not everywhere be frustrated from taking effect, 
nor will there be lacking in some place at least princes or scoundrels prone to wars, especially when it pro- 
duces such persons, or the disposition excites and sets into motion persons already produced; and a single 
man, even a common man, is sufficient [to start] a war, a schism, a sect, and such like in the whole world, or 
in the indicated part of it, as is plain from Mohammed, Luther, Calvin, Attila, and others. And the same rea- 
soning applies to the rest of the dispositions of the caelum to other vices or virtues, that is, the depravity and 
pemiciousness of human kind or its reformation and utility, which in this differ greatly, because the refor- 
mation of any kingdom or empire is not the undertaking of a common man but of a king or emperor divinely 
inspired to this end, whose authority helps his natural inclination. But very rarely is such a king or emperor 
4 

===== PAGE 16 =====

bom, who at least receives an education agreeable to his inclination, and who is not deceived or led astray by 
the evil arts of his counselors or assistants. 
But in a particular subject, such as a man, future occurrences are contingent. But, those things that per- 
tain to his moral nature, even those that mostly follow temperament and native propensity. For God said to 
Cain, "The desire for it will be under you, and you will rule it."6 Then wealth, brothers, children, servants, 
spouse, journeys, religion, actions, profession, dignity, friends, enemies, imprisonment, sickness, for all 
these things are submissive to the will of man, as well as to prudence or imprudence. However, parents are 
not future things, since they precede, but future things happening to the native because of them or with them 
are signified. Finally, death, although it may be inevitable in the future, yet its quality is contingent and can 
be diverse. Nevertheless, whatever future things are signified by the stars for the man who is being bom are 
most often accustomed to happen from two causes. First, because man most often yields to the natural pro- 
pensity impressed upon him by the stars at birth. Second, because a man lacking astrology [and therefore] 
ignorant of his own fate, especially of an unlucky fate, is not able to change it by forethought and prudence. 
Therefore, astrology is not only necessary, but very often also true in its predictions of future things for men, 
although among those men it is only conjectural, as [is the case] with medicine. 
But having understood these things, we already say that the astrologer can predict some future things 
from celestial causes, but not in the same manner. For the things that are going to happen due only to the mo- 
tion of the celestial bodies, he predicts with certainty through the laws of astronomy. But the things that are 
going to happen because of the active qualities of those same bodies he predicts with the laws of judicial [as- 
trology] and not even in the same way. For general events emanating from the universal dispositions of the 
caelum, such as plagues, wars, floods, etc., are predicted in one way; and the particular effects that will hap- 
pen after birth to any man who is being bom, or will at least be signified for him, are predicted in another 
way. For in the latter case both the substance of the "effect and also its time are predicted through directions; 
but how these things may be foretold—both their substance and also their time—will be explained in its 
own place. 
Furthermore, a particular event signified for a man after his birth is predicted with certainty so far as the 
time of its manifestation is signified; for the time itself depends on a certain and definite distance of the 
significator from the promittor, then by a certain motion of the stars in revolutions and transits of planets to 
the places of a geniture, [by] which [the revolutions and transits] agree with the direction for that event. But 
with respect to existence and substance that effect is predicted only conjecturally by human skill, even 
though by a conjecture that may very often be equated to certitude. But the substance itself of the effect, or 
its nature, can be predicted in three ways. First, very generally, as that a native will die a bad or harsh death. 
Second, more specifically, as that his death will be very violent. Third, most specifically, as that the native 
will be hung, or his head will be cut off, or he will be slain by the enemy, or he will be drowned, etc. And in- 
deed the first prediction can be made from the first elements of astrology. The rest, however, deserve a 
greater glory, but they must not be undertaken by just anybody, especially the last, for in addition to an out- 
standing judgment illuminated by theory, they also require long and manifold exercise in their own field and 
in that of others; and the same reasoning applies to the rest. Therefore, having explained these things thus, 
we are now ready to discuss the significators and promittors of the effects that will take place for the man be- 
ing bom. 
6 Genesis 4:7. God was speaking of sin. 
5 

===== PAGE 17 =====

Chapter 3. The Significators of Things that will take place for a Man, and their 
General Definition and Number. 
There is nothing that is inherent in a man or will be inherent in him that is not signified by the stars in his 
natal horoscope. But those things that are inherent in him or will be inherent in him generally pertain either 
to his body or to his mind or to his fortune. And these kinds of things are separated into different categories. 
For things of the body comprise temperament, bodily appearance, life, strength, and health; then, the oppo- 
sites of these—sicknesses, wounds, and death. The things of the mind: character, moral nature, mental qual- 
ities, religion, skills, knowledge. Finally, the things of fortune: parents, brothers, wealth, profession, 
dignities, servants, the wife, children, friends, enemies, journeys, freedom, imprisonment, exiles. Therefore 
it is necessary that the significators of these in the genethliacal figure be given, if the body, the mind, and the 
fortune (which no one active in astrology will deny) are affected by the stars. From which significators there 
is indicated not only what is inherent in the man being bom in the matter of body and mind at the very mo- 
ment of his nativity, but what [conditions] will accme to him after birth in those things that pertain to the 
body, the mind, and to fortune. And this is why these significators are directed, so that the times of the 
events may be known in order to permit the exercise of prudence by their prevision. 
Besides, among astrologers there is no little dissension with regard to the significators themselves. For 
Ptolemy, Quadripartite, Book 4, Chapter 11, adopts only five significators to be directed for all the future 
accidents of the native, viz. the Ascendant ,for health and travel, the Part of Fortune for assets, the Moon for 
mental characteristics and conversation, the Sun for dignity and glory, and finally the Midheaven for the 
other actions of life and for the procreation of children. Moreover, Cardan in his Commentary not only,ad- 
heres to this opinion, which he praises, saying that these five significators are sufficient bases for all the 
good and evil things that can happen to the native from the planets and the cusps of the sectors, but in that 
same place Haly7 refutes [Ptolemy's theory] and assumes seven planets and twelve cusps for significators to 
be directed; and Schoner,8 Book 3, and others follow Haly. But Cardan, not standing firm on his own cus- 
tom, at the end of his Commentary to Book 3, throws over the opinion of Ptolemy, since for the state of mind 
he directs the Moon, the Sun, and Mercury, and for the state of the body, the Moon, the Sun, and the Ascen- 
dant. Moreover, in Book 3, Aphorism 39, he says to direct the planets and the fixed stars and also the rays of 
the planets to the 2nd house for wealth, making the cusp itself the significator of wealth; otherwise, the rays 
of the planets would be significators, against the opinion of all astrologers. Why then shouldn't all the other 
cusps be significators? Moreover, in his Book on the Judgment of Genitures, Chapter 4, he directs Venus as 
a significator to the opposition of Jupiter for the time of his own marriage. And after that, in Chapter 5, he 
counts 10 significators, viz. 7 planets, the Ascendant, the Midheaven, and the conjunction or opposition of 
the luminaries which most nearly preceded the birth. But in Chapters 5 and 6 of the Book of Revolutions, and 
in Book 3, Aphorism 137, he recognizes the cusps of the twelve houses and the seven planets as 
significators, which he combines among themselves in various ways, and he rejects the preceding conjunc- 
tion. What need is there for more [instances] to detect Cardan's inconsistency to this matter? 
Moreover, although others have expressed an opinion about the significators to be directed and their 
number, yet the more common opinion among astrologers has hitherto been that of Ptolemy: just the five 
7 Presumably Haly Abenragel ['AH ibn abi al-Rijal (d. after 1037)], author of Praeclarissimus liber completus de iudiciis 
astrorum {The very famous Complete Book of the Judgments ofthe 5"/arj] (Venice, 1485, etc.), or else Haly Abenrudian ['All 
ibn Ridwan (988-1061?)], author of a much read commentary on pseudo-Ptolemy's Centiloquy and some other astrological 
tracts. 
8 Johann Schoner (1477-1547), German mathematician, astronomer, and astrologer who wrote De iudiciis nativitatum 
libri tres [Three Books on the Judgments of Nativities] (Numberg, 1545). 
6 

===== PAGE 18 =====

significators mentioned above, although Sixtus ab Hemminga,9 the apostate astrologer, in his book Astrol- 
ogy Refuted by Reason, wants all the effects that are going to happen to the native to be due to only four 
significators, the Ascendant, the Midheaven, the Sun, and the Moon, the inferior ignorance of which is 
shown to be more obscure than the Moon itself, seeing that he wrongly directs these alone for all the native's 
accidents. Moreover, Origanus,10 in Part 3, Member 4, thinks that the above said five significators of Ptol- 
emy are the principal ones, but that all the planets and the cusps of the houses ought to be directed. There- 
fore, this controversy over the number of significators has lasted down to us; nor has anyone brought 
forward any reasons for his opinion,except perhaps frivolous ones, such as Cardan set forth in his previously 
mentioned Commentary on the Quadripartite, Book 4, Chapter 11 [p. 360], for the five significators of Ptol- 
emy, saying: "For these are the bases of all the good things and parts of a house. For some are good things of 
the mind, some of the body, others of fortune. The good things of the mind are denoted by the Moon, those 
of the body moreover by the Ascendant, the most important things of fortune—glory and dignities—by the 
Sun, the moderately good things by the Lot [of Fortune], [and] the least good by the Midheaven. Again, in 
the case of relations, such as children and the wife, they are denoted by the Midheaven and the Moon. There- 
fore, since nothing is lacking, it is sufficient to direct these places." So, Cardan. But this reasoning proves 
nothing, except the same through the same, namely that good things of the mind are from the Moon because 
such good things are from the Moon, or they are properly signified by the Moon itself, as he says in that 
place, and so with the rest. Therefore, what wonder that these and similar ridiculous reasons have exposed 
astrology to mockery among philosophers? 
Furthermore, this fivefold number of significators to be directed rests not just a little on a long-standing 
error of astrologers about the significators per se, or, (as Cardan says in his Book of Revolutions, Chapter 5) 
by essential nature, which we have refuted in Book 21, Section 1, Chapter 3. For no more valid reason can 
be brought forward by Cardan why the Sun should be directed for life, glory, dignities, and the father, or the 
Moon for mental characteristics, the mother, and the wife, than that the Sun and the Moon are significators 
of these per se, or by essential nature, which however Cardan himself does not prove. Besides, if they are di- 
rected for these things for this reason, why shouldn't the twelve house cusps and the seven planets be di- 
rected, which Cardan himself, in the chapter just mentioned, makes significators by essential nature of the 
diverse accidents attributed to them—indeed, the rulers of these [accidents], [and consequently] 
significators by accident of these same events? For example then, if the Moon is directed for the wife be- 
cause the Moon, Venus, and the cusp of the 7th are significators of the wife by nature, as he will have it in 
that same Chapter 5, but the dispositors of these, or their rulers, significators by accident, why similarly 
shouldn't the cusps of the other houses be directed, and then the planets agreeing with the significations of 
the cusps, as the Sun and Saturn for the father or the 4th house, Jupiter for wealth or the 2nd? Therefore it is 
very clear from what was said above how uncertain, confused, and self-contradictory is Cardan's teaching 
about the significators to be directed, in which along with all the other astrologers he erred severely in this 
respect—that none of them hitherto has spoken of the significators that he calls "by accident." For example, 
the ruler of the Ascendant for life, health, etc., since it is the ruler of the Ascendant, the ruler of the 
Midheaven for actions and honours, since it is the ruler of the Midheaven, and so with the others. Nor simi- 
larly have they directed the planets found in the houses for the things signified by those houses, such as Ve- 
nus posited in the 10th for actions or honours, Jupiter placed in the 7th for mental qualities, etc., even though 
experience proves that the directions of these are much more certain in their effects than those of the planets 
9 A Frisian physician who had studied astrology but had grown disenchanted with it to such an extent that he wrote a 
book against it, Astrologiae ratione et experientia refutatae liber [Astrology Refuted by Reason and Experience] (Antwerp, 
1583). 
10 David Origanus (1558-1628) was professor of mathematics at Frankfurt. He was well known in astrological circles for 
his ephemerides and his treatise on astrology, Astrologia naturalis sive tractatus de effectibus astrorum [Natural Astrology 
or a Treatise on the Effects of the Stars] that was published posthumously at Marseilles in 1645, 
7 

===== PAGE 19 =====

that are significators of the same effects by nature, unless they are determined in the figure by bodily posi- 
tion or rulership. And Junctinus certainly seems to have scented this in his Commentary on Book 3, Chapter 
12 of Ptolemy (p. 396), where, after he has put the significations by nature of the seven planets, he adds 
"The several planets signify these things per se in directions, and they are customarily directed for the 
events of these significations. But sometimes they assume accidental significations from the nature of the 
houses in which they are placed and from those which they rule, which can easily be inferred from the na- 
tures of the houses." Nevertheless, he never directs these planets because of their own accidental significa- 
tions, for example, Jupiter in the 7th, or ruler of the 7th, for marriage, etc. 
But in fact, in order to explain this difficulty, it seems necessary first to define in general what astrologers 
consider a significator to be. Cardan, cited above, says that significators are subjects of good and evil things 
that can happen to the native from the planets and the cusps of the houses, but he is deceived. For of the good 
and evil things that can happen to the native, there is nothing that is a subject [more] than the native himself 
to whom they happen. Moreover, since there are various kinds of good and evil things that happen to a man, 
and some refer to his life, some to actions, others to friends, etc., and these classes of events pertaining to the 
twelve houses are subjects susceptive of various kinds of accidents, such as those of life, health and sick- 
ness, actions, happiness and unhappiness; also, it is plain that the Ascendant as significator of life, is not a 
subject to which sickness or health happens, that is, it is not life itself, and so with the rest. Therefore, the As- 
cendant as significator of life is in no way the subject of those things which happen to the native. Then what 
is it? 
Here surely shines forth the solid truth of the doctrine we have given in Book 21, Section 2, Chapter 1, 
and elsewhere. Namely, that the Ascendant may be said for this reason to be the significator of life, since it 
signifies about the life of the native, which life can be said to be the subject of the first house because it is 
represented most efficaciously by the Ascendant. And the Midheaven may be said to be the significator of 
actions because it signifies about the native's actions, which can be said to be the subject of the 10th house, 
represented by the 10th house. And so with the rest of the significators. From which it is deduced that a 
significator in astrology is nothing other than a celestial substance, that is, a part of the caelum or a planet, 
signifying through itself, by reason of determination, about some class of things happening to the native; 
from which it is also said to be the significator of its own class or subject as far as affecting [the native] 
through a direction, by which definition certainly the universal significators that Cardan calls "by nature," 
but we call "by analogy," are excluded except insofar as they may have been determined in the celestial fig- 
ure. Then the aspects, which do not11 signify through themselves, since they do not exist in themselves, but 
[only] through the planets from which they emanate; and they have only a relative existence. 
But it follows from this definition that there are as many significators in kind for directions as there are 
planets and celestial houses, i.e., the parts of the primum caelum occupying the spaces of the 12 figures, 
whose virtue is most potent in the cusps. Therefore, as Haly maintained, (here will be 19 significators, al- 
though there are only 12 generalities signified by the 12 houses; to which, if with Ptolemy we add the Part of 
Fortune, there will be 20 significators. For just as the cusp of the tenth is directed separately for the things 
signified by the tenth house, and the Ascendant for the things signified by the first [house],12 so the cusps of 
the other houses ought to be be directed principally for the things signified by their houses. And from that a 
true and natural mode of construction of the celestial figure can be proved, which, of whatever sort it is, the 
directions prove the first and the tenth houses at least to be rightly constituted. 
Besides, references to the seven planets are not to be understood as references to the bodies of the planets 
11 The text has nos 'us' by mistake for non 'not'. 
12 The text has 'the tenth', but plainly 'the first' is meant. 
8 

===== PAGE 20 =====

themselves, but rather to their places fixed in the primum mobile, or the parts of the primum mobile deter- 
mined to the nature of these planets at the moment of the nativity by reason of their celestial and terrestrial 
state, as was set forth very fully in Books 20 and 21. And the reason is that the planets are in perpetual mo- 
tion, and from the moment of the nativity they move away from the places which they occupied at that mo- 
ment. But in directing, the astrologer does not attend to the wandering planets' places, which are continually 
varied by their motion, but only to the places they occupy at the moment of the nativity, which are the fixed 
termini of the directions, and the parts of the primum mobile determined by the planets. So then the astrolo- 
ger, making a judgment by means of the celestial influx on things past, present, or future that concern the na- 
tive, contemplates the genethliacal figure, i.e., the constitution of the caelum at the moment of the nativity, 
as something [established] by God, or by nature, or rather by Divine Providence through natural causes—a 
fixed decree, in which through his natural characteristics the fate of the native is produced, recognizable 
only to astrologers. In each genethliacal constitution just as it is fixed and invariable, both with respect to the 
caelum and also to the Earth, but not to the movable bodies of the planets; he measures for directions the dis- 
tances of the promittors from the significators, and these are also fixed. Therefore, in a genethliacal consti- 
tution he attends only to the fixed distances of the planets with respect to the caelum and the Earth, but not to 
the mobile bodies of the planets; consequently he directs the former, having taken into account their nature, 
as well as the celestial and terrestrial states that were allotted to them in their places at the moment of the na- 
tivity, and, by consequence, as the planets themselves were determined in the celestial figure. Therefore, he 
directs the Sun, the Moon, and the other planets merely as causes particularly determined, but not as the uni- 
versal causes which Cardan calls "by nature," which directions of Cardan, Ptolemy, and the others are really 
chimerical and utterly absurd, and consequently always erroneous, unless a particular determination about 
that for which they are directed happens to agree with such universal causes. For what is more absurd than to 
want to direct the Sun in the twelfth house, badly afflicted by sign and by the rays of the malefics for the 
glory and dignities of the native, when, so afflicted, it plainly portends the contrary by its own determination 
and status—namely enemies, sicknesses, prison, exiles, etc.? 
Besides, although we admit only 20 significators in general, that is the cusps of the twelve houses, the 
seven planets, and the Part of Fortune, nevertheless it must be known that any planet can be allotted a multi- 
ple signification in the same figure, for by however many ways it can be determined about the native, in that 
many also can its function as a significator be allotted. Moreover the same planet can be in one house of a 
figure, and ruler of one or more others; therefore, it will be at the same time the significator of diverse acci- 
dents pertaining to those diverse houses, and at the same time it is directed for all of these, as will be stated 
more fully below. But again, any kind of accident pertaining to the native, or the subject of any house, can 
have many significators at the same time; for example, life is signified by the Ascendant and its ruler, then 
by a planet in the first house and its ruler; honours by the Midheaven and its ruler, then by a planet in the 
tenth house and its ruler; consequently, the Midheaven and its ruler, a planet in the tenth and its ruler ought 
to be directed for honours and actions, each of course by a different computation, as will be explained in its 
own place; and the same reasoning applies to the others. 
There is, moreover, a certain order that must be observed with all these significators. So in fact a sign oc- 
cupying any house and its ruler are the principal significators of the accidents of that house, and the most 
principal is that part of the sign which occupies the cusp and begins the house, as is plain from the directions 
of the Ascendant and Midheaven. But a planet which is found in that house signifies the realization or the 
prevention of that accident, according to its nature, state, and determination; and if two or more planets are 
in the same house, the one nearer the cusp, especially if it has analogy and is strong, is preferred to the rest in 
that signification, and in the signified realization it designates the quality of it in accordance with its own na- 
ture. Moreover, the planets in aspect signify assistance to the realization or prevention, in accordance with 
their own nature and state and the kind of aspect; and the signification of the accidents must be pronounced 
from a combination of all these [factors]. 
9 

===== PAGE 21 =====

Chapter 4. The Promittors of Future Things from the Stars 
for a Man; their Definition and Number. 
It seems to us that apromittor ought to be defined thus. Namely, that it is a part of the primum mobile de- 
termined with respect to some category of accidents for the native, or to the second terminus of a direction, 
according as it presages per se anything that is going to happen with respect to the subject represented by the 
significator, or to the native himself by reason of such a subject. Thus, Mars, represented with respect to life 
by the Ascendant, portends danger to life itself from sickness, a wound, death, or to the native himself by 
reason of life. 
But by "a part of the primum mobile" is to be understood a part determined not only by reason of its own 
location in the figure, but in particular determined by the body of a planet or by an aspect; or, as I may say 
more concisely, such parts are understood to be the places of the bodies and the aspects of the planets in the 
primum mobile, according as they are determined in the genethliacal figure. And so, since there are seven 
planets, each of which has eleven aspects, namely two each of semisextiles, sextiles, squares, trines, quin- 
cunxes, along with the opposition, and in addition the antiscion; therefore, there will be 91 promittors, and 
with the Part of Fortune there will be 92, 
Cardan, in his Book on the Judgments of Genitures, Chapter 5, adds both of the nodes, or Caput, Cauda, 
[Sun], Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury; but the former points13 are of no efficacy, even 
though astrologers hold that Caput is of the nature of Jupiter and Venus, and Cauda is of the nature of Saturn 
and Mars. For that virtue would be the same in all places; but already the point of the ecliptic which to us is 
Caput, or the Ascending Node of the Moon, is to those in the southern hemisphere the Descending Node; 
and the Node that is Descending to us is Ascending to them; therefore, there would be a different universal 
virtue of the same node at the same time, which is absurd. For any part of the caelum, or any planet, or its as- 
pect, is of the same universal virtue, or insofar as it is seen in the caelum. But if it is said to be different with 
respect to different peoples, since the same point is at the same time ascending to some and descending to 
others, I ask what is the virtue of the head or the tail of the dragon of the Moon, when in the Torrid Zone 
those points are in its zenith, where they cannot be said either to ascend or descend, nor consequently to be 
distinguished by the name of Caput or Cauda. For they will not be of both virtues there, therefore both there 
and everywhere on earth they are of no virtue.14 But because the planets are perceived to be more efficacious 
there, where they are closer to the ecliptic, and, moreover, when they are closer to their own or to the 
Moon's nodes, then they are nearer to the ecliptic, this has deceived astrologers, who have supposed that 
greater efficacy to be due to the nodes of the Moon or of the other planets.15 
And as for the terms of the planets, 60 in number, that all astrologers admit to the number of their 
promittors with so much faith—as when Cardan, Junctinus, and others did not blush to predict or declare 
even a violent death from the direction of the Ascendant to the terms of Saturn or Mars, there is no need for 
us to tarry longer here in rebutting these things, since we have most adequately revealed the worthlessness 
of the terms in Book 15, Chapter 13. 
And finally, we shall discuss below whether the cusps of the houses can be promittors, as is pleasing to 
some astrologers, e.g. Origanus in Part 3, Member 4, Chapter 1, who also directs the Ascendant to the cusps 
of the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th houses, 
3 That is, the nodes. 
14 This isn't much of an argument, since logically it should also apply to the equinoxes of the ecliptic. 
15 This seems to say that the planets are closer to the ecliptic not only when they are near their own nodes but also when 
they are near the Moon's nodes, which is of course not true. Morin certainly knew this, so his statement is puzzling. 
10 

===== PAGE 22 =====

Chapter 5. The Formal Difference between a Significator 
and a Promittor, and their other Deferences. 
A significator and a promittor agree in this respect, that each is a part of the primum mobile, determined 
about some kind of accidents for the native, but they differ among themselves in many respects. 
Firstly, they differ formally in this respect, that a significator per se represents a subject affected by a di- 
rection, or about which, the native is affected. But a promittor signifies the effect produced by itself. For an 
effect is always produced in accordance with the nature of the promittor. Moreover, another formal differ- 
ence follows from this, namely that a significator concurs only subjectively with the effect that will be from 
the direction, but a promittor concurs efficiently, and as introducing the form at the time of completion of 
the direction. For it is proved by experience that the same significator, such as the Midheaven, or the Sun, 
concurring in the same way in directions with differentpromittors following [in sequence], causes different 
effects with them in the individual directions; moreover, that diversity is not efficiently from the 
significator, which is the same and concurs in the same way, but from the promittors, which are different in 
nature, in determination, and in their way of concurring. Which is confirmed by the fact that each individual 
effect is assimilated to its own promittor by reason of its nature and determination, just as the same wax is 
liquefied by heat and congealed by cold. But on the other hand, the same promittor, concurring in the same 
way with different preceding significators, still effects different things in the individual directions. More- 
over that diversity is not efficiently from significators differing among themselves, because the effect is al- 
ways in accordance with the nature and determination of the promittor; therefore, it is only subjectively 
from significators representing different subjects; just as the same Sun by its own heat hardens mud and liq- 
uefies wax,16 but by its influx it effects one thing in a plant,17 another thing in a brute animal, and something 
else in a man because the subjects are diverse in nature and disposition. Wherefore, it seems to us that 
Cardan ought to be refuted when he says, in Aphorisms, Book 3, Aphorism 26, "The place of the significator 
shows the nature of the event, the significator the form, the promittor the effective [agent], and the planets in 
aspect the helps and hindrances of the thing that is going to happen." Where, by "place of the significator" is 
understood the house of the figure which concerns the subject matter or the subject affected, by 
"significator" the planet posited in that house, which indeed from [its position in] the radix bestows some 
form or disposition upon the subject to which it is determined, or influences the native about it, but con- 
stantly throughout the whole course of his life. As for instance Venus in the first house bestows a Venerean 
moral nature upon the native that will last throughout his whole life; but through a direction of Venus to Sat- 
urn another form or mood happens to this nature—one of the nature of Saturn; consequently, the form in di- 
rections is not from the significator, but from the promittor, which is a planet or its aspect. 
Secondly, they differ because not every significator can be a promittor, as is plain from the cusps of the 
houses. For, that these only concur subjectively in directions and do not have any part in effecting [any- 
thing] will be proved below. In turn, not every promittor can be a significator, as is plain from aspects which 
otherwise would be directed to themselves mutually, against experience. For these do not signify anything 
through themselves, since by themselves they do not exist, but [only] through the aspecting planets. But ev- 
16 This same illustration was used by Placidus in Book I of his Quaestionum physioma thematic arum libri tres [Three 
Books of Physiomathematical Questions] (Milan: G.B. Malatesta, [1650]), as cited by John Cooper in his translation of 
Placidus's Primum Mobile (London: Davis and Dickson, 1814), p. 3 "The stars are indeed the universal cause, and indeter- 
minate, as to their specific and individual effects; but are determined according to the variety of the passable subjects and 
nearest causes: as the Sun melts wax, dries up the mud, whitens it, blackens the human skin, with man generates man, a lion 
with a lion, etc." While neither Placidus nor Morin attributes this illustration to anyone, it seems likely to be from some ear- 
lier writer, perhaps Aristotle. 
17 Reading planta 'plant' rathem than planeta 'planet'. 
11 

===== PAGE 23 =====

ery significator, by definition, signifies by itself; and so only the planets can be [both] significators and 
promittors. And in fact they signify the subject or the kind of accident to which they are determined by their 
bodily position, and the active impression from the radix on the native with respect to [the subject or acci- 
dent] itself, and to this extent they are significators. And besides, they presage anything that is going to hap- 
pen with respect to the kind of accident represented by any antecedent significator, and so they are [also] 
promittors. 
Thirdly, they differ because every significator signifies something that is present and existing in its ac- 
tion, namely a radical disposition of the native, received from some significator at birth, toward the kind of 
accident to which the significator itself is determined in accordance with its own nature and celestial and ter- 
restrial state. But a promittor, as such, presages something that is absent, at least at birth, and only existing in 
potential, consequently something that is going to happen. 
Chapter 6. Which Significator Ought to Be Directed for Which Things. 
Astrologers very often talk wildly and err shamefully about this, being too much addicted to the doctrine 
of Ptolemy, Cardan, and the other older [astrologers], with their universal significators, which Cardan him- 
self calls "by nature;" directing, for example, the Sun in every nativity for life, the father, honours, etc., 
without having any reason for [such] a determination of the Sun in the natal figure. 
That the Sun should not be directed for this reason18 is thus proved a priori. For whatever is directed 
ought only to be directed for those things of which it is a significator at birth, that is, of which it can be the 
cause from birth; moreover, every significator derives [its signification] solely from the houses of the figure 
because it is a significator at birth. For whatever is signified [by it] is from the essential signification of some 
house. And every planet has its [signification] through its determination in the figure by body, by rulership, 
or by aspect. And so it is a particular significator with respect to [one] native; and it does not cause every- 
thing in every nativity, but this thing in one, and something else in a second, just as it is determined in vari- 
ous ways by individual [circumstances]. Therefore, each planet is to be directed only for those things which 
it signifies particularly in a figure. For having taken away its particular signification, it can have no univer- 
sal effect. Thus it is [the function] of a significator to determine the promittor for any kind of effect, which, 
however, a significator viewed universally cannot do. For the Sun, viewed in this way, does not signify the 
life any more than the father or dignities, but all of these, and others—riches, brothers, children, the spouse, 
etc.—indifferently. Whence it is no wonder that from such directions one thing is accustomed to be pre- 
dicted, but very often something contrary happens; which imposes upon astrology and gives its adversaries 
an opportunity to scoff. 
But the cusps of the houses are already determined particularly to the things signified by their own 
houses; in which, however, there now and then occurs a change. For the directions of the Midheaven very 
often bring marriages, imprisonment, sicknesses, and death itself through notorious crimes, duels, battles, 
falls from a high place, and other things that originate from the action of man. For the Midheaven is the 
significator of actions, and consequently of a good or bad end to them. Similarly, the direction of the Ascen- 
dant to the Sun, the Moon, and the ruler of the Midheaven, when fortunate, causes honours, of which the As- 
cendant itself is not the significator per se, but [rather the significator] of the native himself. But we have 
said that the effect of a direction is from the promittor as well as from the significator, and each of them joins 
in this in accordance with its own determination, which must be carefully noted. 
And indeed, planets are determined in many ways, viz. by bodily position, rulership, aspect, exaltation, 
18 That is, as a general significator of life, the father, honours, etc. 
12 

===== PAGE 24 =====

and triplicity. And the bodily position of a planet in any house is stronger than its rulership in another, ac- 
cording to that common [rule], the presence of a planet is more effective than the rulership of an absent 
[planet]; and this is stronger in the case of an aspect, etc. And consequently, the directions of the planets for 
the particular things signified by them by reason of their corporal position and their rulership are very effec- 
tive; but for things signified by reason of aspect, exaltation, and triplicity, the effects are scarcely percepti- 
ble, at least alone and through their own action. Yet it cannot be denied that Mars square the Ascendant or its 
ruler signifies about life, for it is proved by experience that the square of Mars to the Ascendant badly af- 
flicts the things signified by the latter. Indeed, because Mars aspects all the houses, therefore it signifies 
about the subjects of all of them, more weakly to be sure where the weaker rays of the semisextile, sextile 
and quincunx fall, more strongly where the stronger rays of the opposition, trine, and square fall, and most 
strongly of all where in addition Mars itself is strong by reason of bodily presence or rulership. On which ac- 
count, it ought only to be directed for those things that it signifies by bodily position or by rulership, but not 
for those that it only signifies by aspect, at least by a weak aspect. And there is no need to direct the square of 
Mars to the Ascendant for life, since the Ascendant itself is directed for life to the point where it is struck by 
the square of Mars, for the state of the significator is visible. But it will still be necessary to consider Mars in 
its own directions because that square must be considered, as inimical to life, and consequently its direction 
would be very dangerous to the ruler of the Ascendant following. 
Furthermore, in the case of a significator, its own nature, its analogy with those things that it signifies, 
and its state must be looked at. For Leo in the Ascendant signifies something else about the life than does 
Scorpio or Gemini, and Scorpio something else than does Aries, although these two signs belong to the 
same planet. Similarly, the Sun as significator of honours signifies honours of a kind other than those signi- 
fied by Saturn, and Saturn signifies honours other than those signified by Venus. Besides, the Sun is analo- 
gous to honours, but Saturn is contrary to them, especially when badly afflicted. Therefore, these and 
similar things must be noticed in significators, such as those things for which they are directed, and what ef- 
fect is to be hoped for from them will be established more evidently. 
The objection is raised: Every man's life is from the Sun, and this cannot be denied. Therefore it is the 
significator of life in every nativity, and consequently it ought to be directed for life in every one. 
I reply firstly: The Sun, the Moon, and the other planets are the universal causes of life because they join 
universally in the generation of all living things, as do the four elements. But when in any nativity the cause 
of life is sought, the cause of a particular life, is understood, and the cause that is determined to life in that 
very nativity, but not the universal cause. Otherwise, the Moon, Saturn, Mars, etc., should all be directed 
equally for the life in individual figures along with the Sun, because they also, like the Sun, concur univer- 
sally, but that would be a great confusion, which would provide nothing but errors. 
I reply secondly: The Sun is the universal cause, merely through its active and perceptible heat, which 
alone it communicates here to inferior things, but not by its influence, which is communicated merely 
through a particular determination by location, rulership, aspect, etc.; as a result of which, the planet may be 
a particular cause. Moreover, the effects of directions derive only from the influences—hence, only from 
particular and determined causes. 
But, having understood these things, we may now inquire about something else. Let the Sun be supposed 
to be in the 11th house, or the ruler of the 11th, so that it is determined about the native's friends. The ques- 
tion arises. For what things should it be directed? For friends, so that it may be known what will happen to 
them? Or, for the native [himself], so that it may become known what will happen in connection with his 
friends? 
To which question I reply: The essential things signified by the houses, namely life, riches, brothers, etc., 
13 

===== PAGE 25 =====

are established through their relation to the native, so far as he may affected by them or in connection with 
them, but not so far as that the things signified are to be affected in connection with themselves. For the na- 
tive is the unique subject whom the celestial configuration primarily concerns, and all the accidents signi- 
fied by the planets and the signs happen to him, according as they are determined in the figure. And 
consequently, when some yokel is born as the sole son of parents who are beggars, his riches, brothers, 
spouse, children, and servants are not affected by the caelum, but he himself receives a celestial impression, 
by which he is actively or passively determined and affected with respect to those things, and that either well 
or badly, according as planets agreeing or disagreeing with them by nature and state are found to be corpo- 
rally present in the houses of those things or ruling them. 
Therefore, from the direction of the Sun in the 11th house, or as ruler of the 11 th, to the trine of Jupiter, 
the native will be well affected as regards his friends, but to the square of Saturn or Mars, badly affected. 
Yet, something good or evil can happen to his friends because as dignities may be lost, so it is with friends. 
However, they will not be lost, but generally something evil will happen to them in their life, fortune, etc., 
either through their own actions, or through ours, or through those of others. And the same reasoning applies 
to Saturn or Mars in the 3rd, which signifies the death of the brothers; but the signification and the direction 
primarily and essentially pertain to the native, to whom it portends that there will be misfortune in connec- 
tion with his friends (and] brothers. Nevertheless, it is greatly worthy of admiration that the virtue of the na- 
tive's figure also affects others in such a way that one who has Saturn or Mars or both in the third will see the 
death of his own brothers or sisters, whether he is the eldest or the youngest, or bom in the middle, as is 
shown in my case, since I have Mars in the 3rd, and in that of the most noble Mr. Tronson,19 who had Mars 
and Saturn in the 3rd. For while malefics in the 3rd portend to the native the loss of his brothers, at the very 
same time they threaten death to the brothers [and] survivorship to the native. And in the same way Saturn or 
Mars in the 7th presages the death of the spouse and the enemies before the native's own demise; from 
which it can be concluded that every significator, whether cusp or planet, should only be directed for those 
things that it particularly signifies by reason of its determination in the figure; and for this reason primarily 
only so far as the native is affected in them or by them or about them; and secondly, it can be directed for the 
status of things signified and for future accidents, especially if these things are persons, such as brothers, 
parents, children, the spouse, etc. 
Similarly, let the Sun be in the 12th house. It may be asked, For what things should it be directed and 
what will be the effect of that direction? 
I reply that it ought to be directed for the native's secret enemies, imprisonment, sicknesses, and other af- 
flictions of the body. Not in so far as the native himself is affected primarily and essentially, but according 
as he is affected by these things. For, since the Sun in the 12th is a particular significator of such things, 
therefore, every promittor translated to its circle will produce an effect on the native from this category of 
things, both in accordance with the nature and state of the significator and also in accordance with the na- 
ture, state, and determination of the promittor. And consequently, the Ascendant, or its ruler, translated to 
that circle, threatens the native with sicknesses, imprisonment, and secret enemies. And the ruler of the 7th 
translated to that same circle also portends a bodily affliction to the native, but through the agency of his 
spouse, or a lawsuit, or an open enemy. And the reasoning is the same for the Sun in the 10th for actions un- 
dertaken and for dignities. 
Again, let Mars be ruler of the 4th in the 6th, with the Moon in the 10th, whose square [falls] in the 7th. 
The question is asked, What will be the effect of the direction of Mars to the square of the Moon? 
The Moon in the 10th is a significator of actions, and its square to the 7th portends lawsuits and disputes 
19 Louis Tronson (b, 1576), whose horoscope is often cited by Morin, 
14 

===== PAGE 26 =====

for the native. Moreover, Mars signifies parents and servants. Therefore, only the signification of the 
Moon's square in the 7th should be combined with the signification of Mars; therefore, for the native law- 
suits are predicted, or disputes with the parents or the servants or both, or because of animals, since of course 
the effect of the direction must be referred primarily to the native; and all prudence and the highest degree of 
knowledge is involved in making combinations of the significations of the significator and the promittor, as 
it should be. Moreover, many things can be combined in each direction; therefore, the several possible com- 
binations should be predicted separately, unless it is plain from the figure of a revolution what future thing is 
mainly signified, for then this will be the main thing predicted. 
Chapter 7. Uow many Kinds of Directions there are-, whether Planets and the Cusps of 
Houses ought to be Directed against the Succession of the Signs; then, which of the 
Termini of a Direction is said to be the Significator and which the Promittor, and why. 
All astrologers expound a twofold [method of] direction. The first is said by them to be direct, or accord- 
ing to the succession of the signs, or in the following direction^ by which they mean the preceding terminus, 
considered as the significator, is borne to the promittor, which follows. But they assert this wrongly, since, 
on the contrary, the promittor or the following terminus, is transferred by the motion of the primum mobile 
to the location or circle of position of the significator to get the arc of direction, which is nothing other than 
the difference in ascensions, whether right or oblique, of each terminus, taken in the circle of position of the 
preceding terminus, not the following; or, it is the arc of the equator or of a parallel to it, intercepted between 
the promittor which follows and the circle of position of the significator, the finding of which arc, is termed 
by us an artificial direction. 
The second is called converse, or against the succession of the signs, or in the preceding direction, which 
they use for retrograde planets and for the Part of Fortune. And in this the significator, which follows, moves 
toward the promittor, which precedes, by the same motion of the primum mobile as the arc of direction ex- 
hibits, entirely as in the first direction. Thus in both cases, right or oblique ascensions are taken in the circle 
of position of the preceding terminus because the following (terminus] moves toward it by the prime mo- 
tion, and not vice versa. And consequently, since in both there is the same motion of the primum mobile and 
the same method of finding the arc of direction, it seems that this should not be considered to be a twofold 
direction, but a single one. 
And yet from another viewpoint it may be said to be twofold because the promittor or agent certainly fol- 
lows the significator in direct [motion], but in the converse it precedes; and consequently in direct [motion] 
the preceding terminus assumes the function of the subject affected, but the following assumes the function 
of the agent or the one affecting; and in a converse [direction] it is the other way around. 
But here there occurs no small difficulty in directing both the planets and the cusps of the houses; 
namely, whether the same terminus ought to be viewed now as the significator and then as the promittorwith 
respect to the same other terminus following or preceding, and thus at the same time to assume the functions 
of both the subject and the agent, just as if at the same time two directions with diverse effects were being 
made, one direct from the preceding terminus to the following, and the other converse from the following 
terminus to the preceding itself. 
And that this should not be allowed is proved by reason and experience. For since both directions happen 
at or are completed at the same moment of time, because the same arc is calculated in the same manner in ei- 
ther direction, if one effects something else than the other, then whenever any two planets or a planet and a 
cusp concur in direction, or whenever the time of the direction of one to the other is completed, the agents of 
15 

===== PAGE 27 =====

such a concourse will always be twofold, as opposed to the customary manner in which concurrent causes 
act; consequently, two totally diverse effects will always happen at the same time, against experience. But if 
one does not effect something different from [the effect of) the other, it follows that the second of these is su- 
perfluous, which is also absurd and alien to nature. Therefore, the same terminus of a direction does not as- 
sume at the same time the function of the significator and the promittor with respect to the same other 
terminus following or preceding. And consequently, by a direct direction of Saturn in the 12th to the Ascen- 
dant or to Venus in the 1st, the effect will not be different from [the effect of] the converse direction of the 
Ascendant or of Venus in the 1 st to Saturn in the 12 th; but as it is one and the same concourse of causes, so, 
from it one and the same total effect will come forth, conformable and proportionate to the natures of these 
causes, to their state, and to the concourse itself. 
You will object: Then take away the converse direction of the Part of Fortune and of the retrograde plan- 
ets against [the teaching of] all astrologers. 
I reply firstly: Astrologers have no cause why they only direct the Lot conversely; since by the passage of 
time it is moved in the following direction, i.e., it successively increases the number of its degrees in the 
ecliptic, just like the Ascendant, on which it depends; consequently, it should rather be directed to the fol- 
lowing promittors, just like the Ascendant itself and the direct planets. But as for the retrograde planets, they 
indeed seem to be directed in the preceding direction—namely, to those promittors to which they were 
borne by their own apparent motion at the moment of the nativity; if indeed directions should be established 
by the apparent motion of their own planets and not rather by that common [motion] of the primum mobile. 
But the difficulty mentioned above always occurs, if the promittor is a direct planet, to which as to a 
significator the same direction in the following direction agrees by reason of motion; certainly because at 
the same time either the direction of these same termini to themselves is twofold with a twofold effect, 
which was rejected above, or because the direction is then individual with an individual effect, just as was 
established. But having postulated this, which one of the termini will be the significator and which one the 
promittor? Or which will be represent the affected subject and which the efficient cause? And what about a 
retrograde planet? Or a direct preceding planet? Here really we come up once more against a most difficult 
thing, seeing that there seems to be no reason favoring one terminus over the other. Nor can it be said that 
such a difficulty does not occur when a retrograde planet is directed to the preceding aspects of the planets, 
which are only promittors and not significators, as we have stated in Chapter 4. For if a preceding aspect can 
be a promittor with respect to a following planet, why not all the more a preceding planet? But the latter is 
also a significator with respect to the following planet; therefore, there always remains the difficulty of the 
twofold significator and the twofold promittor in the same direction of the two termini. 
Moreover, the difficulty is increased by the cusps of the houses: if they are directed conversely to preced- 
ing planets, or those directly to them, effects are produced in the subject of the cusp by the nature, the deter- 
mination, and the state of the preceding planet, as I have learned from frequent and irksome experience from 
my own horoscope, which has Venus, the Sun, Jupiter, Saturn, and the Moon in the 12th house, whose indi- 
vidual directions to the Ascendant, or its directions to them, have always produced evil events in connection 
with my own person, which the Ascendant represents. And I have noticed the same thing in many other 
genitures, both with regard to the Ascendant and also with regard to the Midheaven; so that, just as in these 
directions, the cusps only assume the function of the significator, or the subject, or the native in the subject 
itself, or the [planet] affecting it, just as if they were directed to following promittors; and that will be shown 
more fully elsewhere with appropriate examples. 
Therefore, it seems to us that such a difficulty from the things already mentioned above is terminated, so 
that we can state .definitely: Firstly, that there is only a single way of directing, namely that in which the fol- 
lowing terminus by the motion of the primum mobile is conceived to be carried to the circle of position of 
the preceding terminus, since this is done in every direction, and the ascensions of each terminus are taken in 
16 

===== PAGE 28 =====

the circle of position of the preceding terminus. Moreover, the one that is moved is the only one that can 
property be said to be directed, as opposed to the common way of speaking, from which, therefore, we think 
one should refrain hereafter. 
Secondly, the effect of a direction is not from a single terminus but from the concourse of both [termini]. 
Just as if Mars in the 2nd is directed to the Ascendant, it will be a sickly or lethal direction; but the sickness 
will not be from the Ascendant alone, to which namely if Jupiter is directed, especially when lacking ruler- 
ship in the 12th or the 8th, sickness will not be produced; nor from Mars alone, which, unless it is directed to 
the Ascendant, no sickness will be produced. Therefore, it is from the concourse of both. And the same rea- 
soning applies to the rest. 
Thirdly, Both termini do not efficiently concur in the production of the effect, but only the second, which 
of course designates the type of effect or determines it specifically. For the other [terminus] only influences 
the disposition in the subject or in the native himself to the effect; whether namely the subject itself or the 
native is going to experience such an effect or not. Moreover, the one that efficiently or actively concurs is 
called the promittor, whether it is a planet or an aspect or an antiscion. But the one that passively and subjec- 
tively concurs, i.e., the one whose subject is specifically determined by the second terminus, is called the 
significator, whether it is a cusp or a planet or the Part of Fortune, which, depending on the luminaries and 
the Ascendant, assumes a nature intermediate between the cusps and the planets. 
Moreover, this is only to be understood with respect to the effect of a future direction, for strictly speak- 
ing both the promittor and the significator are efficient causes and signs, for from Book 21, Section 1, 
Chapter 7, the significator is the efficient cause of the disposition of the subject in a direction; and the 
promittor is the sign or the significator of the form or type of effect that is going to be produced by the direc- 
tion. For just as celestial causes are said to be signs of the effects that they produce, so are they the effectors 
of those things which they signify. For these are reciprocal according to that chapter. 
Fourthly, the cusps of the houses, whether they are directed to preceding termini or the termini are di- 
rected to them following, are only significators, for they concur only subjectively, i.e., for the subjects to 
which they are determined, in as far as those subjects are going to be affected, or for the native in connection 
with those subjects. Nor does it hurt that the Sun in the 12th can be directed to Venus partilely posited in the 
Ascendant as to a promittor. For although Venus and the Ascendant are the same in position, they are not the 
same in nature, nor are they the same when they are together as they are when they are apart. For these three, 
the cusp of the 1st, the Ascendant, and Venus in the Ascendant differ in the following ways. First, the cusp is 
only an imaginary circle dividing the mundane space of the 12th house from the mundane space of the 1st 
house or the primary houses twelve and one. The Ascendant is a part of the primum mobile, or rather the be- 
ginning of the part of the caelum itself which is considered to be in the first space, which whole part has a 
force by reason of its determination for life; moreover, [that force] is greater in the Ascendant itself, or in its 
beginning, not in so far as it is a point, but in so far as it is the beginning of this part. Moreover, Venus in the 
Ascendant is the place of Venus very strongly determined to life, or it is the Ascendant itself infused with 
the Venusian virtue. And judge the same of the Part of Fortune, which only assumes the function of a 
significator or a subject. Moreover, aspects and antiscia are only promittors or agents. 
But in the case where two planets are the termini of the same direction, it is more difficult to distinguish 
which of them is the significator and which is the promittor, whether they are in the same house of the figure 
or in different houses, since each of them can be a significator and a promittor in directions. And it seems to 
us that it ought to be determined in this way. If both of them are in the same house, it is certain that each 
planet is determined to the same subject or to the same kind of accidents for the native by its bodily position; 
and consequently, the future effect will be of that kind, at least from the bodily determination of the planets. 
But the one that precedes is nearer to the cusp of that house; and consequently it will influence more 
17 

===== PAGE 29 =====

strongly the subject itself, or the native with respect to the subject, for the preceding parts of a house are 
more efficacious than the following parts, and the cusp is the most efficacious of all. Therefore, other things 
being equal, the preceding [planet], as the one more efficaciously determined with respect to the subject, 
will represent it more efficaciously, or it will concur subjectively with it more efficaciously, since it is going 
to be affected by the following termini; and consequently it will be affected by a following terminus through 
direction, and not the other way around. And so, the preceding [terminus] will be the significator and the fol- 
lowing [terminus] the promittor. Just as if the Sun and Mars ruler of the Ascendant were in the 10th house 
with Mars following; each of them is determined to honours by its bodily position, and each of them influ- 
ences its disposition to honours in accordance with its own nature and state; but the Sun, being nearer to the 
cusp, is more efficacious; and consequently it will be the principal terminus of the direction, namely the 
significator, which signifies that the subject, i.e., honours of a Solar nature, will be affected or determined 
by the Sun. For otherwise the honours of a Solar nature that are signified would be affected or determined by 
Jupiter, or by Mars, or by Mercury, etc. Therefore, from the direction of the following Mars to the Sun pre- 
ceding in the 10th, honours of a Solar nature, i.e., illustrious honours, will happen, not of just any nature, but 
martial or military from Mars itself. And it must be judged similarly with the rest. Thus, my Sun and Saturn 
are in the 12th, significators of sicknesses; and the Sun is closer to the cusp. Consequently, in the 8th year af- 
ter birth a Satumian sickness, namely a quartan fever, befell me from the direction of Saturn to the Sun; and 
of course the Sun, being nearer the cusp, signified the kind of sickness, namely a fever, but Saturn caused or 
contributed the specific type. And the reasoning is the same in other instances. 
Moreover, I said above "at least from the bodily determination of the planets," for, from other determina- 
tions, such as rulership, the effect that is produced either differs in kind, or at least is modified in its kind by 
those other determinations. I also said "other things being equal," for if the following [planet] is ruler of that 
particular house or analogous to its particular signification, it might concur subjectively more efficaciously, 
as Saturn in the 12th for sicknesses or the other significations of the 12th to which it is analogous; although it 
seems to matter little or not at all whether we speak of sicknesses of a Saturnian nature subjectively repre- 
sented by Saturn specified by the Sun through a difference in [the type of] fever, or sicknesses of a Solar na- 
ture, among which fevers are included, specified by Saturn through the difference of a quartan [type], since 
on the one hand a fever that is Satumian is signified, but on the other a Satumian fever (which is the same 
thing). Indeed it may seem that it ought rather to be asserted that the Sun in the 12th portends sicknesses of a 
Solar nature, and Saturn those that are Satumian, and from their concourse in direction the sickness is made 
to be of the nature of the Sun and Saturn, which is a quartan fever. 
Similarly, the Sun in the 10th presages dignities of a Solar nature, Mars mler of the 1st in the 10th mili- 
tary ones; therefore, from their concourse in a direction, honours that are military, royal, or distinguished are 
certain to be presaged. And the same reasoning holds for the rest, when each planet, from its essential nature 
and its own state and determination signifies a future accident of the kind of that house which it occupies, for 
if Mars in the 10th is badly afflicted and is not the mler of the Ascendant, it would rather portend the loss of 
honours; this would happen from that direction, because it makes even more clear that a following planet 
produces the changes characteristic of a promittor. 
But if two planets are in different houses, and are therefore determined to subjects that differ in kind, and 
represent these subjects subjectively, there seems to be a greater difficulty in defining which will determine 
the other for the type of future accident [signified] by their direction, or which will function as promittor. 
But if to the Moon in the 12th is directed the square of Saturn from the 1 st,20 it will be square the promittor it- 
self or the agent, since, from what has been said above, it cannot be the significator. Consequently, the 
Moon will be the significator or representative of the subject to be affected, with respect to the square of Sat- 
20 That is, if the square of Saturn falls in the natal 1st and that aspect is directed to the Moon in the natal 12th. 
18 

===== PAGE 30 =====

urn. Why not then with respect to Saturn itself, from which the force and effectiveness of that square de- 
rives, just as if Saturn itself had been in the 1st? Besides, if the Moon is posited in the 12th, it must not be 
said that Satum directed to it either from the 12th or the 1st or the 2nd would produce effects of the same 
type, if indeed Satum does not concur through its own nature alone, but also through its determination, 
which is different in different houses. And so, the effect of Mars will be different for a different determina- 
tion. Similarly, if several planets are directed to the Moon in the 12th, one from the 12th, another from the 
1st, and another from the 3rd, they will produce different effects from their individual directions, as experi- 
ence proves. But the Moon is the same in all these, that is in its nature, determination, and state; therefore, 
the diversity of effects, i.e., the different forms of these, are brought about by the individual planets that fol- 
low, on account of their diverse natures and determinations, as is deduced from the elementary principles; 
and consequently, from what has been said above, the promittors will be called "concurring actively/' 
Nevertheless, it can also generally be said that in the concourse of any two termini, with which otherwise 
the name of significator can agree, it should be carefully noted which one of the different subjects that are 
otherwise signified by them is more likely to submit to or be determined by the other; or rather, through 
which of these subjects the native is more naturally and suitably affected by another subject; then [the judg- 
ment) should be declared about that [subject]. So that, if the Ascendant is directed to the Moon in the 12th, it 
is more appropriate for the subject of the Ascendant, i.e., the native's personality, life, temperament, moral 
nature, mental qualities, to submit to, to be affected by, or to be changed by the subject of the 12th, i.e., sick- 
ness, imprisonment, exile, etc., than the other way around; and so for this reason the preceding terminus will 
be the promittor or the agent. And the same thing must be judged if Mercury ruler of the Ascendant in the 9th 
signifying by rulership the native's personality is directed to Mars in the 8th; for Mars signifying death will 
exercise the function of promittor and Mercury that of significator. 
Fifthly, we say that the direction of planets and cusps should be admitted to be twofold; one direction, by 
which the following termini are conceived to be bome by the motion of the primum mobile to the circle of 
position of the preceding planet or cusp—and this direction is called direct or in the following direction be- 
cause in fact the significator looks back at the following termini. And the other, by which the preceding ter- 
minus itself is bome to the circle of position of the other preceding terminus; and this is called converse or in 
the preceding direction. And both directions of the same cusp or planet to different termini before and after 
should be noted; not otherwise than if a planet is bome at the same time by any motion of direction to a pre- 
ceding terminus when it should follow after a following one, because surely both directions are effective, as 
experience proves. However, it must always be noted in either direction, which of the different subjects of 
the termini would more suitably be affected by the other, as was said above. And if both termini are in the 
same house, it will have to be seen from the things said above which of these will more effectively be the 
subject for that house, so that it may be definitely established which terminus is the promittor and which the 
significator in that particular case. 
Moreover, it is worthy of admiration that the same promittor, concurring in the same manner with differ- 
ent significators, still accomplishes different things in its individual directions. And that diversity is not ef- 
fectively from the significators because the effect is always in accordance with the nature and determination 
of the promittor; hence, it is only subjectively from the significators; by which means the same Sun hardens 
mud and liquefies wax by its heat.21 Similarly, the same significator, such as the Ascendant or the 
Midbeaven or Jupiter in the 1 st, concurring with different promittors in the same manner, causes different 
effects with them in the individual directions. And that diversity is not effectively from the significator, 
which is the same and concurring in the same manner, but from the promittors, which are diverse in their na- 
ture, determination, and way of concurring; which is confirmed by the fact that the individual effects are as- 
21 The same illustration used in Chapter 5 above. 
19 

===== PAGE 31 =====

similated to their own promittor by reason of its nature or determination or both, just as the same wax is 
liquefied by heat and solidified by cold. 
You will object: By allowing the direction of cusps in the preceding direction and in the following direc- 
tion, the principal and more certain way of rectifying nativities by the native's accidents is taken away. For 
there is no more certain way of rectifying nativities than by finding the true position of the angles of the fig- 
ure; and this is found through the directions of the Ascendant or the Midheaven to significators correspond- 
ing to past accidents. But now, if a sickness happens equally from a direction of the Ascendant to Mars 
following in the 1 st, and from the direction of this same Ascendant to Mars preceding in the 12th, it cannot 
be said whether Mars precedes or follows the Ascendant, nor therefore which degree of the ecliptic will be 
the Ascendant degree; and the directions of the Midheaven for honours or actions must be judged similarly. 
Therefore, a twofold direction cannot be assigned to the same significator. Moreover, the force of directions 
in the following direction22 is the best known to all astrologers. Therefore, each significator can only be di- 
rected in the following direction. 
I reply firstly, a sickness can certainly happen from either direction, because the Ascendant is the 
significator of life and health, and badly afflicted from either direction it is sickness; but different effects can 
also be produced from these same directions: in fact from Mars in the 1 st, sickness or a wound or a bum; and 
from Mars in the 12th, sickness, imprisonment, or exile; in fact, because Mars in either direction acts in ac- 
cordance with its proper nature and its own determination in the figure, but it is determined to one set of 
things in the 1 st and to another set in the 12th. And thus, from [a direction of] the Midheaven to Jupiter in the 
10th or the 11th, dignities of a secular nature happen, unless Jupiter is ruler of the 9th; but to Jupiter in the 
9th, journeys, or an ecclesiastical position. From the Midheaven to Mars in the 11th, military honours 
through the aid of friends, especially if the state and determination of Mars agree; but to Mars in the 8th, 
dangers to life, or even a violent death. 
I reply secondly, no nativity can be accurately rectified by a single accident pertaining to the Ascendant, 
e.g. a sickness, because of the objection already stated, but many accidents are required so that the rectifica- 
tion may be secure and certain; but if they correspond to their own causes according to the rectification of 
the direction of the Ascendant to Mars in the 12th, this will have to be judged to be more truthful, for they 
will not correspond closely to both. Therefore, the converse direction of a cusp does not remove or weaken 
the rectification of the nativity through many of the native's past accidents, especially because on the days 
of the accidents a transit of the planets is very often made through the cusps themselves, from which the cer- 
tainty is then greater. 
You will make a second objection: If the converse directions of the cusps and planets are just as valid as 
the direct directions, then when the Ascendant is conversely directed to Mars in the 12th in the 15th year 
from the nativity, a sickness, imprisonment, exile, or something like in kind to the signification of the 12th 
house will happen according to the nature and state of Mars; but in the 345th year, if the man shall have lived 
so long, as before the flood, the same type of accident or another type will be produced again when the As- 
cendant is directed to Mars according to the succession of signs. But because Mars and the Ascendant are in 
the same mode in either direction, namely with the Ascendant as the subject and Mars as the agent or 
promittor, acting on either side with the same nature and determination, the same type of accident will be 
produced again, rather than another type. But both seem to be absurd, for the promittor will fulfill only once 
that which it signifies and promises it is going to do. 
I reply: Neither is absurd or contrary to the actions of the celestial bodies. For when men used to live 800 
or 900 years it was necessary that the Ascendant be directed to the same promittor several times according to 
22 That is, direct directions. 
20 

===== PAGE 32 =====

the series of signs. Why then should two directions of it to Mars in the 12th not produce the same type of 
sickness, doubtless a tertian fever of some kind, or even something of a different type, since there are many 
types of Martian sicknesses, or a sickness in the first direction, but imprisonment in the second. Moreover, it 
is a false statement that the promittor fulfills only once that which it signifies it is going to do. For, as often 
as it repeatedly concurs with the other terminus, the significator, by direction in the preceding direction or in 
the following direction, always effects something new according to the diversity of that terminus and its 
own nature and determination. And consequently, even though in the 12th house it is only determined to- 
ward sicknesses, imprisonment, exiles, and secret enemies, yet in these it varies its effects by directions to 
different termini in a remarkable way. What then will it effect in addition if it is seen to follow its own ruler- 
ships in other houses? Similarly the Ascendant or any other significator; even though it may have only one 
and the same influence towards the subject that it represents generically by reason of house, or, in the case of 
the native, towards him himself; yet, this impressed force or disposition is something universal with respect 
to the different effects of that kind which can be produced by different promittors. 
It is true that it may be said by some that from the direction of the Ascendant to a preceding Mars sickness 
is produced through the native's own fault, because the Ascendant is borne by the prime motion to the 
promittor. But from the direction of a following Mars to the Ascendant sickness is [also] produced without 
any action on the native's part, because the Ascendant will expect the promittor to be coming to it, or the lat- 
ter will rush to the former. But from this it would follow that nothing good or evil happens to the native 
through directions of the Ascendant to following promittors, with the native himself concurring effica- 
ciously or by his own action, which experience opposes. For even if the Ascendant, i.e., the native repre- 
sented by it, maintains itself subjectively or passively in directions, yet this must only be understood, insofar 
as it is affected well or evilly according to the nature and determination of the promittors; but not because it 
can do nothing from which such an affection could happen to it. 
You will object thirdly: The cusp of the 10th house is something immobile. Therefore it is not transferred 
to any preceding terminus; therefore it cannot be directed. 
I reply: That although the cusp of the 10th house, or the 10th house [itself], is something immobile with 
regard to space, yet the part of the caelum that is culminating is mobile because of the prime motion; and 
consequently it is transferred by this to the location of a preceding promittor; and consequently it is directed, 
and the objection is refuted. 
Chapter 8. \n which the Various Methods of Artificial Directions 
Used by Astrologers are Set Forth, and the False ones Rejected. 
The diversity of directing has produced such confusion in astrology, that very many may still be in doubt 
as to the true method of establishing this operation—the principal one of the whole art. 
Junctinus, in his Commentary on the Quadripartite, Book 3, Chapter 12 (p. 381), explains the various 
opinions of the old [astrologers] about this matter, discordant among themselves and supported by no rea- 
sons, which it would be tedious and useless to repeat here. But the sum of all his discussion consists of this: 
that some direct by equal degrees, i.e., they take the longitudes of the significator and the promittor in the 
ecliptic without latitude, then they take the difference of their longitudes; for this, as they aver, is the arc of 
direction equivalent to as many years as there are degrees in that same arc. But others direct by ascensions of 
the degrees of the equator, and these are right [ascensions] both for the significator and the promittor if the 
significator is in the right circle or the meridian, but oblique [ascensions] if it is in the oblique [circle], i.e., 
the horizon or another intermediate circle of position passing through sections of the horizon and the merid- 
21 

===== PAGE 33 =====

ian. The difference of these ascensions will be the arc of direction. Moreover, Junctinus says that it seems 
safer to him to direct according to both modes, viz. by equal degrees and also by ascensions of degrees of the 
equator; but because he offers no reason for his opinion, and because there can be only one method of direct- 
ing that is true and natural, it is therefore plain that Junctinus is thrusting upon us here three [different] opin- 
ions on a matter of the greatest importance—two indeed of the old [astrologers] and one of his own. Which 
of these is truer has been a matter of controversy until now. But Junctinus's opinion overturns itself. For if 
the same direction is made by the equal method and by ascensions, whose individual arcs of direction will 
be different, as almost always happens, one of them must necessarily be false and erroneous in defining the 
time of a future event; therefore the astrologer would always be uncertain about the time of that event. And 
so it is superfluous to examine which of these two is true and natural, because the truth can only be defined 
by reason and experience. 
And certainly in things unknown to the intellect experience must always be consulted first, since there is 
nothing in the intellect that was not first in the senses, and it is certain that false things do not coincide with 
experience except by chance and by accident; but those things which always or at least very many times 
agree with experience—those things are true. And they motivate the intellect to discover the reason behind 
this truth, so that it can therefore be said not inappropriately that reason is the daughter of experience. But 
indeed aside from the fact that direction by equal degrees is absolutely foreign to the intention of Ptolemy, 
who holds that in every direction the promittor and significator differ in location, i.e., in their circle of posi- 
tion, which, however, would not be the case where there are two planets differing in longitude in the ecliptic 
itself when it coincides with the horizon or another circle of position, as frequently happens beyond latitude 
bb^O', experience too proves that this is false. And this will readily be apparent if anyone wants to reduce 
to their proper causes all the accidents in the life of a bO-year old man buffeted by various events, for he will 
see that it is impossible. Nor should it be objected that some of the old [astrologers], such as Albumazur, 
Alchabitius, Messahala,23 and others whom Junctinus reviews, used this method of directing. For it perhaps 
struck them that this mode is the easiest of all, while the other by ascensions is by far the more difficult,24 es- 
pecially when the significator is placed beyond the angles, undertaken either by Ptolemy's way—hitherto 
understood by few—or else by tables of ascensions that had not yet been published at that time. Whence it is 
not surprising that the majority, avoiding such labour or not knowing the true method of directing, has em- 
braced the other method, since Cardan himself strayed very far from the truth in the three ways of directing 
that he explained, which differ among themselves and also differ from the intention of Ptolemy,25 as 
Maginus26 proves from Valentine Naibod,27 at the end of his book on the legitimate use of astrology in medi- 
cine,28 although in assigning the times of future effects they have very often been deceived, whenever they 
have increased the number of promittors by [adding] the terms of the planets. 
Furthermore, it can also be stated that this way of directing is false, because of course a promittor cannot 
23 Three of the best known figures of Arabian astrology: Albumasar [Abu Ma'shar] (c.787-886), Alchabitius [al-QablsI] 
(d.c.967), and Messahala [Masha'allah] (c.740-c.815), 
24 Yet, these men were successful astrologers. 
25 Actually, Cardan understood Ptolemy's method, which is what we would now call Placidian, while Regiomontanus 
and his faithful followers Naibod and Morin did not. 
26 Giovanni Antonio Magini (1555-1617), Italian mathematician, astronomer, and astrologer. 
27 Valentine Naibod or Nabod (b. 1527), German mathematician and astrologer, whose book Enarratio elementorum 
astrologiae [Explanation of the Elements of Astrology] (Cologne, 1560) discusses primary directions and contains the fa- 
mous measure of time still called by his name. The "proof" cited from his book is invalid, as we shall see below. 
28 De astrologica ratione ac usu dierum criticorum seu decretoriorum [Astrological Reason and the Use of Critical 
Days] (Venice, 1607). 
22 

===== PAGE 34 =====

produce an effect on the subject represented by the significator solely through its own distance from the 
significator, taken in the ecliptic with the longitudes of both; but it is necessary that it be determined to such 
an effect, since the planets do not act on particular things except by reason of their own determination, as is 
set forth fully in Book 21. Moreover, because determination through its bodily position is necessary to a 
promittor, it may or may not be ruled by the place of the significator, because either a planet is a promittor, 
ruled by the place of the significator, or it isn't; from the promittor's direction to the latter, the effect itself is 
produced; therefore, by reason of the determination of the promittor itself through its bodily position, simi- 
lar to the location of the significator with respect to the horizon,29 by reason of which similarity the planet 
that is the promittor, when it is directed to the Ascendant, produces the same [effect] as if it were in the As- 
cendant. And yet the promittor cannot obtain that similar position unless it is transferred to it by the motion 
of the equator or the primum mobile\ therefore, the arc of direction will have to be measured, not by degrees 
of the ecliptic, but by those of the equator; for the equator, not the ecliptic, transfers celestial bodies to the 
preceding spaces of the houses. And of all the celestial circles, only the circles of position are determinative 
of the virtue of celestial bodies, as is most evidently established from the circles of position of the houses, 
but not the ecliptic or the equator or the circles of latitude or declination; moreover, what is said about a 
planet acting as promittor is also to be understood about the aspects. And consequently, the method of di- 
recting by equal degrees must be rejected, both by reason and by experience, even though it may sometimes 
happen by accident that it agrees with experience, concerning which we shall speak at the beginning of the 
Second Section. 
Chapter 9. That theWay of Directing by Ascensions given by Ptolemy 
is Natural and True, but Hitherto Understood by Few. 
Most astrologers follow the way of directing by ascensions, but although they hold that it is acceptable to 
Ptolemy, yet they are separated into various opinions about his intention. They have also introduced differ- 
ent methods of directing by ascensions, while some have tried to hunt down the arc of direction with the as- 
censions themselves, but others30 with the equivalent horary times and the semidiurnal arcs familiar to 
Ptolemy himself. 
Moreover, even though the method of directing by horary times is more involved than that by ascensions 
of degrees of the equator, nevertheless it would scarcely be of any importance by which of these two modes 
a direction was made, provided that it produced the same arc of direction either way, by which arc the time 
of the effect of the direction may be designated, which can be the same. But when through different methods 
arcs emerge with many [different numbers of] degrees, i.e., differing by many years, it must be that either 
the true method was not handed down by Ptolemy through [the use of] horary times, or it has not been under- 
stood by all astrologers. And this is not surprising, since not only does that way involve no little obscurity, 
but also the examples of calculations given by the Prince of Astrology differ from his own doctrine, as Val- 
entine Naibod learnedly notes in his Commentary on the Quadripartite, Book 3, Chapter 15.31 Furthermore, 
it is established in that chapter that Ptolemy was of this opinion about directions—that there is one single 
mode of directing, when Naibod says, "Surely, if anyone investigates this part of the doctrine according to 
29 Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos iii. 10, says that the promittor must be brought to a "similar place." But his definition of such a 
place does not agree with what follows here. 
30 Most notably, Placidus. 
31 On the contrary, Ptolemy's precepts and examples are clear enough, but Naibod, like Regiomontanus, simply failed to 
understand them. This does not necessarily mean that the Regiomontanan method of directions and house division is wrong, 
but it does mean that it is not Ptolemaic. 
23 

===== PAGE 35 =====

nature, he will feel that from all [considerations] only one mode which he may follow is suggested to him, 
namely to ascertain by how many equinoctial times the [following] place—either the body or the point of 
aspect—is brought to the location of the preceding place in that geniture; and because the equinoctial times 
are carried across equally, both at the horizon and at the meridian, with respect to both of which similarities 
of places are taken." For the universal unity of this mode consists of that [very thing]. Firstly, that the 
significator is always in some circle of position; but the horizon and the meridian themselves are also circles 
of position, in fact passing through the same points, then all the others are passed through these. And the cir- 
cle in which the significator is fixed is its horizon, either normal or oblique. Secondly, that the circle in 
which the significator is situated, that is, its horizon, may be conceived to have the same relation to its own 
proper meridian, as the horizon of the figure or region has to its own meridian. Thirdly, that the equator cuts 
across all circles of position equally or uniformly, i.e., no more degrees of the equator rise in one hour above 
one of the circles than they do above another; not otherwise than if the equator itself should revolve about 
common sections of the horizon and the meridian, just as Ptolemy says in that same Chapter 15. Fourthly, 
that the degrees of the equator that pass through the circle in which the significator is fixed, until the follow- 
ing place or the promittor is bome by the motion of that same equator to that circle, are the desired arc of the 
direction, which is the equatorial distance of the promittor from the circle of position of the significator, and 
the distance from the significator itself is not single. Moreover, when it is conceived to have been bome [to 
that place], it is said to be in a similar position with the significator with respect to the horizon of the celestial 
figure, or in the same circle of position. 
Therefore, on account of these properties, common to whatever circle of position the significator occu- 
pies, Naibod says with Ptolemy that this general method of directions is natural. But I offer a truer reason, 
and a twofold one. The first is that by this means the method of directions may correspond with the construc- 
tion of the houses, which is also made by circles of position. But the second and most important is that the 
promittor, transferred to the circle of the significator, will undergo the same determination from that posi- 
tion as does the significator itself, and consequently it ought to act and in fact does act on the subject of the 
house in which the significator itself is, not otherwise than if it were conjoined to the significator in that 
same circle, as experience proves. From all of which causes indeed, I declare this one mode to be natural, 
i.e., conformable to the natural principles of astrology, and consequently true. 
Besides, among all the astronomers who have followed Ptolemy, Regiomontanus first understood per- 
fectly this general way, and he composed tables suitable for its employment, namely tables of declination, 
right ascension, ascensional differences, oblique ascension at different elevations of the pole, and position, 
all of which he termed Tables of Directions?2 And the last of these, as it was more difficult than the rest, but 
also more useful and of nobler use, by which namely is found the altitude of the pole above the circle of posi- 
tion, or the horizon of the significator, and from which are given the ascensions both of the significator and 
also of the promittor in that circle, the difference of which is the arc of direction. And as a matter of fact the 
arc of direction is in general nothing other than the difference of the ascensions of the significator and the 
promittor in the circle of the significator, when the significator is in the part of the caelum that is ascending, 
or the difference of the descensions if it is in the part that is descending. Moreover, the ascensions are under- 
stood to be right ascensions if the significator is in the meridian circle, but oblique ascensions if it is in a cir- 
cle of position oblique to the equator. Therefore, let us explain here the method of Regiomontanus, so that 
this may be to us as some Lesbian rule33 to which other things are compared. 
32 Tabulae directionum profectionumque in nativitatibus multum utiles, [Tables of Directions and Protections very Use- 
ful in Nativities] (Augsburg, 1490). 
331 don't know what Morin means by "Lesbian rule." In the Greek language it would mean "second best," but this does 
not seem appropriate here. 
24 

===== PAGE 36 =====

First then, if the significator is in the Midheaven, he takes the right ascension of it and of the promittor, 
not having omitted their latitude if they have any. And, having subtracted the right ascension of the 
significator from the right ascension of the promittor, the remainder is the arc of direction. And the same is 
done if the significator is in the imum caeli. 
Similarly, if the significator is rising in the horizon, he takes the oblique ascensions of it and of the 
promittor at the elevation of the pole above that horizon, not having omitted their latitude as [mentioned] 
above. And, having subtracted the oblique ascension of the significator from the oblique ascension of the 
promittor, whatever is left is the arc of direction. 
But if the significator is in any circle of position between the horizon and the meridian, either above or 
below the horizon, he first finds the altitude of the pole above its circle of position; and this will always have 
to be found exactly. Then, if the significator is in the ascending half of the caelum, he takes as above both its 
and the promittor's oblique ascensions at that altitude; and, having subtracted the oblique ascension of the 
significator from the oblique ascension of the promittor, whatever is left is the arc of direction. 
But if the significator is in the descending half of the caelum, either in place of it he directs its opposite in 
the ascending half to the opposition of the promittor, just as above, and it produces the arc of direction; or, 
having found the altitude of the pole above the circle of the significator, he takes the oblique descensions of 
the significator and of the promittor at that altitude; and, having subtracted the oblique descension of the 
significator from the oblique descension of the promittor, the remainder is the same arc of direction. 
Thus, therefore, from Regiomontanus it is plain that there is only one general method of directing ac- 
cording to the intention of Ptolemy. Let us then take up the examples given by Ptolemy himself, so that it 
may be plain whether he himself was consistent in his procedure. 
He supposes, therefore, a region in which the longest day is 14 hours, i.e., in which the pole is elevated 
310 above the horizon,34 as is plain from his table of the length of the day, which region is that of Alexandria, 
Egypt. And, having put the beginning of Aries in the Ascendant as significator, and directing it entirely by 
horary times to the beginning of Gemini, or rather the latter to the former, he finds the arc of direction to be 
45°, and this is found to be 45o02' in Regiomontanus's tables, for Ptolemy himself did not bother with a few 
minutes in these examples.35 
And, having put the beginning of Aries in the Midheaven, and similarly directing the beginning of Gem- 
ini to it by right ascension, he says the arc of .direction is 58°, which, however, from Regiomontanus's table 
is only 57048', but this is of little importance. 
But when he puts the beginning of Aries in the middle of the caelum, descending beyond the angles, so 
that the culmination of the caelum will occupy 18° Taurus, and directs the beginning of Gemini to this, then 
he falls into a scarcely tolerable error, stating the arc of direction to be 64024', which, however, from the ta- 
bles of Regiomontanus is found to be 66052',36 partly because he did not bother with an exact calculation to 
the minute, as when he says that 0 Gemini is 13° from 18 Taurus in the Midheaven, although the distance is 
34 Actually, 30o22' according to Ptolemy, Almagest, ii. 9. 
35 In fact, Ptolemy did not use minutes at all in his example calculations, but only whole degrees (see Robbins's edition 
and translation of the Greek text, and also Ashmand's translation of Proclus's Paraphrase). But the Greek edition and the 
Latin translation used by Morin (and Cardan) has degrees and minutes. However the minutes, while present in a few of the 
MSS, seem to be interpolations. Morin, of course, refers to them in good faith. 
36 Ptolemy's example, as he clearly states, is based on proportional semi-arcs, or, as we would say today, the method of 
Placidus. A more precise calculation from the tables in the Almagest yields 64o07' for the arc of direction. Naturally it would 
not agree with a calculation from the tables of Regiomontanus. 
25 

===== PAGE 37 =====

only 12017and partly because of the lack of tables of position for finding the altitude of the pole above the 
circle of position of the beginning of Aries,37 [and] in this same example he gives another lengthy way [of 
making the calculation], confused, and not in accord with the universal mode of directing.38 Many and 
learned men have spoken foolishly about the explanation of this [calculation of Ptolemy's].39 But this direc- 
tion can now be made by the tables of Regiomontanus, so that the error will become evident. 
Therefore, let the Midheaven be 18 Taurus, with right ascension 45031', the significator 0 Aries, the 
promittor 0 Gemini, and the latitude of the place 310. 
The declination of 0 Aries is 0. 
Its right ascension is 0. 
Its Meridian Distance is 45031'. 
The altitude of the pole above its circle of position, as calculated from the spherical triangles, is 23° 12'. 
And because the significator is in the descending half of the caelum, we may, from what is said above, use 
the opposite point of the zodiac, that is 0 Libra, whose oblique ascension in the circle of position to which the 
pole is elevated 23° 12' is 180°; and the oblique ascension of 0 Sagittarius, the opposite of 0 Gemini, in the 
same circle is 246052'; from which, having subtracted 180°, there is left 66052' for the arc of direction. 
But so that the verity of this arc may be established more evidently, let us examine it afresh according to 
the method of Naibod, who, having thoroughly grasped the intention of Ptolemy, cleared it up, and, as is 
proper, explained it.40 
And because for Naibod's method the semidiurnal arcs of both the significator and the promittor are re- 
quired, it will thus be found universally, whether the promittor or the significator have latitude or not. 
With the longitude and latitude of a planet its declination is sought in the table of declinations in 
Regiomontanus or elsewhere, and through it from the table of ascensional differences for the altitude of the 
pole above the circle of position, for which the semidiurnal arc is sought, the ascensional difference is taken 
out, and this is added to a quadrant or 90° if the declination is north, but subtracted if it is south, and it be- 
comes, or there is left, the semidiurnal arc of the aforesaid planet or point in the caelum. With this said, 
Naibod's procedure for directing the significator anywhere between the angles follows. 
First. Find the altitude of the pole above the circle of position of the significator according to the 20th 
Problem of Regiomontanus. 
Second. Take the semidiurnal arc of the significator at that elevation, and add it to the significator's right 
ascension if it is in the descending half of the caelum, or subtract it from the right ascension if it is in the as- 
cending half; and in either case the result is the RAMC with respect to the given circle of position. 
Third. Take the distance of the promittor in its own location from that RAMC; this is called the primary 
distance. 
37 These two excuses are beside the point. The discrepancy is not due to lack of precision nor to the lack of an auxiliary ta- 
ble, but rather to the difference in method—Placidus vs. Regiomontanus. 
38 Ptolemy was not confused, since his second way of making the calculation gives the same result as his first way. 
39 With this statement Morin joins their ranks, as he mistakenly assumes that the method of Regiomontanus is in accord 
with "the intention of Ptolemy," which it isn't. But, having followed Regiomontanus up a blind alley, he proceeds to defend 
vigorously their joint mistake, 
40 Actually, Naibod was so enchanted with Regiomontanus's method that he twisted Ptolemy's words around in an effort 
to provide Ptolemaic authorization for Regiomontanus. 
26 

===== PAGE 38 =====

Fourth. Take the semidiurnal arc of the promittor also for the elevation of the pole above the aforesaid 
circle of position; and this is called the secondary distance of the promittor from that same Midheaven. 
Fifth. Compare both of these distances of the promittor; then, if the significator is in the ascending half of 
the caelum at the time of the geniture, take the secondary distance away from the primary distance; but on 
the contrary, subtract the latter from the former if the significator is in the descending half, i.e., the preced- 
ing is always taken from the following, and [the difference] in either case is the arc of direction. As, in the 
example above, the altitude of the pole above the circle of position of the significator is 23° 12'. 
Its semidiurnal arc in the same circle is 90°. 
The RAMC to which the circle of position is referred is 90°. The RA of the promittor is 
The promittor's distance in its own location from that Midheaven—the primary distance—is 32° 12'. 
Its declination is 20° 12' north. 
Its ascensional difference in the circle of position of the significator is 9o04', which, with the addition of 
a quadrant or 90° (because it is north), makes 99o04' for the semidiurnal arc of the promittor in its own loca- 
tion or in the circle of the significator, which arc is the secondary distance of the promittor from the same 
abovesaid Midheaven, And because both distances are in the same half of the caelum, with respect to the 
Midheaven itself, the primary or lesser distance of 32° 12' is taken away from the secondary or greater dis- 
tance of 99o04'. And there will remain 66° 52' for the arc of direction, exactly as above. 
Moreover, Maginus, a man of the utmost skill in abbreviating calculations (who, in his book on the legiti- 
mate use of astrology in medicine, has communicated to us this statement of Naibod's, excerpted from his 
Commentary on the Quadripartite of Ptolemy, which has not yet been published), has thought out a very 
similar method of directing for significators between the angles in Canon 45 of his own Tables of Direc- 
tions, and it is this: 
First. Find, as above, the altitude of the pole above the circle of position of the significator. 
Second. From the RAMC of the figure, which is 45031', and the right ascension (RA) of the promittor, 
which is 57048', he takes the primary distance of the promittor in its own location from the same 
Midheaven, which is 12° 17', 
Third. He takes the secondary distance of the same promittor from the same Midheaven when it is under- 
stood to be transferred to the circle or the location of the significator, which distance is found to be 54036'.41 
Fourth. Since the significator and the promittor are in different halves of the caelum, he adds both dis- 
tances, and they make 66053', as was given from the other method above. But if the promittor and the 
significator had been in the same half of the caelum, the smaller distance would have been taken away from 
the greater to get the arc of direction. Moreover, the secondary distance is taken thus by Maginus without the 
semidiurnal arc from the table of positions for the latitude of the place of the figure. Since, having taken the 
declination of the promittor at the side of the table, and having taken the pole of the circle of position of the 
significator in the heading, he will have that distance in the common angle. And this way is easy and expedi- 
tious. 
Therefore, these three modes agree with each other exactly, and they produce the same result. Whoever 
deviates from these is going to be considered wrong. And consequently, there are astrologers of no small 
4) This number is obtained by adding the ascensional difference of the promittor (0 Gemini) under the pole of the 
significator (0 Aries) to the meridian distance of the significator. 
27 

===== PAGE 39 =====

reputation who are deceived in regard to the doctrine of directing promittors to significators that are not 
placed on the angles of the figure. And this is because they have either disregarded the latitudes of the 
significator and the promittor in directing, the omission of which causes error in the remainder of the calcu- 
lation, or, not well comprehending the intention of Ptolemy with regard to the single general mode of direct- 
ing, in the calculations of the example explained by him, which do not correspond to that single mode, have 
entangled themselves in various ways. Among whom are counted Cardan, who understood neither Ptolemy 
nor Regiomontanus on this doctrine, as Naibod proves in the place cited above;42 then Origanus, who, as is 
apparent in the figure he gives in Part 2, p. 394, also, against his own opinion, wants the difference in RA be- 
tween the significator and promittor to be the arc of direction, which, by a lengthy and greatly confused cal- 
culation not agreeing with the figure, he found to be 30o15', although in fact this difference is 43044', and 
the true arc of direction from Regiomontanus's tables is only 25°, which difference of some 5° from the 
abovesaid arc of 30° 15' is altogether intolerable. We omit other astrologers of lesser fame.43 
But now we should give this procedure for converse directions. Let the Part of Fortune or a retrograde 
planet be directed conversely, so that it may be known how far this direction extends in any year after birth. 
From the right ascension of the significator or the terminus to be directed take away the years elapsed from 
birth up to the the year [in question], converted into degrees of the equator, and find the distance of the re- 
mainder from the Midheaven or imun caeli, according as the same remainder falls above or below the earth 
(which the oblique ascension of the Ascendant will indicate), with which distance and the declination of the 
terminus itself above or below according to the location of the remainder, take the circle of position. Having 
taken the oblique ascension or descension of the terminus under the pole of that circle of position, according 
as the abovesaid remainder will fall into the oriental or occidental part of the caelum, and from this having 
subtracted the elapsed years, the arc of the ecliptic that corresponds to this remainder in the table of ascen- 
sions of the abovesaid pole will be the place of the direction by oblique ascension or descension. 
For example, let Jupiter be in 27 Virgo 10 retrograde with 1035' north latitude to be directed conversely, 
and let the years elapsed from birth and converted be 30o26'. Subtract 30o26' from the right ascension of Ju- 
piter 178o0l'; there will remain 147035'. And this subtracted from the RAMC, which is calculated as 
148039', will leave lo04' for the distance of the remainder from the Midheaven, which remainder will be 
above the earth in the occidental part of the caelum. With this distance and with the declination of Jupiter 
2036' north, take the altitude of the pole above the circle of position in the table of positions for the latitude 
of the place, which is 49°, and the altitude of the pole will be 1°. Therefore, since the remainder is in the oc- 
cidental part, take in the table of oblique ascensions for the latitude of 10 the oblique ascension of the oppo- 
sition of Jupiter, which is 357049'. Then subtract 180°, and there will remain the orbital descension of 
Jupiter 177049'. From which again take away 30o26' for the years elapsed, and there will remain 147023'. 
By adding 180° to this last figure, it will become 327023which is the right ascension of about 25 Aquarius. 
Therefore, the converse direction of Jupiter is in about 25 Leo. This is in the Heart of the Lion,44 having sup- 
posed the year of the nativity to be 1625 45 
Finally, it must be noted that since the true method of directing depends upon the same fundamentals as 
42 This statement is false, as mentioned in the preceding notes. See the pertinent sections of Cardan's Commentary on the 
Quadripartite, Book III. 
43 Perhaps a slap at Placidus. 
44 The fixed star Regulus in about 24 Leo 36. 
45 This discussion seems to be based upon an actual horoscope. According to Morin's version of The Rudolphine Tables, 
Jupiter would have been in the specified position on the evening of 5 March 1625. The time from the RAMC is then 10:59 
LMT. Recalculation shows that none of the numbers are precise. The altitude of the pole above Jupiter's circle of position is 
lo10N instead of Io00N. The orbital ascension of the opposition is 358o04N (vs. 357049N), etc. 
28 

===== PAGE 40 =====

does the true method of constructing the celestial figure, namely circles of position drawn through the inter- 
sections of the horizon and the meridian; hence, let it be [noted] that the true method of directing has a place 
for the whole globe of the earth, with the exception of those two points on the earth which are placed exactly 
at the poles of the equator, where there is no meridian, and no intersection of the equator and the horizon, but 
where in fact they coincide. For which, see the universal method of dividing the caelum into astrological 
houses that we have given in Book 17, Sections 2 and 3.46 
46 The so-called Morinus system. 
29 

===== PAGE 41 =====

Section II 
The Latitude of Significators and Promittors in Directions. 
Chapter I. Whether it is Right to use the Latitude as well as the Longitude of 
Significators and Promisors in Directions. 
Junctinus, in his Commentary on the Quadripartite, Book 3, Chapter 12, p. 381 ff., exhibits a jumble of 
methods of directing from the older users, contrary to themselves, which display alike confusion in ability, 
since it is sufficiently plain per se that nothing is disproved by him, nor is it shown which of these methods is 
truer. Moreover, he does not have a procedure for using the planetary latitudes in any of these methods, but 
on the contrary he teaches how they should be projected by equal degrees in the ecliptic without latitude, ac- 
cording to Ptolemy, Quadripartite. Book 1, the last chapter, against which and against its commentator. 
Cardan, we have argued in Book 16, Section 1, Chapter 6. And in Chapter 8 we have said, against Origanus 
and Regiomontanus, that planets having latitude project their aspects into the same circle in which they have 
their latitude. And in Chapter 9 we showed what circle that is. 
Moreover, that in directions not only should the longitudes of the signiflcator and the promittor be used, 
but also their latitudes, may be proved thus. For the circle of position ought to pass through the true place of 
the signiflcator, since it is the true position of that place, which is not determined in the caelum simply by the 
longitude of the signiflcator. Otherwise, the true places of two planets placed in the same circle of latitude 
would be the same, even though one was in the northern part of the caelum with respect to the ecliptic and 
the other was in the southern part, which is utterly absurd to suppose. Therefore, both the latitude and the 
longitude of the signiflcator must be used. 
Moreover, it may [also] be proved about the promittor. For whether a promittor is a planet or an as- 
pect, it is certain that its true place in directions is conceived to be transferred to the circle of position of 
the signiflcator. But that place is designated in the caelum not only by the longitude of the promittor it- 
self, but also by its latitude, if it has any, as was said above. Therefore, in bringing the promittor to the 
circle of the signiflcator, the longitude and the latitude of the promittor must be taken into account. Be- 
sides, as Cardan and the others will have it, if the signiflcator and the promittor differ very much from 
each other in latitude, one in the south and one in the north, either little or no effect will be forthcoming 
from the direction. 
Someone will object: The ecliptical places of planets having latitude are very often efficacious in direc- 
tions. Which can be proved, not only from [the testimony of] many of the ancients, who had no [special] 
procedure for [using] the latitude in directions, but also from experience itself. And we have also experi- 
enced this now and then, with planets as well as with their aspects, and especially with the square. There- 
fore, either the latitude should be omitted, or it should be admitted that the way of directing is twofold, 
namely with latitude and without latitude; not of course with equal degrees, which we have rejected above, 
but with the ascensions of the ecliptical place of the promittor to the circle of position of the ecliptic place of 
the signiflcator. 
I reply. It is already sufficiently plain from Book 16, Section 1, Chapter 6, and from Section 1, Chapter 8 
of the present book that Ptolemy and the rest of the ancients erred in omitting the latitude in directions. But 
as for experience, it must be said that when a planet or its aspect is in any sign, this is determined, since it is 
such a sign. Whence, the position of the Moon in Capricorn is said to be unfavorable because Capricorn is 
inimical to the Moon and its exile as has already been said elsewhere. Moreover, the ecliptic is the course or 
line of march most efficacious for [planetary] influence, as appeals from the fact that the closer the planets 
31 

===== PAGE 42 =====

are to the ecliptic, the more efficacious they are, and they are most efficacious of all in the ecliptic itself. 
Therefore, it is no wonder that after the point of the sign in which the true place of the Moon falls beyond 
the ecliptic, the point of its longitude in the ecliptic is more strongly determined to the nature of the Moon 
than the rest of the points of that same sign, since the ecliptic is the Sun's path, to which all the rest of the 
planets are subordinated in some manner, both with respect to their own motion and to their influences. 
But if that point on the ecliptic possesses the lunar virtue on account of the true place of the Moon beyond 
the ecliptic, it follows that the true place itself is of still greater virtue. For because "every single thing is 
such, and that is more," by an axiom of the philosophers.47 Therefore, directions with latitude will always 
be more efficacious than directions without latitude, and consequently more certain; if, however, an an- 
nual revolution does coincide with a direction without latitude, by no means should the effect of the direc- 
tion be rashly predicted from it. And consequently, since the direction without latitude will almost always 
differ in time from a direction with latitude, if the effect shall have begun with the direction which pre- 
ceded in time, it will perhaps last until the (time of the] following [direction], especially if the following 
[direction] shall have been one with latitude, by the time of which the effect will also be extended; or, the 
effect will be perfected as it were by the more efficacious [direction], or at least it will be reinforced. Nev- 
ertheless, it can happen that a direction without latitude can produce an effect, and the [same] direction 
with latitude can produce another effect; therefore, each of them should always be considered, so that it 
can be compared with the solar revolution, for the one that agrees with the revolution will produce its ef- 
fect. And these things may be said not only of the bodies of the planets, but also of their aspects, for the 
logic applies equally in both cases; but the direction with latitude, if there is one, is always more to be trusted 
than the one without latitude. And the joint effect will happen more certainly, the less the difference in time 
between them shall have been.48 
Chapter 2. How the Aspects of the Planets may be Corrected for Directions 
both with Longitude and with Latitude. 
Although the places of the planets and the aspects can be referred to the equator, and can be defined in the 
caelum by their right ascensions and declinations; yet, all astronomers, led by the astrologers, have referred 
them to the ecliptic and designated them in the caelum by their longitudes and latitudes; because of course 
the ecliptic claims the nilership of the planets in the signs of the zodiac, from which astrologers judge the ef- 
fects of the stars, and by which the influential force of the aspects is measured.49 
Moreover, in Book 16, Section I, Chapters 6-8, we have reported the opinions of Ptolemy, Cardan, 
Bianchini, Schoner, Regiomontanus, Origanus, and Algol50 about the celestial circle in which the aspects of 
the planets having latitude must be conceived; then, about their correction when they are referred to the 
ecliptic; and we rejected those opinions, and set forth our own in Chapter 9, declaring that the aspects of any 
planet are conceived to be in that great circle, which from its appearance in the caelum deviates least from 
47 Unidentified. 
48 Morin says repeatedly that primary directions must be calculated in mundo to be valid. Here, he somewhat grudgingly 
allows the use of zodiacal primaries, but only as an extension in time of the corresponding mundane primaries. 
49 Astronomical ephemerides continued to give the longitude and latitude of the celestial bodies until the early 19th cen- 
tury, when, to facilitate the comparison of theory with observations, they switched to right ascension and declination, with 
the exception of the Sun and Moon, which they continued to give both ways. Thereafter, astrologers were obliged to trans- 
form the coordinates in the national ephemerides or else calculate their own ephemerides. 
50 Johann Schoner (1477-1547). German mathematician, astronomer, and astrologer, Giovanni Bianchini (15th cent.), 
Italian mathematician and astronomer; Andrea Argoli (1570-1651 ?), Italian astrologer. 
32 

===== PAGE 43 =====

the path of the planet, and which we have called the circle of aspects and we have demonstrated the 
method geometrically, by means of which these aspects may be referred by longitude to the ecliptic with 
their own latitude. Which, along with some other things of the old [astrologers], we have combined after 
long and repeated experience; and we have seen our [theory] excel all the rest both in reason and in experi- 
ence itself, and to agree more accurately with the observed accidents of the natives. Now we assert that the 
aspects of the planets must be corrected for [use in] directions according to that same [theory], i.e., they 
must be reduced by it to the ecliptic by calculation of a longitude conformable with the latitude. 
Chapter 3. In which a Table of Correction of Aspects of the Planets for 
Directions that we have Constructed is Set Forth and Explained. 
We have selected this table of aspects from the foundation that is established in Book 16, Section I, 
Chapter 9. And for its construction and arrangement three things must be known in advance: viz., the longi- 
tude and latitude of the planet at the given time, with the maximum northern or southern latitude which the 
planet itself can attain, from the calculation of the more correct ephemerides, according as with respect to 
the ecliptic it is in the northern or southern part of the world; which maximum latitude is the inclination of 
the circle of aspects to the ecliptic. From which is first discovered the true place of the node in which that cir- 
cle itself and the ecliptic intersect, and then the true longitudes and latitudes of the single arcs of that circle, 
counted from the node, are found under that same inclination, as will be explained below. Moreover, in 
making the table we have used only the inclination of that same circle supplied by the astronomers for each 
planet and the individual arcs of the same circle by degrees, as is done for the table of declination of the de- 
grees of the ecliptic. 
Explanation of the Table 
At the top of the table are placed the degrees of inclination to the ecliptic of the circle of aspects for the in- 
dividual planets Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, and the Moon from 1° to 8°, And in the first column 
on the left are put the degrees of the arcs of that same circle (which we designate by the name excentric), be- 
ginning from the node nearest to the planet. And in the space of the second column are put the latitudes of 
the several degrees of each arc corresponding to the inclination of 1° at the top of the column. And in the 
third column beside the groups of five degrees of the excentric are put the equation of the arcs of the ecliptic 
that are related to the excentric arcs, i.e., the arcs beginning from the same node into which the circle of lati- 
tude falls. And it is this same equation by which the excentric arc or the arc of the circle of aspects is greater 
or lesser than the corresponding ecliptical arc. And in fact this equation increases from the node to 45°, then 
similarly it decreases down to 90°. But under the inclination of 1° is put only 0 for the equation because it 
does not amount to 1 minute of arc. And the arrangement is the same for the other columns of the inclination 
or maximum latitude of 2,3,4, 5,6, 7, and 8° placed at the top [of the table].52 
51 This is approximately the great circle on the caelum on which the planet appears to be moving at the time for which the 
chart is drawn. But see the reference mentioned for an extended discussion of the concept. 
52 The table is actually twofold. First, it is a table of latitude as a function of the inclination of what Morin calls the 
excentric of the planet to the ecliptic and the distance of the planet from the node of the excentric on the ecliptic, measured in 
the plane of the excentric. The inclination, i, is given in integer degrees at the top of the table and the arc, Exc, (Planet minus 
Node), is in the left-hand column. The numbers in the columns directly beneath the inclinations are the latitudes, b, calcu- 
lated from the equation sin b = sin i sin Exc. Second, the table serves to calculate the equation that Morin uses to correct the 
length of the aspect arcs. This quantity is another function of the arc, EXc, and the inclination, i. It is in fact the difference be- 
tween the excentric arc of a planet and the planet's distance from the nearest excentric node, measured in the ecliptic. Thus, 
it is like the reduction to the ecliptic of orbital astronomy. Or, in terms more familiar to astrologers, it is analogous to the dif- 
33 

===== PAGE 44 =====

Use of the Table 
The use of this table can be one and the same for the Moon and for Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and 
Mercury. 
But for the Moon, because the ephemerides give its true longitude, latitude, and the place of its node, first 
the distance of the Moon is taken from its nearest node by subtracting the preceding place in signs, degrees, 
and minutes from the following place, so that the remainder is less than 90°. 
Secondly, that distance, which is an arc of the ecliptic, is taken in the left part of the table in the column 
headed Exc; but with the shortened Equation which corresponds to the latitude of that same planet taken 
from the same table to the right of that shortened distance; and so, through this shortened distance (which is 
the abovesaid arc of the ecliptic) and the true latitude of the Moon itself, there will be had in the first column 
on the left the corresponding arc of the excentric, namely by increasing the ecliptical arc itself by the equa- 
tion, by which it is less than the corresponding arc of the excentric. And at the top [of the table] there will 
then be given the tme inclination of the Moon's excentric to the ecliptic at that time by taking the propor- 
tional part where required, as is customary in other tables. 
But for Saturn, Jupiter, 
Mars, Venus, and Mercury, the 5 
true place of whose north nodes 
is not known at the given time, 
their distance from the nearest 
node, and through it the place 
of the node itself in the ecliptic, 
will first have to be found. 
Moreover, that distance can be 
found just from a table, but not 
without effort if the minutes are 
close to the planet's maximum 
latitude, unless the table is con- 
structed to every five or ten vJ 
minutes of the maximum lati- 
tude of the planet, or of the in- 
clination of the excentric to the 
ecliptic. And I did not want to 
undertake the labor of such a 
lengthy calculation. 
For example, in the follow- 
ing figure, let there be given 
Mars at B with longitude or 
true place 24°16'Leo and lati- 
tude ED 1044' north ascending, 1S4 
which is [its position] on 4 No- 
vember 1648 from the Figure 1 
KC 
A U 
ference between ecliptic longitude and right ascension if the obliquity of the ecliptic is replaced by a variable inclination, i. 
Therefore, it can be calculated from the equation Eq = Exc - Ecl where tan EC1 = (cos i)(tan Exc), or more simply from Eq = 
3438' abs[-tan2(i/2) sin 2(EXC) +(l/2)tan4 (i/2) sin 4EXC], where the second term is virtually negligible. 
34 

===== PAGE 45 =====

« M as m » « «r> m o o ti -o _ 
2S8SS 
— —tSM«"»^-vv«a 
«s 
R«S?!?^ES;o <o o> 
i55Kf!K8«S arj <C 
RSSSSSSS^ 
«8SS2£2?3a8 r~ — o 
SS = 22«8fiSa 
as r- 
<o m 
Oto«r>tatON«<OasO « pitsraanmrttnan* 
RSRoS pt <*> « « 
b « 2 « as 
issasa 
BS22E2a88 
« 
aassaaaas 
«no$t-»o>—Man 
O O 
tfcaOftO'OO — — 
O O 
ra«smpt**inin«« ar>«r>«r>irttftaftar>ir»ir>*r> 
8SS3SS$&SS 
— «nt-0*N5'OaSO — ananananv^-^^arjarv 
as « 
•DCre«SX!®S® — P« 
« «ri 
S5:?5^??^RE 
SSSBtafi^Manan 
«n «n 
***«ir>«ar>iftioir» 
« — 
^SaSKSBRSS 
g>a^*«f»«f»aA«*«.p-as •r>«naoif»if»war>«r>af>«r> 
o O 
jepvr^r-asaswo^oo <r>«r>«r)«n«r>^<nf)00 
SPPRSicstsa 
«o «•> o 
csEassaaass manartwianartanarjarj oo as * « O 
5RSRRRS;S:888 i- «n ra o 
in<o>or»aeo>o>A»S9 irtif>»>«r>*v«r>«r>«r>an®0 
« - O 
SSD:2SS£2S58SR mmmmoartartanooo m « - © 
<Or^asaB»o>eoooo •ritninwimiriooooo * —■ — o 
p-asasototototoooo irtartananaDtnanSSSS m o o 0 
asas»o<0«eeQOOO ananantnanSoBSCo ra o o o 
88888888888 
SSSSSSBSS8 IE 
b o « * 
i=asa?aR82 
o ra »»> 
b«*)»in<-<as^-o<Ori p»-—p|«»>«nv««no 
o - ra 
|22a8SS«!rS 
o — — 
|S2tS8R??P:9 
o •-■ 
|iss2£2aaa5 
O O 
gS88222C:£a 
|S8SSSSS£= 
-"Manarao^f-asOiO 
s?§^RS2a?JP;'? ra « as 
S8R!??«8225 ra an <o 
8«n — r~«no>ir) — aor? — rara«n«nafa-i«no ra 
S?g82 = 88SS? 
ra an 
«SXRg8=22a 
— ra 
ap» — Sr~oan<oo<s an*-v*an*>ar>ar>0 
13 
14 
16 
17 
RSS28aa^RS an *■ o — 
8282282^82 an ra 2 
•—^an—asin — ao^ — ananva-ia-io — —raan an 
^ as 
p««nra«ra®'*o»y> — an^ananoo — — raan * Os Os 
»an—r»ana6ao*ep ©-•raraanan^-anino an 
r-raP-raP-faf-Pt O — — raraJnan^-varj 
an «o so P- 
aornr^rap-a^f^-- « m an o O — — ra ra an ra an * 
anO^-atacanr-. — an®.^- anan**ananOO&-" an ▼ 'W 
26 30 
34 
38 2 41 46 
49 53 
56 
2 200 
SSS228SSS2 
ra ra 
sssssaaaas 
- - 
anmr-ff1—•raanoapo ♦ * vafmanananano 
O O 
8S8S8 = 222E; 
o o 
aaaaassaas — p»an**an«p»aoOv t9> <4> fi <*1 <*> 
raafJSSSraSr!® anManananmPaman# 
saas? 
an 
« ra r- fn » an * »r> K 
o> 
B g 2 S 52 
» — * r- o an an 
ra 
R85SS ra 
35 

===== PAGE 46 =====

Rudolphine Tables, close to the Ephemerides of Durret53 which are very often erroneous; moreover, let the 
maximum northerly latitude to which Mars arrives on 11 February 1649 be 4° 15'. Then let it be found by the 
two columns of maximum latitude 4° and 5° that the true latitude of 1044' only agrees with an excentric arc 
of 24o02' which lies between 24° and 25°; which proves the table to be true and in agreement with trigono- 
metric calculation. But this cannot be found from the top row [of figures] of this table constructed only to in- 
teger degrees of the maximum latitude. Just as when the altitude of the pole having been given in degrees 
and minutes, along with the distance of the planet from the meridian, its declination cannot be found to de- 
grees and minutes from the top row [of figures] of a table of positions. 
Moreover, since the principal task of this art consists of finding the arc of the excentric exactly, if a table 
constructed to [intervals of] 5 or 10 [minutes of arc] of the maximum latitude of the planets is lacking, I rec- 
ommend that this same arc, i.e., the distance of the true place of Mars in the ecliptic from the node that is 
nearer at the time, be found as is shown in Book 16, Chapter 9. For quickerthan the word this will be done to 
the desired precision, in fact merely by saying "as the tangent of the maximum latitude of Mars 4° 15' is to 
the tangent of its true latitude 1044', so the whole sine is to the sine of 24o02'," which is the desired distance. 
And because the greatest latitude was taken, it follows the true place of Mars. 
Therefore, from that same place of Mars 24016' Leo the distance of24o02' is taken away, and 0o14' Leo 
is left for point A, which is the true apparent north node of Mars. But now this distance 24o02' of Mars 
from its node, which is the ecliptical arc AE, is reduced to the excentric arc by the addition of the corre- 
sponding equation, which is placed beside 24° of the excentric arc under the columns of maximum lati- 
tude 4° and 5°. And the value of this equation is a little more than 3', but not 4'. Therefore, having added 
3' to 24o02', it makes 24o05/ for the excentric arc AD, corresponding to the ecliptical arc AE, i.e., begin- 
ning from the same node, for the ecliptical arc is less than the corresponding excentric arc by [the amount 
of] that equation. Now the rest is very easy by the table. So, therefore, having first found the correspond- 
ing excentric arc for the Moon or Mars, all of the aspects must be counted from the derived terminus in the 
excentric [circle] itself according to the appropriate ratios, viz, by giving 30° of the excentric to the 
dodectile,54 60° to the sextile, 90° to the square, etc. And the final termini of the several [aspects] must be 
related to the node, either following or preceding, which is nearest to them, so that the increase or de- 
crease of it will be apparent from them. So, therefore, the corresponding equation of the increase or de- 
crease of it will be given in the table, always to be subtracted in coequating for the corresponding arc of 
the ecliptic, and then to be referred to the node nearest to [the aspect] itself by addition or subtraction, so 
that the true place in the ecliptic of the aspect itself, with its own latitude, may be had, to be taken [from 
the column to the right of] the column under (he maximum latitude of the planet, from which the right as- 
cension or oblique ascension of the aspect itself will be given in the tables of ascensions. And so, having 
found the sinister semisextile, sextile, square, trine, and quincunx aspects, the dexter aspects will be in the 
diametrically opposed longitudes, retaining the same latitudes but changing their designation,55 as is said 
in Book 16, Section 1, Chapter 9.56 And therefore, with the [places of the] sinister [aspects] given in longi- 
tude and latitude, the [places of the] dexter [aspects], which are individually opposite them, are also 
53 Noel Durret (1590-C.1650), Novae motuum caelestium Ephemerides Richelianae annorum 15, ah anno 1637 
incipientes. (New Richelian Ephemerides of Celestial Motions for 15 Years, Beginning with the Year 1637] (Paris, 1641). 
Owen Gingerich & Barbara Welther, Planetary, Lunar, and Solar Positions A.D. 1650-1805 (Philadelphia, 1983). p. xv, say 
that Durret used his own tables, which, like Morin's, were based upon Kepler's Rudolphine Tables. 
54 That is, the semisextile. 
55 He means the latitudes are to be reversed, north for south, or vice versa. Also, the sinister and dexter aspects are to be 
taken in supplementary pairs: the sinister semisextile + 180° = the dexter quincunx, the sinister sextile + 180° = the dexter 
trine, etc. 
56 See Appendix 2, which contains a translation of the method given in that place. 
36 

===== PAGE 47 =====

known; or else, given the two semisextiles, the two sextiles, and one of the squares, the rest are given as their 
opposites. 
Example 
Moreover, so that the use of this table maybe more evident, we shall find all of the aspects for Mars, both 
in the excentric or circle of aspects which we have explained, and also in the ecliptic, each with its appropri- 
ate latitude. Since therefore Mars is at point D, distant from A by 24o05', 30° is added to it for the sinister 
semisextile, and it makes 54o05'. This number being entered in column Exc, [the columns] beneath maxi- 
mum latitude 4° 15' will give 3026' north ascending latitude for that aspect, with an equation of 4'. Sub- 
tracting the latter from 54o05' or 1 sign 24o05,, the remainder will be 54o0r or 1 sign 24o0r for the 
corresponding arc of the ecliptic. By adding to this the place of the node A, 4 signs 0o14', it will become 5 
signs 24° 15' for the longitude of the aspect or 24° 15' Virgo, with the abovesaid north latitude of3026'. Sim- 
ilarly, to the abovesaid distance of Mars, 24o05', 60° are added for the sinister sextile; it makes 84o05' for 
the sinister sextile. Which number, found in column Exc will give 4° 14' [in the columns] under maximum 
latitude 4C'15' for the north ascending latitude of this aspect, with an equation of 1Subtracting the latter 
from 84o05, will leave 84° 04' or 2 signs 24o04' for the corresponding arc of the ecliptic. By adding to this 
the place of the node A, 4 signs 0° 14', it will become 6 signs 24° 18' for the longitude of this aspect or 24° 18' 
Libra. Again, to the abovesaid distance of Mars, 24o05', 90° are added for the sinister square; it makes 
114o05'. Which, having been subtracted from the semicircle ABF or 180°, will leave 65055' for FI. Which 
number, found in column EXc, will give 3°53' [in the columns] under maximum latitude 4° 15' for the north 
descending latitude of that aspect, with an equation of 3'. Subtracting the latter from 65055' will leave 
65052' for the arc of the ecliptic corresponding to FK, i.e., 2 signs 5052'. By subtracting this from the place 
of the south node F, 10 signs 0° 14', there is left 7 signs 24° 22' or 24° 22' Scorpio for the longitude of this as- 
pect. In addition, since the place of the square in the excentric is I, and FI is 65055' from what has been said 
about the square, therefore 30° are taken away from FI (which amounts to adding 30° to I itself for the sinis- 
ter trine aspect), and the remainder will be 35055' for FQ. Which number, found in column Exc will give 
2o30' [in the columns] under maximum latitude 4°! 5' for the north descending latitude of this trine aspect, 
with an equation of 4'. By subtracting this from 35055', there will remain 35051' for the arc of the ecliptic 
corresponding to FK,i.e., 1 sign 5051'. By subtracting this from the place of the south node F, 10 signs 
0° 14', there will remain 8 signs 24023' for the longitude of this trine aspect, with its abovesaid latitude RQ. 
And so with the quincunx and any other one of the aspects mentioned above. 
Experience 
And the first notable experience of correcting aspects in this fashion was made by me in the nativity of 
the Queen of Poland, Marie Louise of Gonzaga,57 whose endowments of body, mental ability, and spirit, su- 
perior to any praise, along with certain accidents of her life, merit a volume to themselves. For in the year 
1645, on the 5th of November, at noon, she was married at Paris to Vladislav IV, King of Poland,58 who, 
struck by the fame of her merits, wanted to many her. For this most famous and outstanding accident, the 
wiser astrologers found no celestial cause, which having been adopted, other more outstanding accidents of 
life could be ascribed to genuine stellar causes. For when on 12 October 1626 she had fallen into a very 
grave sickness at Paris, in which she was also despaired of by the Paris physicians and handed over to an em- 
piric physician, who restored her from a dying condition to the best of health by the use of antimony, of 
57 She was the daughter of Charles I Gonzaga (1580-1637), Duke of Mantua. 
58 Vladislav IV (or VII) (1595-1648) reigned 1632-1648. He was the son of Sigismund III by his first wife Anne of Aus- 
tria. Vladislav's first wife was Renata Cecilia of Austria (d.1644). 
37 

===== PAGE 48 =====

course, the astrologers conjectured that such an accident could only be referred to a direction of the Ascen- 
dant as the primary significator of life to the dexter square of the Moon badly disposed in the 4th house, with 
her exaltation of power in the 8th, and next applying to the trine of Mars ruler of the 8th in the 12th; and this 
was the true opinion of the wise men based on the given hour of the nativity. But because they took the 
square of the Moon in the common way in the ecliptic, as [recommended by] Bianchini and Regiomontanus, 
that sublime marriage with royal dignity had no celestial cause at its own time, which in this science seemed 
utterly absurd because of the importance of the accident, so that I need say nothing about the other lesser ac- 
cidents passed through in the course of her life. I, therefore, having thought out then this correction of the 
time of aspects, found the dexter square of the Moon to be in 10° 11' Libra with latitude 4° 38' north, whose 
oblique ascension at the place of the figure is 190o34'.59 From which, having subtracted 14056' for the time 
of the abovesaid sickness accord- 
ing to Naibod's table, there re- OAU 
mained 175038' for the oblique ^ 
ascension of the Ascendant. From 
which, having subtracted 90°, 
there remained 85038' for the 
RAMC. To which, if 33042' are 
added for the time from birth to 
the day of marriage, it makes 
119o20'. Moreover, the right as- § 
cension of Venus is 119° 14 And ^ 
consequently marriage and royal c5 
dignity happened from the direc- 
tion of the Midheaven, the pri- 
mary significator of actions and 
dignities, to Venus ruler of the 1st 
in the 10th, sextile the Ascendant; 
and Venus is found in the domicile 
of the Moon and the exaltation of 
Jupiter ruler of the 7th, in which ^ ^ 
Venus also is strong by exaltation. ^ 
And this is the cause of both acci- .. ... . , Nevers, Nivernais Lai. 470N dents—at once elegant and genu- I8 Augus( }6JJi l9:51 ATtrue (20:03 estimated) 
ine* From the Rudolphine Tables 
Moreover, trusting in the 
aforesaid rectification, the noble, distinguished in virtue, and most skilled in celestial sciences, Nicolas, 
Lord of La Mothe,61 Chamberlain of the Most Serene Prince Gaston, Duke of Orleans,62 whom I had taken 
47* 
Lat. 
h 1S5I 
2f0N35 
cfONSS 
9 0NO4 
9 0N54 
D 1S56 
59 Assuming an inclination of 5° for the Moon's orbit, calculation from Morin's tables would seem to give 10 Lib 17 or 
perhaps 10 Lib 15 (depending on the value chosen for the "equation"), rather than the 10 Lib 11 he derived for the Moon's 
dexter square. The latitude 3N48, however, appears to be correct. This discrepancy is small, but his figure for the OA is fur- 
ther off. I calculate 190o56' (using his coordinates of the square). 
60 The discrepancy in RAMCs rectified from these two events is only 6' by Morin's calculations. However, the recalcu- 
lation widens this to 28' or more. 
61 Nicolas Goulas (1603-1683), Lord of La Mothe, retired to his chateau after the death of the Duke of Orleans in 1660. 
62 Prince Gaston of Bourbon (1608-1660). the younger brother of Louis XIII. He intrigued against Louis and particularly 
against Cardinal Richelieu. 
38 

===== PAGE 49 =====

as my only student in Paris up until that time, dared to write, while Vladislav was still alive, to Lord Des 
Noyers, his own personal friend, the private secretary of that Queen, very active in old astrology, that within 
a short time the Queen would be married to another King, because Jupiter ruler of the 7th and Mercury ruler 
of the Ascendant and the Midheaven, partilely conjoined in the 11th, would be directed in the year 1649 to 
Mars ruler of the 7th, with the direction of the Ascendant to the sextile of the Sun following closely, which is 
exalted in [the sign of] the 7th and is powerful in the 11th in its own domicile and partilely conjoined to the 
royal fixed star Cor Leonis,63 but that she would suffer from a difficult sickness on account of Mars ruler of 
the 8th in the 12th. And so it happened, for with Vladislav dead in 1648, and she herself attacked by a long 
and difficult sickness, after having recovered her health this heroine was married to Casimir,64 the brother of 
Vladislav, who had been elected King of Poland, and in whom her beauty and virtues had kindled a chaste 
love. The day of the wedding was 30 May 1649. From which prediction Goulas, Lord of La Motte, got out- 
standing praise along with the admiration of the Queen herself and an honorarium worthy of that Queen. 
And from this it is demonstrated not only that this nativity is outstandingly rectified, but also that the correc- 
tion to the Moon's square made by us is absolutely true. And it is more amply confirmed by the fact that in 
the year 1629 Gaston of Bourbon, now the Duke of Orleans, had ardently desired to join himself in matri- 
mony with the Princess Marie, and this was no light rumor and appearance. And then the Ascendant was 
precisely directed to the sextile of Jupiter ruler of the cusp of the 7th and the sextile of Mercury ruler of the 
Midheaven, but Marie de Medici the Queen Mother and Cardinal Richelieu obstructed that marriage with as 
much authority as they could excercise. I had a second experience and one even more illustrious at the birth 
of the Most Christian King Louis XIV, which, by the altitude of the Sun taken by astrolabe at Saint Germain, 
occurred at 23:15 PM of 4 September 1638. And in the figure erected for this moment, previously published 
along with a prognostication addressed to Cardinal Richelieu; the RAMC is 152047', and consequently the 
oblique ascension of the Ascendant is 242047/. And from this figure which we have corrected as will be said 
below, the birth took place at 23:11, at which time the horoscope was such as is shown below. So in fact he 
suffered two sicknesses, namely a fever on 9 March 1644, which was followed on the 12th day by erysipelas 
in the face. Then, an abundant and deadly outbreak of pustules with danger to his life, which began on 11 
November 1647 with a swelling up of blood, erupting on the 13 th.65 Moreover, Jupiter ruler of the 1 st in the 
12th, which is [the house] of sicknesses, is besieged by the square of Saturn and [the square] of the Moon 
ruler of the 8th, and the Moon is injured by the opposition of Saturn; consequently, these two sicknesses 
arose from directions of the Ascendant, the primary significator of life, then of Jupiter ruler of the 1 st,66 to 
the sinister square of the Moon [falling] in the 12th, of which the former is converse and the latter is direct. 
For, having put down the estimate time of the nativity, no other genuine directions occur by which these 
sicknesses might be caused. But unless the square of the Moon is corrected by longitude and latitude, the 
pustules, which constituted the more dangerous of the sicknesses of the nature of Saturn, will have no cause, 
and the figure of the nativity cannot be rectified by these sicknesses. But in fact it can be done if that square 
is corrected according to our method. So, therefore, this figure must be rectified in accordance with [the 
method explained in] Book 18, Section 3, Chapter 6. 
63 Regulus, in about 24 Leo 25, is 1012' from the Sun. 
64 John II Casimir (1609-1672), son of Sigismund III by his second wife Constance of Austria, and a younger 
half-brother of Vladislav IV; he is sometimes called Casimir V. 
65 Probably an acute attack of smallpox. 
66 Mars is of course the ruler of the Scorpio Ascendant, but it is not in domicile, so Morin selects Jupiter, the dispositor of 
Mars, as the ruler. This is what he calls the secondary ruler. Cf. Book 21, Section 2, Chapter 24 (p. 56 in Baldwin's transla- 
tion). The ruler of the sign containing the ruler of the sign on the Ascendant is said to be especially significant when the ruler 
of the Ascendant is not in domicile, as in this case. (Jupiter is also co-ruler of the 1 st house because the latter part of the I st is 
in Sagittarius.) 
39 

===== PAGE 50 =====

First let the correct sinister square of the Moon be found by use of the table or the method given above. 
And it will be 5°42' Scorpio with 4° 17' south latitude; and its declination will be 17o30' south, and its right 
ascension 211054,.67 Consequently, in the figure for the estimated time the distance of this square from the 
meridian will be and the altitude of the pole above its circle of position will be 48o30'. The oblique 
ascension taken at this [polar altitude] will be 232046'. If to this is added the time of the pustules reduced to 
degrees of the equator, which is 8057',68 it will make 241^' for the oblique ascension of the Ascendant. 
But this from [the initial] hypothesis is 242047'; therefore, the distance of the square of the Moon from the 
meridian is greater than 59o07'.69 
Therefore, let it be supposed to 
be 60° 10'. And consequently the 
RAMC will be 151044',and the 
oblique ascension of the Ascen- 
dant will be 241044'. Moreover, 
the altitude of the pole above the 
circle of position of the Moon's 
square will be 48°33' and the 
oblique ascension of that same 
square in that circle will be 
232048'. If to this is added the re- 
duced time of the pustules, 8057', 
it will make 241045' for the 
oblique ascension of the Ascen- 
dant—namely, the value that 
arises from this meridian, which 
therefore is true. And conse- 
quently the figure given here is 
true, and the birth occurred at 
23:11.70 
<rt79Sl33__ 
* 
**32 
Lat. 
0S37 
0N55 
^ 3S20 
a 0S23 
ft 0N47 
Figure 3 
Moreover, this can be con- 4 September 1638, 23:11 AT true (23:15 AT estimated) 
firmed. For, with the figure stand- Z,a/i/Mfi?e 49 A 
.a- it. i c , From the RudolphineTables ing thus, the altitude of the pole 
above the circle of position of Ju- 
piter will be 47022', and Jupiter's oblique ascension will be 223023'. If the time of the pustules, 8052' as 
converted above,71 is added to this, it will make 232o20,. Moreover, the oblique ascension of the Moon's 
67 These numbers are substantially correct, but those that follow have errors of several minutes—amounting in one case 
to 14'. 
68 This is wrong. The unreduced arc of the event is 9° 11' (Sep 1638 toNov 1647), and consequently the reduced arc is 
9o03'. 
69 These numbers are all off slightly: the altitude of the pole should be 48034', the OA 232o50'. and the OA of the Ascen- 
dant 241047'. 
70 Again, recalculation gives the altitude of the pole as 48o40', the square's oblique ascension 232054 and 241051' for 
the OA Ascendant. Correcting Morin's 8057' to 9o03' would yield 24l057' for the OA Ascendant, 151057' for the RAMC, 
and a rectified birth time of 23:12. 
71 This figure is evidently a misprint, since Morin used 8057' above. However, as noted previously, it should really be 
9o03'. 
40 

===== PAGE 51 =====

corrected square taken in that circle amounts to 231°49', differing only 31' from 232o20'; and consequently 
the pustules were produced by these two directions concurring in the same year.72 Moreover, the earlier sick- 
ness occurred because of the direction of Jupiter to the square of the Moon in the ecliptic, as will be plain to 
anyone calculating from this rectified [figure] on account of what was said in Chapter 1 of this section; and 
consequently the sickness was less severe. Moreover, when in either particular or universal configurations of 
the caelwn the Moon's square, as corrected above, falls in the ecliptic itself, then the maximum effect will be 
produced by it—that is, greater than from an uncorrected square in the ecliptic,73 and greater than from a cor- 
rected square beyond the ecliptic, which must also be understood to be the case with the other aspects. 
The third experience, also manifest and evident, will be taken from my own nativity, as follows. 
In the year 1652, which I had predicted three years earlier would be a very unfortunate year, full of 
sickness and danger, as is plain from my many public writings, the Most Serene Prince Gaston of Bour- 
bon, Duke of Orleans, a man very fond of sciences—and particularly, celestial sciences, ordered me on 
the 7th of April to observe with him in the Orleans Palace the major eclipse of the Sun that would occur on 
the 8th.74 Moreover, I knew that at that time I would be endangered by sickness, as I had predicted to my 
astrological friends; but because at the end of March and [again] on the 4th of April I had purged my body 
very thoroughly by way of precaution, and thereafter I was feeling good, and it was not proper not to com- 
ply with the command of so great a prince, I therefore promised that I would do it. And so I went to Mr. 
Agarrat,75 who had prepared instruments for this observation at his own home, and informed him of the 
prince's desire, warning him to see to it that the instruments were transferred to the Orleans Palace. But 
this was done in the evening; and the next morning, having constructed a darkroom in the open air in a 
suitable place, with curtains and other necessaries, only a quarter of an hour was left before the beginning 
of the eclipse. And then, when I had advised the Most Serene Prince of the imminent beginning of the 
eclipse, he, together with his dear wife the Most Serene Princess and many important personages, entered 
the room. Mr. Agarrat closed the door and displayed an image of the Sun cleverly projected with an opti- 
cal tube onto a one-foot circle drawn on paper and divided for accurately measuring the digits of the 
eclipse. Another experienced man was taking altitudes of the Sun in the open air with a quadrant circle 
with a 3-foot radius beautifully made and accurately divided for measuring down to single minutes of a 
degree. But I was directing my attention now to the image and now to the altitude of the Sun, so that I 
might be more certain of the precision of this observation, which greatly delighted the prince and princess 
and the whole company. It was an eclipse of 10 digits 20', and it began at precisely 9:30 AM, and left off 
at precisely noon, as taken from the place of the Sun in Eichstadt's76 Ephemeris. And all the ephemerides 
and tables were considerably in error with regard to it, the causes of which and the remedies we have 
given in o\xv Astronomy Restored from the Fundamentals.11 Moreover, the most erroneous of all were the 
72 Recalculation gives the altitude of the pole as 47032' Jupiter's OA 223031the rectified OA Ascendant 232028', and 
OA of the Moon's square 232o03', and the final difference 35'. 
73 That is, a square with latitude. 
74 According to Oppolzer's Canon of Eclipses this was a total eclipse whose shadow path passed to the west of Ireland, 
across the northern tip of Scotland, and parallel to the coast of Norway. It was only partial at Paris. 
75 Antoine Agarrat, a 17th century French astronomer who was well-known in his own day. 
76 The text has Euhstadt's, but this seems to be a typographical error. Lorenz Eichstadt (1596-1660) of Danzig (now, 
Gdansk) published three volumes of ephemerides covering the years 1636-1675. See Owen Gingerich & Barbara Welther, 
Planetary, Lunar, and Solar Positions, A.D.1650-1805 (Philadelphia, 1983). If I understand Gingerich and Welther, 
Eichstadt's ephemerides were calculated from Kepler's Rudolphine Tables and constituted an extension of Kepler's own 
ephemerides (1617-1636). 
77 Morin's Astronomia jam a Jundamentis integre et exacte restitua. .. [Astronomy, now Completely and Exactly Re- 
stored from the Fundamentals...] (Paris, 1640). 
41 

===== PAGE 52 =====

Tabulae Philolaicae of Ismael Boulliau78 and also his observation made at Paris, since he attributed to the 
Sun at the end of the eclipse only 48o40' of altitude, when in fact it was accurately observed with our 
quadrant to be 48044', which difference of 4' is intolerable among masters of the art.79 And he put the end 
of the eclipse at 11:50, when in fact with the supposed altitude of the Sun 48044'. its place 19o20'55 " Aries, 
declination 7035' north, and with the altitude of the pole at Paris 48051', having observed exactly with that 
quadrant the maximum altitudes of the Sun, the resolution of the spherical triangle has the Sun not a half i , i ■ n I minute of arc distant from the meridian circle. But let us return to our subject. 
Having taken a light lunch after the eclipse, I wanted to define the beginning and end of it in hours and 
minutes by calculation, so that the [time of) the middle [of the eclipse] might be known, for which [time] the 
astrological figure had to be erected. But either from the heat of the Sun, which I endured for IVi hours with 
a bare head, or from the malign influx of that eclipse particularly [acting] against me, or rather from both 
causes, a rigor and a fever with a fierce catarrh suddenly coming upon me, forced me to retire instantly to my 
lodging, where I was sick for almost a month with such a loss of strength and with an attack of deafness, that 
until now at the end of May neither the recovery of strength nor the lessening of the deafness is noticeably 
apparent to me after the 15 th day [from the onset], although diet and medicine were duly adopted, and I fear • * 81 a worsening unless I take precautions. 
Moreover, that this ecliptical conjunction of the luminaries in addition to the heat of the Sun was the 
cause of so great a sickness for me, is plain from the fact that in my nativity I have the Sun and the Moon in 
the 12th house, which is [the house] of sicknesses, in which this eclipse occurred with its own conjunction 
injuring my Ascendant, which is 28 Aries. And in this year's revolution [of my nativity] I have the Sun and 
the Moon rulers of the 8th, which is [the house] of death, with the Moon occupying that same house with 
Saturn, whose radical partile square falls upon the Ascendant [of the revolution]; and the sickness occurred 
when the Ascendant itself by annual direction came to the opposition of Saturn, from which the deafness 
seems to have arisen. But there was no radical direction of the common sort complete at this time, although 
the direction of Mars ruler of the Ascendant to the opposition of Saturn in the 6th was impending, which will 
be completed in the year 1653,103 days from the beginning of the revolution, which also portends for me a 
dangerous sickness and many other evils. 
78 Ismael Bouillau (1605-1694), a prominent French astronomer with a reputation as a careful observer. Some of his ob- 
servations are still of value. His Philolaic Tables, based on Kepler's Rudolphine Tables, were published at Paris in 1645. 
However, Bouillau seems to have trusted his observations more than positions calculated from tables. 
79 I have calculated the longitude of the Sun and the circumstances of the eclipse at Paris using modem elements. As- 
suming the place of observation to be at 48N51 and 2E20, the LAT of first contact was 9:29 AM, maximum eclipse 10:39 
AM, and last contact 11:52 AM; the magnitude was 0.865 or 10 digits 22'48 The Sun's longitude at the last contact was 
19°]2.T, the obliquity 23029.'2, and the Sun's declination 7N31.'9. At Local Apparent Noon the Sun's altitude was 
48o40. '9, which is closer to Boulliau's 48o40' than to Morin and Agarrat's 48044'. If Agarrat's assistant actually observed 
48044', then the quadrant was misoriented by 3' of arc. But the Rudolphine Tables have a sizable error in the solar longitude 
when the Sun is in Aries, and Morin gives the Sun's longitude as 19o20.'9 and its declination as 7N35, which yields a maxi- 
mum solar altitude of48044.'3—exactly what Morin claimed they observed. 
80 I think Morin has inferred Boulliau's time of 11:50 AM by comparing his reported solar altitude of 48o40' with 
Morin's 48044'. If Morin's figure had been the true value at noon, then Boulliau's figure would in facthave corresponded to 
11:50 AM. However, see Appendix 2 for a further discussion of this eclipse. 
81 Morin was 69 years old and evidently not in the best of health. He seems to have spent part of the 2 Vi hours inside the 
camera obscura, which was hot and undoubtedly reeking with the cloying scents of perfume and sweat emanating from the 
assembled aristocrats, and the rest outside in the sun. It is also possible that some of the food he ate at lunch was spoiled. 
Some of his symptoms sound like those of heat prostration, but we would not expect the effects of that ailment alone to lin- 
ger for weeks after the event. 
42 

===== PAGE 53 =====

But in this year of 1652, precisely at the time of the sickness, the direction of the radical Sun to the 
Moon's sinister square with latitude was completed, which direction along with the eclipse was very indica- 
tive of sickness because the Sun and the Moon were in the 12th house of the radix. For from the preceding 
table that square is in 17 Gemini with lo02' north latitude,82 whose oblique ascension under the pole of the 
Sun 41° is 53o08', from which, if 345o01' is taken away from the oblique ascension of the Sun, the remain- 
der is 68°07', which is equivalent by Naibod's measure to 69 years and 41 days, which, added to the year of 
my birth 1583, gives the year 1652 A.D. with 41 days from the beginning of the revolution, leaving off on 
the 5 th of April; and the sickness began on the 8th.83 What better accuracy could be hoped for? I could offer 
here many other experiences, especially involving the Moon, but these should suffice. 
Chapter 4. Whether the Aspects of the Planets ought to be Considered in the Equator 
as well as in the Ecliptic. And what should be judged about the Direction of Aspects that 
are Distorted in the Equator bg the Long or Short Ascensions of the Signs. 
Cardan says in his Commentary on the Quadripartite, Book 3, Chapter 14, that Ptolemy conceived two 
aspects—one in the equator and the other in the zodiac—and never combined them; but in the ecliptic he 
takes the planets' aspects from a degree and minute to the same degree and minute [in another sign]; but in 
the equator he would consider the portion of the equator intercepted by the circles of position delimiting 
the arc of the ecliptic which comprised the exact aspect; and he considers it to be [the equivalent of] the 
ecliptic arc. And if both arcs are equal, the nature of the are [as it is] established in the ecliptic will not be 
varied; and it will have an effect conformable to its own nature and virtue. But if they are unequal, Cardan 
holds from Ptolemy that the nature of the aspect is altered; and the sextile of [the signs of] long ascension 
and the trine of [the signs of] short ascension are altered and converted into the nature of a square; and 
consequently the judgment about the nature and effect of the aspect ought to be judged according to the 
prevailing aspect, namely in this way: that if an arc of the equator corresponding to the arc of a trine aspect 
lying in the ecliptic comes closer to a square than to a trine aspect, it should be said to be an ecliptical trine 
degenerated to the nature and effect of a square, and similarly with the rest. And astrologers commonly 
agree with this opinion. 
Besides, except for what Cardan imposes upon Ptolemy, who does not take an arc of the equator inter- 
cepted by circles of position delimiting the exact aspect in the ecliptic, but the are of the equator rising with 
that aspect, in the circle of position of the preceding terminus of that aspect, as is made plain in Book 18, 
Section 2, Chapter 5, on the construction of the houses; this doctrine is self contradictory and seems to be 
devoid of reason. For an aspect in the ecliptic, since it is always exact according to Cardan's hypothesis, can 
never give way to an aspect less exact in the equator, especially since according to the opinion and testi- 
82 Recalculation yields 17 Gem 14 with latitude 1N01. 
83 These numbers are not very accurate. Accepting Morin's latitude of 45N25 for Villefranche, the altitude of the Sun's 
pole is 41-30', not 41 o00'. And under this pole the OA of the Moon's square is 52043the Sun's OA is 345o08', and the dif- 
ference is 67035Converted into time, this is 173 days eariier than the date Morin derived, or about 15 Oct 1651. This dis- 
crepancy arises from Morin's having rounded off the altitude of the pole to an even 41° to avoid having to interpolate 
between the 410 and 42° columns. Easier, but less accurate. And to make matters worse, the latitude of Villefranche is actu- 
ally 45N59 rather than 45N25. If the calculation were to be repeated for the true latitude of Villefranche, the pole would be 
nearly 42°, and the time of the event would be pushed even further back into 1651. On the other hand, Morin's apparent er- 
ror in determining the zodiacal position of the Moon's square would increase the arc of the event by about a quarter of a de- 
gree, and would move the calendar date forward about three months, thus offsetting some of the error arising from his use of 
the wrong latitudes. 
43 

===== PAGE 54 =====

mony and experience of all astrologers partile aspects are more efficacious than plantic aspects, and the cir- 
cle of the ecliptic surpasses the equator by far as the circle of influential powers, manifestly from the fact 
that the Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury have a more powerful influence in that point in 
which they are in their own nodes, i.e., it is the ecliptic they are nearer to and not the equator; consequently, 
the same thing should be judged about their aspects. But if an aspect in the ecliptic should be judged accord- 
ing to the nature which it is allotted in the equator as mentioned above, then it would certainly be proper to 
prefer the equator in influential powers to the ecliptic, to which the powers of the seven planets belong, on 
account of its determination at the beginning of the world, as has been mentioned elsewhere. But not to the 
equator, which has only a daily motion and those things which properly follow from that. 
Besides, the aspects of the planets are projected upon the caelum (as is customarily said) by their own in- 
dividual motion with their own path and speed, whether the planets are direct or retrograde. For when the 
Moon is moved forward by one degree by her own motion in the following direction, all her aspects are also 
moved in the following direction by one degree. And they are not projected nor do they emerge in the 
caelum because of the common or daily motion of the equator; therefore, they do not derive their own force 
from the equator, and consequently they should not be examined [with respect to their position] in it. 
Moreover, if for selecting the nature of the aspect, both circles should be noticed, and their arcs are un- 
equal; either the judgment will have to be made from the ecliptical arc alone, and so the equator will have no 
force for the aspects, against Ptolemy; or, it will have to be made from the equatorial arc alone, and so the as- 
pects in the ecliptic will have no virtue as such, which will be even more unbefitting and absolutely contrary 
to experience; or [else], a mixture of the two—by saying that the sextile of [the signs of] long ascension does 
not have the nature of a pure sextile, nor of a pure square, but partly the benefic nature of the sextile and the 
malefic nature of the square; and consequently that it does not simply effect something good or evil by its 
occourse in directions, but according as the rest of the occurrences in a revolution and in transits. But actu- 
ally the difficulty is not resolved by this expedient. For it will always be asked at what time the effect will 
occur from such a promittor. And according to Ptolemy it occurs when such an aspect in the ecliptic is trans- 
ferred to the circle of position of the significator or of the preceding terminus, for he does not observe the lat- 
itude in aspects. Since then according to Ptolemy the effect gets its time from the aspect in the ecliptic, so 
from its own benefic or malefic nature it will get its own quality of evil or good, but not from the equator, in 
which, as was said above, there is no influential force. 
Someone will object that Ptolemy, in the Quadripartite, Book 3, Chapter 14, asserts that the sextile of 
the [signs of] slow or long ascension sometimes kills, as does the trine of [the signs of] short ascension; 
but the trine and the sextile are aspects of a benefic nature; therefore, from [signs of] short or long ascen- 
sion they degenerate to the nature of a square, and consequently they ought to be examined [with respect 
to their position] in the equator. But 1 reply first that Ptolemy only directed five significators—namely, 
the Sun, the Moon, the Ascendant, the Midheaven, and the Part of Fortune. And indeed for life [he di- 
rected] either the Ascendant alone, or only the Sun or the Moon, according as he judged them to be 
aphetas, even though they were not determined toward signifying life in the nativity. But on the contrary 
he did not direct the Sun or the Moon in the 12th and 8th houses for life, even if they were particular 
significators of life by reason of their being rulers of the Ascendant, concerning which we may speak 
more fully in our Astrological Prediction if God extends life for us. And [Ptolemy] never directed the rest 
of the planets for life or health, even though ruling the Ascendant; and consequently it is no wonder that, 
with the true cause of death unknown, and with the fortuitous occurrence of a sextile of Mars or Saturn to 
his own apheta [in signs] of long ascension, he may have thought that this was the cause of death (even 
though it was harmless), and this at least sometimes, as he himself says; especially, when the true degree 
of the Ascendant had not been established, which he was accustomed to find, not by the native's previous 
accidents, but by the Animodar.84 
44 

===== PAGE 55 =====

[ reply secondly, That the trines and sextiles of Saturn and Mars are also malefic if Saturn and Mars are 
determined to evil in the figure; i.e., if they are in the 12th or the 8th or if they are rulers of those houses, es- 
pecially if they are badly disposed and dangerous to the significators of life by a hostile ray or elevated 
above them; but it has not yet been permitted to me even by long experience to detect that such aspects kill 
when there is no determined cause of death present except them. 
Moreover, by the reason that they will have trines and sextiles in the ecliptic to degenerate, at least in 
quantity, into squares in the equator, by that same reasoning these squares in signs of short ascension will 
degenerate into sextiles, and in signs of long ascension they will be equivalent to trines. And so that it may 
be known whether or not any aspect of a planet degenerates (as they hold) to the nature of another, it will be 
made evident from this single example. 
There is in my nativity a sinister sextile of Saturn, which from the table above falls in 12022' Taurus with 
3° south latitude. The altitude of the pole above the circle of position of Satum is 42o50', in which the 
oblique ascension of Satum itself is 352038'; but the ascension of the sextile is 28o40'; from which subtract- 
ing the 352038' the remainder is 36o02' for the arc of the equator coascending in the circle of position of Sat- 
um. Therefore, since this arc is nearer to the dodectile than to the sextile, it may be said that the sextile of 
Satum in the ecliptic degenerates to the nature of a dodectile in the equator, and consequently it is not dis- 
torted, as the sextile and dodectile are benefic aspects, but only the force of the sextile is diminished, as the • ■ • 85 dodectile is weaker than the sextile. And the reasoning is the same with the others. 
Chapter 5. Whether Directions to the Antiscions of the Planets and 
to the Nodes of the Moon are Efficacious. 
That the directions of the antiscions of the planets are efficacious may be proved by this reasoning: for 
every point in the caelum that is particularly determined to some planetary force is the efficient force of it by 
reason, as is established from the true places of the planets in the caelum, but such [also] are the antiscions of 
the planets according to Book 16, Chapter 15. Therefore they are efficacious; and consequently, when in di- 
rections they come to significators, they produce effects in accordance with the nature, state, and determina- 
tion of that planet of which they are the antiscions just like the aspects of the planets; and antiscions, like 
aspects, are only promittors and not significators. But experience proves this more evidently: either a planet 
is in the ecliptic where it is allotted a single antiscion, or it is beyond, in which case it can be allotted two 
antiscions in the ecliptic, as is mentioned elsewhere.86 And this experience will be made plain in its own 
place from the interpretation of genitures. 
But with regard to the Moon's nodes, since in Section 1, Chapter 4, it was shown that they have no virtue 
84 The method described in the Tetrabiblos, iii. 2, "Of the Degree of the Horoscopic Point." 
85 Here Morin takes advantage of the fact that the aspect pair dodectile/sextile is uniformly benefic, while the pairs 
sextile/square and square/trine discussed above are mixed. He then shows that the word degenerate does not apply in the 
first case because it would be inappropriate to say that a sextile had degenerated into a dodectile. And therefore since the 
term degenerate is false in this instance, it must also be false in the case of themixed pairs. Hence, the degeneration of one 
aspect into another is disproved. 
86 According to the cited passage, a planet with latitude has two antiscions, viz. the points in the ecliptic that (with zero 
latitude) have declination of the same magnitude and direction. An example is given of a point with declination +13053its 
antiscions will be 7 Tau 00 and 23 Leo 00 (assuming the obliquity of the ecliptic to be 23o30/). One of these will necessarily 
be close to the point's zodiacal longitude. Morin notes that the zodiacal longitude of the point itself may be to the right of 
both its antiscions, or to the left, or between them. 
45 

===== PAGE 56 =====

of their own, it follows from this that in directions they cannot have the function of a promittor or a 
significator—at least not an effective one. And consequently those astrologers who attribute to them the ef- 
fective force of a promittor are much deceived; and they predict fortunate events from bringing Caput 
Draconis to the Ascendant or the Sun preceding, thinking it to be of the nature of Jupiter and Venus, but un- 
fortunate events from bringing Cauda there, which they suppose to be of the nature of Saturn and Mars. And 
the same thing should be concluded about the rest of the nodes of the planets. 
Chapter 6. Whether the Directions of the Fixed [Sfars] and the 
Part of Fortune are Efficacious. 
That the directions of the fixed [stars] are efficacious may be proved in the first place by reason. For they 
are celestial bodies endowed with influential virtue, mobile under the twelfths,87 and in a celestial theme de- 
termined entirely like the planets. Why then shouldn't they be directed as the planets are? Next, experience 
proves that directions of the fixed [stars] of the first magnitude produce notable and sudden effects, as will 
be plain from the genitures interpreted in their own place; therefore, they at least take the place of a 
promittor in directions, but whether also of a significator no one has observed until now. Why then will it be 
denied, since they are similar to planets? 
But someone may say that if the fixed [stars] are admitted to directions, at least as promittors, their direc- 
tions to some significator or other in the celestial figure will occur almost every day. Therefore, if great ef- 
fects happen from fixed [stars] of great magnitude, why not moderate effects from those of moderate 
magnitude, and minor events from those of less magnitude, since no star is lacking in its own virtue, nor can 
it be said to be unnecessary in the world? See Book 20, Section 3, Chapter 7, where this difficulty is dis- 
cussed and resolved. 
But with regard to the Part of Fortune, with which the Moon finds itself in the [same] ratio of ecliptical 
distance as the Sun is with the Ascendant of the figure,88 or vice versa and alternately; it certainly seems to 
me to be worthy of admiration because both in the general judgment of a figure and particularly in direc- 
tions it is perceived to be allotted a manifest force of advantage or loss according to the nature of the house 
that it occupies in the figure and according to its celestial state. Pontanus in Book 3 of his De Rebus 
Coelestibus*9 in the chapter on the Part of Fortune, wishing to present some reason for this thing, says that 
the Sun and the Moon find themselves to be the authors of generation and parents as it were in these 
sublunary things as male and female, material and form in the beginnings of bodies, and day and night in 
time. For the Moon prepares the material and the Sun induces the form; the latter moderates the time of 
day, the former the time of night; the Moon provides the nourishment of the body, the Sun preserves the 
vitality. And this pertains to the Ascendant, which is subject to the jurisdiction of the Sun. Since, more- 
over, the Sun and the Moon have conjoined times, day and night; conjunctive actions, material and form; 
and conjoined domiciles, Leo and Cancer; it is proper that in the genitures of those being bom, just as the 
Sun has its Ascendant, so the Moon similarly has its Ascendant, no more distant from the Ascendant of the 
87 The signs of the zodiac, 
88 This is a roundabout statement of Ptolemy's definition of the Part of Fortune in Tetrabiblos, iii. 10, as being so placed 
that "that relation and configuration which the Sun has to the Ascendant, the Moon also has to the Lot of Fortune." This is a 
consequence of Ptolemy's formula for finding the Part of Fortune, Fortuna = Ascendant + Moon - Sun, which can be rear- 
ranged to read Fortuna - Moon = Ascendant - Sun or in words "Fortuna is as far from the Moon as the Ascendant is from the 
Sun." 
89 Giovanni Gioviano Pontano (1426-1503), De rebus coelestibus (Basel, 1530). 
46 

===== PAGE 57 =====

figure than the Moon herself is from the Sun.90 
I may add that since the Sun and the Moon are the only primary planets disposed about the Earth,91 and 
for that reason the primary causes among the planets of sublunary effects, the origin of which into this mun- 
dane stage, since it pertains to the Ascendant; therefore, in individual generations the Ascendant along with 
the Sun and the Moon have so necessary a connection, that however great is the distance of the Sun from the 
Ascendant of the figure, just so great should be the observed distance of the Moon from another point in the 
ecliptic, which is called the Part of Fortune and the Ascendant of the Moon, and according as the Sun pre- 
cedes or follows its own Ascendant, so also does the Moon precede or follow its [Ascendant]. Whatever 
there is about it, it is certain and verified by many experiences that its directions are efficacious, as will be 
shown by examples elsewhere; and the Part of Fortune itself is allotted the function of significator in direc- 
tions as well as the function of promittor. 
You will object firstly that the Part of Fortune is a mere point in the caelum, greatly different from the point 
of the Ascendant, which at least has its own force, since it is the beginning of that part of the caelum that occu- 
pies the 1st house. But the point of the Part of Fortune is neither a part of the caelum nor the beginning of any 
part of the caelum which belongs to the celestial figure. Therefore the Part of Fortune can have no force. 
1 reply that the Part of Fortune does not have force because it is entirely a visual point or the beginning of 
a part of the caelum belonging to the celestial figure, but because it is a proportional connection of the Sun 
and the Moon with the Ascendant, by reason of which it can have force, or because it is a point in the caelum 
determined by the Sun and the Moon in a particular manner. 
You will object secondly: Let the Part of Fortune be such a point and let it be of some virtue or other; why 
will it signify wealth, or why will it be determined to that, whatever house it may occupy, and whatever may 
be the nature, celestial state, and determination of its ruler in the figure? 
I reply that even though the Sun and the Moon may be determined as the other planets are to the things 
signified by the houses in which they are placed and by the houses that they rule, yet because they are pri- 
mary planets—indeed, by common consent, the parents or universal causes of all sublunar effects—with re- 
spect to which for that reason the consideration of orientality or occidentality of the other planets must be 
observed for their particular effects; in general it seems that it must be conceded that the Sun and the Moon 
at least from their own nature have a certain transcendental force for good, on account of which the Part of 
Fortune transcendentally determined by them or to their nature, also to utility or damage, is allotted a tran- 
scendental determination with the essential signification of the house to which it is particularly determined 
by its position in accordance with the nature and determination of its own ruler. 
Chapter 7. That Judgment should not be Rendered on a Given Nativity 
without having Considered the Directions. 
Astrologers are frequently deceived in this respect: having been presented with the figure of a nativity, 
they throw down their judgments from a simple inspection of it, and from only the state of the houses and the 
planets and their determination they pronounce upon the fortune or misfortune of the nativity. But it often 
happens that that geniture which appears fortunate [when considered] in this way may be very unpropitious 
90 Again Ptolemy, loc. cit., "and it [Fortuna] may be as it were a lunar Ascendant." 
91 Morin had adopted the Tychonian Hypothesis in which the Earth is the center of the universe. In orbit about it are the 
Moon and the Sun. And in orbit about the Sun are the other planets. Mercury, Venus, Mars, etc. This avoided difficulty with 
the Church and also offered most of the astronomical advantages of the Coperaican universe. 
47 

===== PAGE 58 =====

because of a series of directions. And conversely the one that appears unpropitious may be rendered very 
fortunate by a series of directions. For a single misfortune caused by directions, such as exile or prison, can 
frustrate the manifestation of many good things; and conversely a single fortunate event can weaken the 
manifestation of many evils. Why then [should there not be] more fortunate or unfortunate events signified 
by the directions that have not been consulted? And so, before an opinion is rendered on a given nativity, an 
astrological speculum should be constructed in which in the common manner a series of directions of indi- 
vidual significators is noted separately. But if such a speculum does not exhibit sufficient light for judg- 
ment, individual directions should be mixed together and arranged in a series by years, so that, from the 
series of accidents of life shown in this, a judgment on the happiness or unhappiness of the nativity may be 
rendered more wisely and more accurately. 
48 

===== PAGE 59 =====

Section III 
The Motion or State of Rest of the Termini of a Direction; 
and the Measure of a Direction. 
Chapter 1. Whether a Direction and its Effect are made by any 
Physical Motion of one Terminus to the Other. 
Lucius Bellantius affirms this in Question 16, Article 2 of his book against Pico Mirandola, and he says: 
"The force impressed on the parts of theprimum mobile by the bodies of the planets at the moment of a na- 
tivity continually moves by its own proper motion and per se, so that it is found now in one degree of the pri- 
mum mobile and now in another." Moreover, this statement is taken from the truth of directions and from 
experience, "which," he says, "most plainly demonstrates that that force operates through directions in ev- 
ery intermediate part where it hits upon a significator, and because if it were not mobile the impressed forces 
(i.e., of the significator and the promittor) could never come together, or one hit upon the other, so that they 
might produce an effect." 
But truly, as we have now entered upon the innermost secrets of this doctrine, we should try to make 
them plain to the best of our ability. We will say that Bellantius is deceived in many ways. In the first place, 
when he says that the force of the planets is formally impressed upon the parts of the primum mobile. For 
stars determine their own places in the caelum to their own nature with respect to us at the moment of the na- 
tivity, as Mars determines his own place in the caelum to the nature of Mars without any formal impression 
of virtue, as is more fully set forth in Book 20, Section 2, Chapter 15. 
Secondly, When he says that that force continually moves by its own motion and per se so that [it is] now 
in one point of the caelum and now in another. For if those forces impressed upon the primum mobile by the 
planets move with any motion of their own, then either they all move to the east, or they all move to the west, 
or some move to the east and others to the west at the same time, or only some of them move, but not the oth- 
ers. If this last is asserted, then let the reason be stated why the impressed force of the Sun moves, but not 
that of the Moon or Saturn. And since no reason can be asserted, since indeed this is contrary to experience, 
by which it is well-known that all the planets are directed with effect, it is plain that this last is false. But the 
third is impossible—about the motion per se that Bellantius assumes; hence [only] the first and second are 
left. But now if the forces of both the significator and the promittor are bome to the east, or both of them to 
the west, they will never be conjoined or meet each other to cause an effect. And if you say that one is bome 
to the east, as the force of the Sun, and the other to the west, as the force of the Moon following the Sun, then 
either there will be no directions of the Moon to promittors following towards the east, which is against ex- 
perience, or else the lunar force will be moved simultaneously to the east for the following promittors and to 
the west for the Sun as significator, which we have already said to be impossible. Therefore the falsity of 
this opinion is plain. Besides, the force that is the accident would be moved locally by itself and not by the 
motion of the subject, or of the primum caelum on which it is said to be impressed; but among philosophers 
this is absurd. Finally, by the motion of the solar virtue to the rising and of the lunar virtue to the setting at 
the same time, both forces encounter each other at the midpoint of the distance of the promittor from the 
significator; and so the effects of the direction would happen twice as quickly as experience shows; there- 
fore Bellantius's opinion has collapsed on all sides. Nor does the truth of directions prove such a motion, 
even though various effects happen from the same significator through the various promittors that follow, 
and which occur in order in accordance with the significator's own series, since this can occur from other 
causes, as will be proved below. 
49 

===== PAGE 60 =====

Regiomontanus, in his Tables of Directions, Problem 25, says "A direction is nothing else than moving 
the sphere until the second place, i.e., the promittor, is brought to the position of the first [place] or the 
significator." And a little later, "A direction is the motion of the primum mobile by which the significator is 
brought to the position of the promittor, or vice versa" (which is more correct). And from this many have 
formed the opinion that a direction is made, i.e., its effect is produced, by some physical motion of the pri- 
mum mobile which the effect itself terminates. But in fact a direction is only defined by Regiomontanus as 
the finding of the arc of direction, just as is mentioned below, i.e., as the artificial direction we defined in 
Section 1, Chapter 1. And the truth of the matter is that the effect of a direction is not produced by any physi- 
cal motion of the significator or promittor, namely one during which the effect is being made, and at the 
completion of which it has been made. For if the effect of the direction of Jupiter in the 11 th house to the Sun 
in the 10th should happen through some motion of one of these planets to the other, then it would happen ei- 
ther on the day of the nativity itself, 2 or 3 hours after birth, when Jupiter by the motion of the primum mo- 
bile would come to the place or the circle of position of the Sun, or on the next day when the Sun by the same 
motion would come to the circle of Jupiter,92 or between one or two months [later] when the Sun by its own 
motion would come to the place of Jupiter itself,93 or in about 10 years when Jupiter by its own motion 
would come to the radical place of the Sun, for no other physical motion can be assigned by which one can 
be brought to the other that is not fictitious, from which there can be no real effect. Yet the effect of that di- 
rection does not happen at any of these times, but only after 30 or 40 years, which is defined by the arc or de- 
grees of the equator intercepted by the two circles of declination, one of which passes through the place of 
Jupiter in its own position, and the other through the place of that same Jupiter in the circle of position of the 
Sun. And which arc is found, when, by the motion of the celestial globe to the setting, Jupiter is transferred 
to the circle of position of the Sun, as Regiomontanus held, following Ptolemy. Therefore, a direction is not 
made, i.e., the effect of the direction does not happen, through any physical motion, either of Jupiter to the 
Sun or of the Sun to Jupiter. Because, if anyone says that the effect is not produced by the motion of Jupiter 
to the Sun or conversely, but by the motion of the virtue of the Sun or of Jupiter impressed upon the caelum, 
it is plain that this is also false. For in addition to what was said above against Bellantius, the force of the Sun 
always remains in the place of the Sun, as the transits of the planets through the place of the Sun prove. 
Therefore, it is not moved from that place to another, otherwise at the same time and with respect to the 
same place it would be moved and it would remain at rest, which is impossible. 
Andrew Argol,94 a physician and a famous professor of Mathematics at the University of Padua, in the In- 
troduction to his Ephemerides, Book 3, Astron. Chapter 15, says that those who contend that the motion in di- 
rections is fictitious and not real are very much deceived, since it is real and the fastest motion of the primum 
mobile from the rising to the setting, accomplished at the time of the emersion of the native into the light of the 
world. "For (he says) at the native's origin, just as from the position and aspects of the planets, and the sign dis- 
covered on the horizon in the rotation then of time of the primum mobile, the active and passive qualities of the 
elements will remain impressed upon the native's body, as will some diverse dispositions produced by the 
stars that are rarely or never destroyed except after death; so also the motion of that origin and the downward 
rotation of the promittor to the place of the significator is actually discharged at the same time and remains im- 
pressed upon the native; [which] is going to produce the signified effect according to the distance of the de- 
grees of the equator between the significator and the promittor and of the path of the primum mobile from one 
place to the other, assigning for each degree a certain space of time approved by experience." 
92 That is, by having rotated through almost a complete circle and having thus come to Jupiter from the other side. 
92 That is, the transiting Sun would conjoin the radical place of Jupiter. 
94 Andrea Argoli (1568-1657) of Tagliacozzo, a well-known astrological authority and ephemeris maker of the 17th cen- 
tury. Morin probably refers to his Exactissmae caelestium motuum ephemerides ... 1641 ad 1700. [The Most Exact 
Ephemerides of Celestial Motions... 1641 to 1700] (Padua, 1648). 
50 

===== PAGE 61 =====

Which words touch to some degree upon a natural direction as we have defined it in Section 1, Chapter I, 
but in a confused manner; and they do not resolve the difficulty. For, even though a natural direction may be 
made by the real and physical motion of the promittor to the circle of the significator, as was explained in 
Chapter 1, yet the future effect is not produced by that direction or its motion, and even less so by an artifi- 
cial direction. But astrologers so bind the real directions to the future effects on the native, that they do not 
wish these directions to be without effects. And they say that a sickness or a wound happens in the year in 
which Mars is directed to the Ascendant. But concerning directions so conceived by astrologers, one may 
inquire whether they are made by any physical motion of one terminus to the other, as Bellantius contends, 
but not concerning the natural direction as we have defined it. And we have proved above that there is no 
motion of these termini by means of which a future effect might be reckoned by directions from the nativity. 
You will object that if 4 or 5 promittors at unequal distances succeed to the Sun in the 1 Oth house, the Sun 
will first produce an effect with the first and nearest promittor, then with the second, afterward with the 
third, etc. Therefore, either there is some motion of the Sun to them, or of them to the Sun; for both termini 
concur in the effect, and there can be no concourse without union, nor can there be an effect without a con- 
course, as Bellantius held against Pico. 
I reply that it certainly seems to be that way, but in fact it isn't, for the reasons brought forward against 
Bellantius himself. Moreover, how and why the termini concur and produce an effect without these motions 
will be stated in the following chapter, for we have only undertaken [here] to show that the effect of a direc- 
tion does not happen through the real motion of one terminus to the other. 
Chapter 2. Htw by means of Termini that are Quiescent or Fixed in the Caelum their 
Effects may be Produced on Earth through their Concourse in Directions. And how their 
Effects, which Remain in Force for so Long, Finally Burst Forth into Action. 
This certainly seems to be miraculous in nature, for not even those ignorant of astrology can doubt the 
truth of this matter. And yet the method seems to escape human reason. Of course it is certain that the ter- 
mini of the directions, namely the places of the significator and the promittor, are fixed in the primum mo- 
bile, just as was said in Chapter 1. And it is likewise certain that the effect of a direction does not arise 
solely from the significator or solely from the promittor, but from their joint concurrence, [as explained] 
in Section 1, Chapter 7. But a concourse cannot be assigned to immobile termini. And this is the knot of 
the difficulty. 
John Kepler, the celebrated Imperial Mathematician, who wanted to render an opinion on everything 
physical, asserts in his Harmonies of the World, Book 4,95 "Fortuitous occurrences, as when a tile fallen 
from a roof strikes a passerby, [or] when this one, cut off by flames, perishes, etc. are to be attributed to each 
one's tutelary Genius. And if a natal horoscope contains indications of these occurrences, there must be a 
custodian or watchman such as this to bring forth impediments or harmful advancements from a natal star. 
And he does not see how the caelum can [accomplish] these things without [the aid of] Genii." By which 
words it is plain that Kepler was ignorant of [both] astrology and angelic nature to have boldly passed his 
judgment on these things. For he did not know that the celestial constitution only influences that which is 
produced by physical generation; and this it affects radically at the instant in which it is bom, but it cannot 
say [anything] about good or evil angels. And besides he did not know the essential powers of the houses of 
the celestial figure, which are the determinants of the virtue of the planets, or the benefic or malefic nature of 
95 Johannes Kepler (1571-1630), Harmonices mundi (Linz, 1619). 
51 

===== PAGE 62 =====

the planets themselves. From which it happens that if Mars or Saturn are in the eighth, or they are rulers of 
the eighth badly afflicting the significators of life, such deaths are accustomed to happen from the property 
of the house and the malefic nature of the planet; therefore, being ignorant of this, especially from experi- 
ence, he could not see how the caelum could [inflict] such things on men without [the aid of] Genii, and he 
revealed what came into his mind about this matter. 
But presently, not remaining steadfast [in this opinion], he says: "Those who perish by iron, by a fall, by 
drowning, and by other fortuitous events seem to have been abandoned by God and the Good Angel and de- 
livered up to the tyranny of Satan, but those who predict cannot see such impiety of life in the stars. For di- 
vine assistance against depraved inclinations of behavior is not written in a celestial figure, and even less is 
it inscribed in the bluish hue of Saturn and the ruddiness of Mars, as are the kinds of punishment due for spe- 
cific sins in the lawbooks. Nor is there any immediate natural connection between these things and the 
caelum" By which words it is plain, first that these accidents are not to be attributed to the tutelary Genius, 
nor to that Custodian or Watchman the impediments or contrary advancements coming forth from the natal 
star, as he held above. In addition, it would follow that it would happen that no upright man would perish by 
iron, by a fall, by drowning, or by any other fortuitous event; but whoever should die thus would be impious 
and delivered up to the tyranny of Satan; to assert which is impious and stupid. Besides, he is mistaken when 
he denies that astrologers can see impiety and other evil propensities of natives in the stars, for among as- 
trologers this is all too common and clear from experience, although they cannot see divine assistance, 
about which they also do not judge, because of course it is above nature. In addition, the unlucky accidents 
of death are not inscribed in the bluish hue of Saturn or the ruddiness of Mars, as Kepler argues, but in their 
influence and determination in the figure of the nativity, which Kepler did not know. Finally, even though 
there is no immediate connection between these things and the caelum, there is an immediate connection of 
the caelum with the native through his nativity, and the caelum efficiently determines the native to these 
things. For just as the native actively determines the caelum, so does the caelum passively determine the na- 
tive, as we have said elsewhere. 
After this [Kepler] "doubts whether the Genii of men, i.e., the Guardian Angels, are impeded naturally 
by the stars, lest they should be able to resist the powers of the air lying in wait, and lest those impediments 
should be foreseen from the native's horoscope, which perhaps (he says) also influences the Genius no less 
than the mind of the one being bom, and so the Guardian Angel might not be able to impede the imminent 
evil." By which words he again contradicts himself, since above he asserted without any doubt that if the na- 
tal horoscope Contains indications of a violent death from a chance (as he says) occurrence, the Genius or 
Guardian of the native ought to be impeded by the stars, and so it ought to receive their influx, which it 
would not be able to resist, which was rejected above as being repugnant to the angelic nature, and abso- 
lutely unworthy of it and of its immutable beatitude, and absolutely inalterable by any causes, especially 
physical ones. Besides, Kepler says that a horoscope influences the mind of the one being bom and his Ge- 
nius; and thus again he asserts what he had denied above. 
Having made these statements, he says then "that the foetus at birth conceives its own vital energetic fac- 
ulty from the act of being separated from its mother, and the character of the caelum at that moment flows 
into it." But he more clearly opens his mind [on this subject] in his Book on the Fire Triplicity,96 where "he 
denies that any force from the planets spreads into the signs or places of the zodiac, or through a real impres- 
sion, as many hold" or through a determination unknown to Kepler and first discovered by me "but in the 
natural and animal faculty of the child being bom it receives the constitution of the caelum which existed at 
the time of birth. And therefore that faculty is affected by all the transits of the planets through the principal 
96 Kepler's book on the conjunction of Jupiter and Satum in 8 Leo on 26 July 1623 was translated into German Discurs 
von der grosser Conjunction.,. (Niimberg, 1623) and into English by William Lilly in his Prophesy of the White King... 
(London, 1644). 
52 

===== PAGE 63 =====

places of the horoscope, as if images received in the mind were real stars coming together with the celestial 
ones and agreeing or disagreeing with them." By which words he also contradicts himself, for why would 
the faculty be affected by the daily transits of the planets through only those places in the caelum that are 
principal places in the horoscope, i.e., through the places of the planets, their aspects, and the cusps of the 
horoscope itself, and not by the transits through the other places in the caelum, empty with respect to that 
same horoscope, if in those same principal places no virtue from the horoscope remained with respect to the 
native, either through impression or through determination? To this question certainly 1 do not see anything 
solid that can be said in reply to support Kepler, nor for that matter another [question] that can be put: 
namely, why the faculty should be affected one way with Saturn transiting through the Midheaven and an- 
other way with it transiting through the Ascendant? 
Finally, arriving at the mystery of directions, he says "That faculty not only perceives the transits of the 
planets, but also the successions of those parts of the caelum that held the planets at birth. Distributing its ac- 
tion throughout the whole life of a man by this proportion: so that by so much as a year is longer than a day, 
by that much slower an effect may follow its sign in a direction than the sign follows in the direction of the 
parts,97 so that this celestial impression may not only remain quiescent, but also while it remains may extend 
itself by an extension of its motion to a longer time of life. That is to say, this faculty is not only circular, but 
its motion is also circular and its time hypothetical, and you might say that the time of the motions of a 
horoscopic character grows along with the body of the native." And finally he concludes in this way: "No 
death in the stars, none in the horoscope, none in a direction: the substance of the body is that which, either 
flooding, snuffs out the flame of life, or running short, deserts it, while nature is stimulated at the time of di- 
rections to complete its own action." By which words he does not resolve the difficulties of such a mystery, 
but rather multiplies them when he says that the faculty marked with the celestial character is circular, is cir- 
cular motion, and is a hypothetical time—which Kepler does not prove, nor if he did prove it would it re- 
move those difficulties. Also, when he holds that all the accidents of a man are due to a faculty concerned 
with completing its own action; seeing that the accidents which are badly termed fortuitous or casual cannot 
be referred to that faculty intent upon its own action, since they are entirely beyond its action and concern, 
but in the directions of significators and the transits of planets they may shine forth greatly, and they may be 
caused by these; with the mind per se being ignorant of such fates, also with the radical constitution un- 
formed. Then, in addition, not wishing the stars to cause death, he makes Nature, intent upon her own work, 
to be the destroyer of her own self and a homicide. And then he gives no reason why the faculty should ob- 
serve the same ratio in time of a day to a year.... 
Moreover, 1 wanted to review here more fiilly Kepler's opinion of astrology and to show its defects, be- 
cause in his Harmonies of the World, Book 4, Chapter 7, "he thinks after the consensus of Haileseus, 
Rossini, and Philip Feselius, very famous {as he says) professors of philosophy and medicine, that this 
new philosophy is the most true, and therefore this tender little plant ought to be fostered and reared with all 
care, so that it may put forth roots in the minds of philosophers." Thus in fact the truth of the matter is that 
Kepler was very ignorant of astrology, as is plain whenever he speaks of this science, as we have already 
shown elsewhere; and nothing is more improper than for an ignorant person to put forth an opinion. As for 
us, what then shall we too say about these things, lest we may seem to be completely silent with regard to so 
great a mystery of astrology? Let everyone be free to philosophize about it. 
97 By 'parts' Kepler means degrees and by 'sign' he means 'indicator', i.e. a direction (which serves as a "sign" of some 
effect to come). This rather obscure sentence is intended to convey the idea that the ratio between a year and a day is equally 
applicable to the arc of a direction: so many years (of life) to so many degrees of arc. 
98 Their fame, which Morin already seems to doubt, has faded. I suppose he refers to Eucharius Roeslin, 
M.D.( 1544-1616),or his son of the same name, and to Philip Fessel, M.D, (fl. 1610), but I cannot identify Rossini, unless he 
means Gioseppe de Rossi (fl. 1576). 
53 

===== PAGE 64 =====

I say firstly, That the cusps of the houses and the planets and their aspects at the moment of birth are de- 
termined by that act to something with respect to the native, as is fully demonstrated in Sect. 1, and by their 
potential they are determined to other things. And so Saturn in the first house is determined by that act to the 
native's temperament, health, moral characteristics, and mental capacity; but at the same time it is also de- 
termined by its potential to all the native's accidents represented by the preceding houses of the figure. For 
example, [it is determined] to causing sickness through its direction to the Sun in the 12th; and so Jupiter in 
the 11 th is determined by that act to the natives's friends, but by its potential to honors, which it is perceived 
to cause by its direction to the Midheaven, when by act it stands in the 11 th at the moment of birth. And the 
rest of the significators preceding Jupiter must be considered in similar fashion. 
Secondly, That the influx of the celestial figure at the moment of birth is impressed upon a sensitive part 
of the native, not in fact diffusely, but distinctly and marvelously as it is in the figure of heaven, that is as the 
determination of the parts of the caelum and the planets are in that figure; and so there may be in that native 
the influential character of that figure, [with its various features] preserved in virtually the same location, 
the same order, and the same distances of the significators and promittors, just as they are found in the figure 
erected for the longitude and latitude of the place of birth. And therefore, just as the celestial figure" is the 
external beginning of the native's life, so is it also an efficient cause in the native, of a similar internal begin- 
ning through the impression of its own character upon the native, from which arises that manifest and won- 
derful consensus of the caelum and the native himself in acting and being acted upon. 
Thirdly, That each significator in the celestial figure, i.e., a cusp or a planet, in accordance with its own 
virtue, both essential from its own nature and accidental from its determination in the figure, flourishes in 
the native through the impression of its own character: it is a sort of beginning of life, action, marriage, or 
suffering, to which all the following places of the figure are referred by a potential determination, whether 
they are planets or aspects of the planets, so that things related to that beginning may be such during the life 
of the native as those places are, both by reason of their nature per se and by reason of their accidental deter- 
mination; and they will be in the same order of time as is the order of the distance of their places from such a 
beginning, so that of course the one that is less distant from that beginning is more quickly and sooner re- 
duced from potential to action, i.e., it produces its own effect. Therefore, if Mercury ruler of the Ascendant, 
then the square to Mars ruler of the 8th, then the trine of Jupiter ruler of the 9th follow the Ascendant, the be- 
ginning of life, the native will first turn his attention to letters or to some other discipline from the direction 
of Mercury to the Ascendant, but then from the direction of the square of Mars to the same Ascendant, he 
will be dangerously ill, and finally, if he escapes [from that illness], he will devote his time to religion from 
the direction of the trine of Jupiter ruler of the 9th, for the determination of the promittor by body and ruler- 
ship must always be taken into consideration, and not just the planet, as the old astrologers supposed, who 
handed down to us their own rules for directions. 
Fourthly, Because since the figure of the caelum at the moment of birth is something permanent and sta- 
ble, in which the whole life of the native along with his accidents flourishes both causally and implicitly, and 
that life and those accidents admit the succession and order of time, it is necessary that some cause of this 
succession and order be given in the caelum-, and that cause is none other than the succession and order of 
the promittors potentially determined with respect to the preceding significators as was said above. For a 
potential determination proceeds from itself to an actual determination; and therefore those promittors, i.e., 
the planets and their aspects, are reduced from a potential determination to an action. But this is done by the 
first revolution of the primum caelum, which begins at the moment of the nativity; for when, by this revolu- 
tion, some promittor is transferred to a circle of position that some significator occupied at that moment, and 
thus a natural direction of these is made as we defined it in Section 1, Chapter 1, it is determined by that act 
w Readinginstead offigurae. 
54 

===== PAGE 65 =====

to produce its effect at some time, according to the nature and location of that significator; and the virtue of 
such a direction for individual natural directions of the promittor itself to the preceding individual 
significators, is imprinted successively on the native by such a revolution, as a sort of supplement to the uni- 
versal natal impression, which explains his particular fates, and efficaciously combines and puts them in or- 
der according to its own temporal series. 
Furthermore, the effect of the direction cannot be produced at the moment of the nativity because the 
promittor is not then actually in the location of the significator, but only potentially. Moreover, it is pro- 
duced after the birth by virtue of its reduction from potentiality to actuality, which is accomplished by suc- 
cessive motion. And it is produced in about as many years from the birth as the promittor is distant in 
degrees of the equator from the circle of position of the significator according to Ptolemy's opinion, which 
will be carefully investigated in the next chapter. And the logic of this doctrine is fundamental because the 
determinative virtue of the houses or their cusps to different types of effects is very well known to astrolo- 
gers through experience, and is therefore entirely certain; moreover, the cusps of the houses are circles of 
position. But the circle of position in which any planet or other significator falls at the moment of the nativ- 
ity is allotted a particular force with respect to the native by that planet or significator by reason of the sub- 
jects pertaining to the house that that circle occupies in accordance with the nature and state of that planet; 
which force is impressed upon the native himself at the moment of his nativity. When, therefore, the 
promittor by that first revolution of the primum caelum is brought to that same circle, it is determined as was 
said above. And the force of that determination, since it is made by successive motion, is similarly im- 
pressed upon the native. And since the concourse and union of virtues of the promittor and the significator 
are thus made both in the caelum and in the native, when they are successively in that circle of position, it re- 
sults from this that at the time designated by the arc of that motion something will happen to the native him- 
self of the nature of the significator and the promittor in connection with the things essentially signified by 
the space or house of the figure in which that circle of position is found. And in sum, this is what L am able to 
say about such a mystery of Nature in accordance with the truth of experience based on lengthy investiga- 
tion; and if it is not sufficient for anyone, he may give better [explanations] and disregard my opinion. Simi- 
larly, what does Galen have [to say] about sicknesses in Book 3 of his On Critical Daysl Namely, that- 
having erected the chart for the beginning of the sickness, an impression of that sickness is made upon the 
native by it, and the accidents of that impression appear through the motion of the Moon to her own square 
or opposition, or (as 1 also believe) through her own monthly directions to that square and opposition and 
other important places of the figure of sickness; moreover, it frequently happens that the direction and mo- 
tion of the Moon take place at the same time on the same day. From which it is plain that the accidents either 
of the native or of his sicknesses are measured by the directions and motions of the planets transiting 
through places corresponding to the accidents. 
Therefore 1 say fifthly, For this reason, since termini of the directions are quiescent or fixed in the 
caelum, their effects are produced on earth, namely in man, since by the radical influx of the celestial figure 
at the moment of the nativity, and the first revolution of the caelum, their concourse is made and impressed 
upon the native, [which will be] efficacious at a certain time, as has already been explained above. 
Sixthly, That the impression of that concourse having been imposed by the first revolution of the primum 
caelum from the moment of the nativity, it follows that it will be continued and confirmed by those that fol- 
low, by which also each promittor is brought to the circle of position of the individual significators that pre- 
cede it; and so it is often confirmed that the efficacy of a direction for an effect may finally then ripen and 
burst forth into its act; no wonder, after about as many annual revolutions of the Sun, as the arc of direction 
contains diurnal [motions] of the same Sun,100 and consequently sooner or later, just as the termini are less 
100 One "diurnal [motion]" equals approximately one degree, so Morin means that the number of annual revolutions of 
the Sun (years) will be approximately equal to the number of degrees in the arc of direction. 
55 

===== PAGE 66 =====

or more distant from each other. Whence it is plain that the Sun by its own diumal and annual motion con- 
curs at least in the measure of time by which the effect of a direction is reduced from potentiality to actuality, 
but not by its own influx or influential force, as we saw in Section 1, Chapter 1, that Cardan held. So there- 
fore the effect of a direction may only smack of the nature and determination of the significator and the 
promittor, but not of the Sun except by accident, by reason of a determination of the Sun itself. 
Finally, I contend seventhly, That the effect of a direction is produced not just by the impression received 
at the moment of the nativity, as Kepler thought, nor just from the caelum, as has been commonly credited 
hitherto, but from both of them working together: not, however, without an actual concourse of the revolu- 
tions of years and months, and of transits too, as is said in what follows, for here we shall only explain the 
mode of action of directions. You will object that from this it follows that after 365 years, corresponding to a 
complete diumal [revolution] of the Sun, in which every promittor accomplishes its effects with [all the] in- 
dividual significators of the entire zodiac, the force and efficacy of all its directions will be absorbed, and 
none of those effects will be left for those who live longer, such as were those men preceding the flood, who 
reached 500 or 600 years, using up the bulk of so long a life, and whom an astrologer might nevertheless de- 
clare to have been dead from the direction of some Anareta to some significator of life. Therefore, the pre- 
ceding doctrine is false. 
I reply that what is said does not follow [logically]. For just as through the second revolution of the pri- 
mum caelum from birth the directions of the first [revolution] are confirmed, which correspond to the first 
365 years of life, so through the third [revolution] are confirmed the directions of the second [revolution], 
which correspond to the next 365 years of life, and so on. And from this it results that after 365 years from 
birth effects similar to the previous ones [caused] by these same promittors will return, if the native shall 
have lived so long, as before the flood; having of course taken account of the native's age and other circum- 
stances. It can also be said that since the force impressed upon the caelum by a determination will last as 
long as the native, that nothing prevents that after 365 years similar effects should still return through the re- 
currence of the directions, having taken account of his age and the disposition of things then existing. 
Finally, it can also be said that since the same direction may signify many things at the same time, by reason 
of the multiple determination of the significator as well as the promittor, in one revolution of 365 years it 
will produce one effect, and in another, having taken account, etc. Therefore, the doctrine explained above 
is consistent and in accordance with experience without any confusion or ambiguities, and the simplest of 
all in approach and logic, which makes us cling to it. Therefore, enough has already been said about so diffi- 
cult a subject. 
Chapter 3. The Various Opinions of the Old and Modem {Astrologers] on Converting 
the Measure of the Arc of Direction into Time. And which of these seems Truer to Us. 
There is something in every branch of learning that testifies to the weakness of the human intellect, as in 
Theology, the Mystery of the Sacred Trinity; in Physics, the essence and production of forms; in Geometry, 
the quadrature of the circle; and in Mechanics, perpetual motion. If, then, the sharp edge of the intellect is 
dulled in scrutinizing these arcane matters, then it is not surprising if in Astrology, the highest and most di- 
vine of the physical sciences, there is also something sought that is conceded to be marveled at rather than 
understood. And such a thing is the measure by which an arc of direction is converted into time to determine 
the time of the future accidents of men. So, then, not without admiration it is established by experience that 
the arc of direction is equivalent to approximately as many years as it contains degrees of the equator. That 
is, the effect signified by a direction will happen in approximately as many years after birth as there are de- 
grees in the arc of direction. And I said approximately because there is still a dispute among astrologers 
56 

===== PAGE 67 =====

about precision. We shall, therefore, add here our opinion and the opinions of others about this measure. 
Ptolemy, therefore, says in his Quadripartite, Book 3, Chapter 15, "Moreover for each degree one 
should take consistently one year"101 or as Naibod has it "and each of the times (i.e., degrees of the equator, 
which Ptolemy here and there terms times) is equivalent to one solar year." By which words it is plain that 
Ptolemy did not determine [this value] of the measurement with certainty, but only probably. But all astrolo- 
gers down to our own time have followed his opinion, and some still hold to it. Moreover, Cardan in his 
commentary on this chapter, and after him, Naibod, thought that one year is not precisely equal to one de- 
gree of the equator, but [instead] to 59'08". Which is of course the mean diurnal motion of the Sun in the 
equator with a similar measure of time; but one degree [of this measure] is equivalent to 1 year 5 days and 8 
hours; from which tables were constructed by Naibod and Magini which we will give below; and most as- 
trologers have already subscribed to this opinion. 
But the Most Noble Tycho Brahe, in his [treatise]. The New Star,m Book 1, p. 113, having rejected these 
two opinions and having been taught by experience (as he says), thinks that the diurnal motion of the Sun, 
not in fact the mean motion, but the true or apparent motion on the very day of birth should be the true mea- 
sure of the year for directions of the genethliacal figure and the true measure of the day for directions of the 
annual revolution. Moreover, the very well-known Mr. Longomontanus103 wrote to me privately that Tycho 
Brahe meant the diumal motion of the right ascension of the Sun and not the diumal motion of its longitude. 
And I, who am unable to assign fictitious causes to the real times of effects, had long since conceived the 
same thing that had been conceived by Tycho [in his book that] I had not yet seen, and that if the diumal 
[motion] of the Sun was the measure of the year it was more fitting to attribute it to the tme and real diumal 
[motion] than to the mean [motion], which might be thought to be only fictitious, and rather to the diumal 
[motion] in right ascension than to the [motion] in longitude, because it is not the ecliptic but the equator that 
is the natural and simplest measure of our time. Therefore, 1 had made tables on this premise for the equating 
of arcs of direction into time and vice versa. 
But Kepler in his enclosure sent with nativities says "not having availed [himself] of experience, he 
thinks it reasonable to move the significators forward in the order of the signs towards the promittors by the 
natural proportion of a day to a year, if of course for any year the diumal [motion] of the Sun is added to the 
places of the Sun and the Moon, departing by the same number of days from the natal day as the number of 
years departs from the natal year. And [as for] the reasons on account of which this should properly be effi- 
cacious—namely why that which was on the thirtieth day will signify for the 30th year—although the as- 
trologers are not accustomed to give or to examine their reasons, being content with their own oracles, 
nevertheless the Samian philosophy104 seems to promise [it], or if this doesn't disclose [it], [then] nothing 
does." This is Kepler, word for word. He wants then, if it is required to find where a direction of the Sun and 
Moon extends to 30 years after birth, to take from the ephemerides the places of the Sun at noon on the day 
of the nativity and then on the 30th day after the nativity, and subtract the former from the latter, and there 
will remain the arc of the ecliptic, which, added to the radical places of the Sun and the Moon, will show 
where the directions of the Sun and the Moon extend to in the ecliptic in that 30th year. 
101 The reference is to Tetrabihlos, iii. 10 (Robbins's ed, p. 288,7-8), or to Ashmand's translation of the Paraphrase, iii. 
14. 
102 The reference is to Tycho's book on the nova of November 1572, It was published in 1573 and dealt with both the as- 
tronomical and astrological significance of the "new star" that blazed up so brightly in the constellation Cassiopeia (Long. 6 
Tau 52, Lat. 53N45), 
103 Christian Severin Longomontanus (1562-1647), a Danish astronomer who worked as an assistant to Tycho Brahe for 
around ten years and thereafter was professor of mathematics at Copenhagen from 1607, 
104 Apparently a reference to Pythagorean philosophy (Pythagoras was from Samos). 
57 

===== PAGE 68 =====

But Argol says in his treatise on astronomical measurements,105 Book 3, Chapter 23, "It is completely 
stupid to assert that Ptolemy seems to have been very exact in his knowledge of this [topic] in other minor 
matters, and [yet] did not explain the precise measure to us." And consequently he thinks that Ptolemy's 
measure ought to be retained, devoid of any reason appealing to experience. But if accidents do not happen 
exactly at [the moment of) contact of a direction, it may be because the places of the planets are not yet had 
exactly, or it may be from the strength or weakness of the significators and the promittors, which can accel- 
erate or retard the individual times of the effects. 
But to define which of these diverse opinions is truer belongs to reason or experience. And indeed, al- 
though reason is blind in this matter—namely why one day's [motion] of the Sun is more or less equivalent 
to one year—yet it seems to support this opinion of Tycho's and ours, namely that a real effect should be re- 
ferred to a real cause but not to a fictitious one, as the causes of Cardan, Naibod, and Ptolemy seem to be. 
For, as Argol says, that which [is given] as Ptolemy's [opinion] does not give satisfaction, first because Ptol- 
emy himself did not assert that one degree is the precise measure of a year, then because we have already 
shown many times that he erred in his teaching of astrology, and finally because the opinions of the rest can 
be excused similarly, as Ptolemy's opinion is excused by Argol. Kepler in truth, even though he does as- 
sume a real cause—namely the true diurnal [motion] of the Sun in the ecliptic on the individual days from 
birth for the individual years, with the days corresponding to them in number—yet from other consider- 
ations reason is doubly opposed to this method. First, because in the direction of the Moon, and conse- 
quently of the other planets, he omits the latitude, contrary to that opinion which he rightly gave in the 
Preface of his Ephemerides from the year 1617, and against the opinion of Regiomontanus. Secondly, be- 
cause it follows from this that through as many days from birth as the years the native is going to live the Sun 
would still have an influx upon the birth of the native by its own motion. But if by its motion, why not also 
by its celestial state, which varies from one day to another by reason of its conjunctions with other planets 
and its ingresses into signs? And why shouldn't the same thing be said about the other planets, and espe- 
cially about the Moon, whose celestial state changes very rapidly? And yet the radical influx both by motion 
and by celestial state and the nature of the planets is only imprinted at the moment of the nativity, at which 
time that influx is the actual cause of those things that are in the native at the very moment of his nativity, but 
they are the potential cause of those things which will happen to him successively thereafter. Whence, those 
two aphorisms of Schoner, which he has in Book 1, Chapter 15, should be exploded, where he says "That if 
the Moon on the third day after the nativity applies to Mars or to Mercury it will make many travels, etc." 
For the planets radically and primarily only have their influx [upon the native] at the moment of the nativity, 
although after birth they do have a secondary influx in two ways, i.e., by revolutions and by transits, but with 
respect to the primary influx and dependant upon it. But the inclination to travel belongs to the radical in- 
flux, as also every other kind of thing. And yet from Tycho and Kepler still another method can be put to- 
gether: namely, by taking the diumal [motions] of the Sun from birth, not in fact in longitude but rather in 
right ascension, and similarly applying them to the total number of years after birth, but from this also fol- 
low the two absurdities repudiated above. 
Therefore, to put an end to this controversy, it only remains for us to consult the experience of things, a 
mistress neglected by Kepler, for this detects the method that is truer than the rest. But some [authors] in di- 
recting observe neither the latitudes of the planets nor the latitudes of the aspects, which is the greatest error. 
But others observe, and they all in fact make use of the latitude of the place of a planet and of its opposition, 
but in the longitude and latitude of the rest of the aspects they disagree, even though there is but one truth in 
this matter, and it can cause a notable difference in experience. Moreover, we have shown above how these 
aspects may be corrected in longitude and latitude. And to this end we have constructed the rational table 
given above, which we believe should be adhered to, because it is more conformable to experience for the 
1051 do not know whether this reference is to Algol's Tables ofthe Primum Mobile (1610) or to one of his later books. 
58 

===== PAGE 69 =====

rest of the aspects than a table agreeing with the method of Bianchini, because it substitutes the mean diurnal 
motion of the Sun in the equator, i.e., its mean diurnal [motion] in right ascension, 59'08 for each year in 
the reduction of the arc of direction into time in accordance with the opinion of Cardan and Naibod. For this 
measure is more accurate than that of Ptolemy and the old [astrologers], who ascribed one year to one de- 
gree, and rightly in Argol's opinion. Moreover, the Tychonic measure obviously deviates too much from the 
truth after the 30th year from birth when the Sun is around the beginning of Aries and Libra, where the diur- 
nal [motion] in right ascension is only 54' or 55', and when it is around the beginning of Capricorn, where it 
reaches 67'. And similarly the Keplerian [measure] exceeds or comes up short too much when the Sun 
passes through those signs where it has its maximum or minimum diurnal [motion]. And I observed these 
things laboriously and as carefully as I could in many genitures, comparing by turns both the methods and 
the individual measures. But if anyone wants to test the same thing in the rectification of nativities, he 
should use first the accidents pertaining to the Ascendant or the Midheaven, whose true causes are the bod- 
ies of the planets or their oppositions, about whose latitude [all] astrologers agree; and through these acci- 
dents the Ascendant and the Midheaven may be rectified, having taken the measure of time according to one 
of the abovesaid authors. And then let him see whether other accidents caused by the squares of the planets 
directed to those same angles, with or without latitude, agree with their own times according to the measure 
assumed. For the mode which will more accurately and frequently agree in directions will probably be con- 
sidered to be the truer. And I have found such a one as I explain here, as will be explained more clearly by 
examples in its own place. 
Chapter 4. In which the Tables of Naibod and Magini are set forth 
for the Conversion of Time into Arc of the Zquator and vice versa. 
The truth of the tables of this conversion will appear more evidently the farther away one goes from the 
moment of the nativity, such as the 50th or 60th year after birth. And because we discovered that the tables 
we had constructed for this same purpose according to Tycho's opinion deviated more from the truth, we 
consequently discarded them, and we have put below only the tables of Naibod and Magini. 
Use of the Table 
Take the years from the nativity in any of the four columns of years and in the column to the right you 
will find the degrees, minutes, and seconds equivalent to the year taken. Thus, 15 years are equivalent to 
14o47'05", and so with the rest. The use of the two tables that follow is entirely similar. Someone will say 
that these tables calculate the mean daily [motion] of the Sun in Right Ascension as the measure of any year. 
But that mean daily [motion] is only artificial, or fictitious; and consequently it cannot be the true or real 
cause of a real effect, i.e., of the real time of effects, as it has also been assumed by us many times in similar 
circumstances in astrology. 
But I reply: Between the maximum and minimum daily [motion] of the Sun in Right Ascension, neces- 
sarily the mean [motion] shown above is given by a part of the thing, for the transition from a real maximum 
to a real minimum is not made without passing through the mean, which consequently is not fictitious as he 
supposes. And therefore, since the maximum and minimum according to Tycho differ greatly from the 
truth, even if they occur on the natal day, it follows that of all these the mean [motion] differs the least, 
which indeed agrees with experience; and therefore it should be taken as the measure of the years in prefer- 
ence to the rest; but not exactly one degree, as Argol argues and as Ptolemy prescribed. And this mean daily 
[motion] for the measure of the arcs of direction is not like the mean motion of the planets that is put in the 
tables of arguments [of the planetary tables]. For those [mean motions] are merely artificial and only substi- 
59 

===== PAGE 70 =====

t-2 22 ^ ® Tr 
o m 
<S ^ W m 
^ e>i d m —« d O 
33 d d m m 3 
d 00 Os O d d d 00 00 
© 00 
0 00 d « © mm en 00 d d d d 
en Os 00 00 d d I « d m m 3^ m m 
d en ^ m m m m v> m 
^ 2 
"N —< 
Os m •*• m mm mm $ —N S© d d d 
SO d d d 
28 
29 8 
00 d •—1 —« 0 00 
•n © S© mm « d i 
d en ^ m 1 
2 
3 
4 m 
OD ro- M o oo —< -« »-i 0O *r) Ov ^ Ov « r- F- oo oo 
« en ^ w> « oo oe eo oo oo 
»8S = 2 ^ 
So oe w 8 o\ 
SSSSgSg 
S5?5 5S?!J m m tn m 
3 >8 5 5© 
^ tt d r- en d d m m ■«* ^ ^ d sn a «n ^ 0\ 0\ 0\ 0\ &, 
XSKZX 
d \o o <n « 
en oo ^ ^ ot «r» »r> vo en en en «d oo O — \© Vf) d d 
1SRKRS 38835 SS$$g 
en d v© O oo d •n ^ \© d r*- v© d d oo oo 
^ d en ^ en en en *n en en 
^ d en ■* en en *n en en en 
en — O ^ en d d d d op en en en 5f ^ en 
v© r- oo ov o 
<© d oo o\ o 
d ^ o\ oo en •—t ^ 
S2S 23 22 ^ 288S V© d OO OS O en en en en ^ 
V© d OO OS O en *n en en't 
*0 en t— 
oo ^ ® ^ Q tn s© s© r*- eo 
^ d en ^ en 
Os ^ ^ O —» d en en ■«» d d d d d 
5^955? 
s© O 00 d — w —I ST) — >© "^ d 00 OS ON O O 
s© d 00 Os Q 
s© r^. 00 os o —' —' —' —' d 
•n © 00 r-. — 
—1« ^ -n d 00 Os © —< Os Os Os © O 
\W--&*-*:*z 
8^2^ 0 «n p -n d es en en 
PPSJCJS 
r* E< SD "* S? d d d d d 
3 eQ ^ 2 s© ^ s© <s d 
© 00 en — g 
d d © op en — d d en 
d«a^ s 
^ d en ■* «r> d d <S d d 
s ^ 
si"5 ►-S t-s S. -SJ .«o •^5 N S! ^ r2 -is: ca 
O -H d en -et »n »r> m »r> m 
d en m »r> m m en m 
d »n en o en ^ m w d n© sn m ■'t en en en en en Sv© d 00 Os d d d d 
so d 00 Os O d d d d en 
00 d »o en ^ -h d en "er Os 00 d s© m m m «n m >n O w d en 
—• d en ^ m 
d d en ^ O 00 in in en in K3 m | 
d m d so d d d ?2 
so d d d 00 Os 0 d d 00 
m en 0 d en 00 en so in tj- en d 
2?Q —• O 00 en ^ 1 
^3 3 d ^ 3 "t Os O d en d 00 00 00 00 
^ d 00 00 en 00 SS 3 
so •n ^F m en as -k 0 O Os 00 
m so d m in in 00 Os •n m 
00 in 
in en 3 in •H en O Os en d 
0 en en d en en ^ en en 
«-« d en en en en as 
O 00 m m d in en , d ^ en en m in m d in in 1 in so d 00 Os 1 
1 
so d 00 Os 0 
d m en d O in -* d en in in ^ en d ^ ^ Sm so d 00 00 00 00 00 
00 So 00 So 5s 
00 so in en —♦ d en ■'t m d so m -et rt 
S3 s scs 
33333 
0 00 2 tQ en •m d en 
m s© d 00 Os en en en en en 
so d 00 os O en en en en 
SOs 00 d d ^ ^ ^ ^ O -h d en ■*■ 
00 d in en d en ^ in —« — Q Os Os 00 ■n en en en 
S 8 Os Ss Os 
zs&zs 
o 00 s© m m — d en en d —< O Os 
3 3 3 3 3 
SO d OO Os O -O so so so d 
3SSS3 
3^533 
en d O 00 d —s d en en ■^■ 
33333 m so d 00 os 
so r- 00 Os Q M ^ d 
d o 00 d in en •1 d d en m 00 d s© in ^ en en en en en en en 
SI 
» s© d 90 Os Q Os Os Os Os OS O 
en —• o 00 s© in ^ in —< d Os 00 00 d so m in m in in tn m 
3 
in en O 00 so —» d en ^ ^ m o Os 00 d so d d —« w w w m so d 00 Os 
m >0 d op os o ■*t n m 
m en d o 00 m -< d d 
3 3 3 m co 
SrSSSS 

===== PAGE 71 =====

Mid DaysH Min DaysH Mid DaysH 
1 6 4 21 12917 41 253 6 
2 12 8 22 135 21 42 25910 
3 18 13 23 142 1 43 265 14 
4 24 17 24 148 6 44 271 18 
5 30 21 25 15410 45 277 23 
6 37 1 
7 43 6 
8 49 10 
9 55 14 
10 61 18 
16014 
166 18 
172 23 
179 3 
185 7 
46 284 3 
47 290 7 
48 29611 
49 30216 
50 308 20 
11 67 23 
12 74 3 
13 80 7 
14 86 11 
15 92 16 
31 191 11 
32 197 16 
33 203 20 
34 210 0 
35 216 4 
51 315 0 
52 321 4 
53 327 9 
54 333 13 
55 33917 
16 98 20 
17 105 0 
18 111 4 
19 117 9 
20 123 13 
36 222 9 
37 22813 
38 23417 
39 24021 
40 247 2 
56 345 21 
57 352 2 
58 358 6 
59 36410 
60 37014 
Table IV 
Magini's Table 
For converting Minutes of the Equator into Time. 
61 

===== PAGE 72 =====

tuted for the true [places], which vary from day to day by the true motion of the planets.106 But in directions 
there is no motion of the termini that is different in different years, as was shown in Chapter 1 of this Sec- 
tion, but only the invariable arc of the equatorial distance of the promittor from the circle of position of the 
signiflcator. And this arc, which corresponds to the years of the future event by the ratio of the daily [mo- 
tion] of the Sun to a year, must be apportioned through this [particular] daily [motion] rather than through 
any other for the reason given above. 
Chapter 5. Whether the Arcs of Direction of all Significators or Promittors Should have 
the Same Common Measure; and what the Logic of that Measure is. 
In his book The Judgments of Genitures, Chapter 5,107 Cardan distinguishes in the case of directions 
the effects that pertain to humans from those that refer to empires, kingdoms, cities, religions, and the rest 
of the more notable changes that take place in the world. And he holds that when planets are directed as 
promittors in figures erected for the beginnings of kingdoms, cities, sects, etc., or for the moments of great 
conjunctions, whatever degrees of distance [there are] from the signiflcator to the promittor, or the arc of 
direction, should be equivalent to the periodic time of the planet that is directed, which consequently must 
be understood of the aspects of that same planet. And therefore for Saturn as promittor the value, from 
Kepler's Epitome of Astronomy, Book 6, is 29 Egyptian years 174 days and 5 hours, for Jupiter 11 years 
317 days and 15 hours, for Mars 1 year 322 days, for Venus 224 days and 18 hours, for Mercury 87 days 
and 23 hours, and for the Moon 27 days and 8 hours. Besides, although this dictum may resemble that of 
Ptolemy, who wanted one degree of that arc to be equivalent to one solar period, or one year, yet Cardan 
did not have any experience in empires, kingdoms cities, and religions with the abovesaid proportion, nor 
could he have had, since the beginnings of these things required for erecting the figures, as well as the mo- 
ments of the great conjunctions, are unknown to men, and it would be pointless to construct the figures of 
cities, as we have said in Book 20, Section 4, Chapter 4. But in the case of men the experience of the pro- 
portion is very well known. 
Moreover, in human affairs it seems worthy of note that, although some of the significators are the points 
of the twelfths [of the caelum] simply and absolutely viewed, which are the Ascendant, the Midheaven, and 
the rest of the cusps of the houses simply determined only to the native, but others are said to be the Sun, the 
Moon, or another planet; and of the planets, some are primary, namely the Sun and the Moon [which re- 
volve] around the center of the earth, but others are secondary or satellites, namely Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, 
Venus, and Mercury, which are arranged about the Sun as their primary; yet, experience proves that there is 
the same common measure for all these in directions, i.e., in the directions of all the significators each indi- 
vidual degree of the arc of direction is equivalent to 1 year 5 days and 8 hours, or 59,08 " of the arc is equiva- 
lent to 1 year, in accordance with the tables above, even though the Moon, the Sun, and the primum mobile 
differ very greatly among themselves both in their nature and in their distance from the earth. 
And reason seems to demand this. For all significators are points on the primum mobile, either complete 
in themselves, such as those that are in the Ascendant, the Midheaven, and the other cusps, or [those] partic- 
ularly determined to the nature of the planets at the moment of the nativity, as has been said elsewhere, since 
they are the true places of the planets and of their aspects, but not the bodies of the planets themselves. 
106 Morin is thinking of such planetary arguments as the Mean Anomaly or the Mean Elongation from the Sun (in the 
older tables). These arguments are "artificial" in the sense that they do not have any such close relationship to the planets' 
geocentric motions as the Sun's Mean Daily Motion has to its Daily Motion in Longitude or Right Ascension, 
id? "-phe Things Signified by Directions and their Mode [of Action]" (pp. 439-440 of the 1583 ed.). 
62 

===== PAGE 73 =====

Therefore, since all the significators and all the promittors too are in the same caelum, i.e., in the primum 
mobile, through whose motion each promittor is transferred in the same way to the circle of position of a 
significator, it is reasonable that all arcs of direction should also be measured in the same way, i.e., through 
the same measure common to all. 
Moreover, what the reason or cause of this measure is, i.e., why the mean diurnal [motion] of the Sun 
in right ascension is equivalent to one year in directions was set forth for us above by Kepler from the 
Samian Philosophy, sc. of the Munus Pythagoricum, to which he was very much addicted; but this game 
of the intellect in numbers does not satisfy men who are more learned in physics, unless it is conceded 
that numbers are the prime ideas that effect all things; but that must first be proved, and it cannot be 
proved. 
Cardan, at the end of the seventh of his Books of Aphorisms, in the peroration of the work, contributes 
this reason:108 
That since the Sun moves perpetually in the ecliptic, and runs through it in a 
year, also when it is situated in its individual degrees, it revolves in its diurnal 
motion once for each degree, in a circle that is parallel to the equator. Whence 
it happens, that if anyone conceives the equator as quiescent, as the theologians 
regard it, the degree revolved, by virtue of the Sun receives the universal force 
of the whole equator, and consequently, since the Sun in any degree of the 
ecliptic, goes around the whole equator in one day, and the whole ecliptic by its 
own motion in one year; hence it results that any degree of that same equator 
(which also receives the force of the revolutions of the 365 [circles] parallel [to 
the equator], and therefore also of the whole ecliptic) will represent one 
revolution of the ecliptic or one year. 
But although this speculation may seem to be a refined one, it still does not satisfy me. For even if the 
Sun in any degree of the ecliptic should go around the whole equator every day and the whole ecliptic with 
its own motion in one year, it still does not follow from this what Cardan concludes without proof, namely 
that each degree of the equator receives the force of 365 revolutions in a year, and therefore represents a 
year, or an annual revolution of the Sun in the ecliptic, especially since the division of both the ecliptic 
and the equator into 360 degrees is artificial and not natural, even though the number 360 is a mean be- 
tween the number of days 365 1/4 in which the Sun traverses the ecliptic and the number of days 3543/4 in 
which it comes together with the Moon twelve times.109 Besides the fact that Cardan says nothing about 
the Sun that cannot be said of any other planet, and especially Saturn, which revolves in circles [more 
nearly] parallel to the equator than those of the other planets, on account of its own motion's being the 
slowest among the planets.110 
And consequently let him who will speculate about such an arcane matter and as much as he wants to. 
After my speculations I do not think any mortal is going to return a cause of this thing that is entirely satisfy- 
ing without a revelation; and this, it seems to me, is far more difficult that squaring the circle, so that here too 
in fact we ought to say something of what comes to mind. Indeed, the Angel revealed to the Prophet 
108 This is a condensed paraphrase of Cardan's comment {Opera, p.91) rather than a direct quote. 
109 Actually, 12 synodic months take place in 354% days; but this does not alter Morin's observation that 360 is very 
nearly the mean between 12 synodic months and a solar year. 
110 Since a planet's declination usually changes during the course of 24 hours, the circle it describes is slightly tilted with 
respect to the equator. 
63 

===== PAGE 74 =====

Ezekiel111 390 days from one side and 40 days from the other, about which he speaks to him, must be under- 
stood to be the same number of years; when he says in Chapter 4 "A day for a year I have given to you," as 
astrologers employ the diurnal [motion] of the Sun for a year in directions; but he did not explain the cause. 
Similarly, in Numbers 14, 40 years are reckoned for 40 days."112 I also see in nature that a day is exactly 
equivalent to a year, namely under the earth's pole, where the day and the year coincide and are the same, by 
taking a day for one revolution of the Sun above and below the horizon; and the diurnal [motion] of the Sun 
there is the same as a year. But in the first place this happens in a place where neither a celestial figure can be 
erected, nor can directions be set up, from the lack of a meridian circle. In the second place, astronomers do 
not take a day as one revolution of the Sun with respect to the horizon, but [rather] with respect to the merid- 
ian; by which convention the diurnal [motion] of the Sun is only around the 360th part of a year, and there is 
no astronomical day under the pole. 
Therefore, we should admit the frailty of our talent in this matter, but we may admire and venerate God's 
infinite wisdom, Who made everything in weights, numbers, and measures, but in just such a way as pleased 
Him; and He wanted the least natural part of a year to correspond to a whole year in many things, as was set 
forth above in [the case of] revelations and nature. 
Chapter 6. Whether the Effects of Directions are Brought Forth at the Precise Time 
when the Arc of Direction Corresponds Precisely to their own Measure. 
This question in the doctrine of directions is one of no little importance. Namely, whether from a direc- 
tion, e.g. of the Ascendant to Mars posited in the second house severely afflicted with an arc of 30 degrees, 
which from Magini's Table above is equivalent to 30 years, 160 days, 14 hours, a sickness, a wound, or 
death will happen precisely at this time after birth; and so with the rest [of the directions]. 
And experience proves that this does not always happen, but the accident sometimes comes before the 
precise time of the direction, and sometimes follows it; not by one day only, or one month, but even by sev- 
eral, or rather now and then throughout the year, although this happens more rarely; and this [happens with] 
whatever may be taken as the measure of that arc and howsoever the aspects of the planets are corrected. For 
there is no nativity in which the effects of all the directions correspond exactly in time to their arcs; and very 
frequently it happens that if in any nativity two or three such directions are seen, the rest will in fact be found 
to precede or follow [the time of their effects] more or less. 
Moreover, a fourfold cause can be assigned to this problem, and one valid for other reasons, and there- 
fore more valid [from] the concourse of many reasons. First is the deficiency of the astronomical tables, on 
account of which the true places of the planets in longitude and latitude are not contained in the genethliacal 
figures; nor can [any improvement] be hoped for until the tables are remade in accordance with our princi- 
ples and fundamentals of astronomy; since to this day a difference of around one degree is often found in the 
Moon's place between [the ephemerides of] Kepler and Argol, 
111 Ezek. 4:4-6. "And you shall sleep on your left side, and you shall lay the iniquities of the House of Israel under it for 
the number of days that you shall sleep over it, and you will assume their iniquity. I moreover have given to you the years of 
their iniquity, in the number of days 390 days, and you shall bear the iniquity of the House of Israel. And when you have 
completed this, you shall sleep on your right side secondly, and you will assume the iniquity of the House of Juda for 40 
days; a day for a year, a day, I say, for a year I have given to you." (translated from the Clementine Vulgate) This is the scrip- 
tural justification astrologers use for secondary progressions, 
112 Num. 14:34. "according to the number of forty days, in which you surveyed the land, a year will be reckoned for a 
day. And for forty years you shall get back your iniquities, and you shall know My vengeance ..." 
64 

===== PAGE 75 =====

The second is that although the virtue of a direction is actually imprinted upon the native through the first 
revolution of the caelum, as is explained in Chapter 2, nevertheless its virtue with respect to a future acci- 
dent that it is going to produce, exists somewhat as a potential that must again be reduced to action at a time 
conformable to the arc of direction. But it cannot be reduced at that time from potentiality to action except 
by something actual: namely, a revolution conformable to the future event, and conformable transits of the 
planets by body or by aspect through suitable places in the geniture, which are first of all the places of the 
significator and the promittor, or places related in signification to them. And yet conformable revolutions 
and conformable transits do not always occur at that precise time, or if there is a conformable revolution for 
the year, there will not be a conformable transit for the day corresponding to the arc of direction, but either 
both, or the second, and especially a suitable transit will come before the precise time or after it. 
The third, that the nature and state of the promittors or the significators may sometimes cause some irreg- 
ularity. For Saturn from its own nature, and planets that are slow, retrograde, occidental, in cadent houses, 
and in short, debilitated, [indicate] a retardation of the effects; but Mars, Mercury, and the Moon, as well as 
planets that are swift, direct, oriental, in angles, and strong, presage anticipation. 
And not only should the promittor's state be noticed in this regard, but also whether it is in its own domi- 
cile or exaltation, or in those signs contrary to these, as well as whether it is favorably or unfavorably con- 
nected with the planets that are benefic or malefic by nature or by determination. For a promittor that is 
strong, either for good or for evil, produces an effect at the very time of the direction; indeed, if a planet pre- 
cedes the promittor, or an aspect similar in signification to the promittor itself, it will anticipate the effects; 
but if the promittor is weak, and there is a planet or a powerful ray of contrary signification [configured] 
with it, that promittor will be frustrated in its effect; but if a planet or a ray of similar signification, follows 
that promittor, it will be able to retard its effects until a direction of the significator comes to them. And this 
must be very carefully taken into account in predicting the time of the effects of directions. 
The fourth and last is that the sublunar causes that a celestial influx sets into motion, or at least excites, do 
not always comply with it equally, but they elude it either by the force of freedom, or they resist it by pru- 
dence when that influx has been recognized in advance, or from the obstinacy of the material they some- 
times beget a slow disposition [of that influx]; or they are made altogether contrary to these [possibilities], 
with sublunary causes only slightly excited by revolutions and transits conformable to the times of the direc- 
tion bursting forth into future events. 
It will be objected that this doctrine overturns the rectification of nativities by the times of the native's 
previous accidents—-that rectification on which the astrologers so pride themselves. For since a reliable rec- 
tification is not made from a single accident, but many are required; and the times of the individual accidents 
are not precisely equal to their arcs of direction, there seems to be no reason why one accident should be 
taken rather than another to whose time the arc of direction should be equated precisely; and so there will al- 
ways be room for doubt about the truth of the Ascendant or the Midheaven. 
I reply; Certainly, the astrologer needs to exercise great prudence in the rectification of nativities in order 
to determine the Ascendant and the Midheaven correctly, and this cannot be done by any artificial means. 
But first the given accidents must not be ascribed to any but their genuine causes, which he will be able to 
know from the natures of the houses and planets and their states. Then, for the foundation of the rectification 
of the Ascendant, he should select some accident that he conjectures is more likely to have arisen from a di- 
rection of the Ascendant to a suitable promittor, as if a quartan fever happened in the 5th year from birth, and 
Saturn is around 12 or 18 degrees of (he equator distant from the estimated Ascendant in the following di- 
rection, he may boldly direct the Ascendant to Saturn for the time of that fever. After this, he should see 
whether the rest of the given accidents correspond by direction of their causes to the Ascendant so defined, 
and if they do, it will be a valid rectification; but if a difference of around one degree appears, and the nativ- 
65 

===== PAGE 76 =====

ity cannot be rectified otherwise by the given accidents, then the Oblique Ascension of the Ascendant will 
have to be increased or decreased by some minutes, until the arcs of all the directions correspond with their 
times as nearly as they can be made to do; meanwhile, diligently observing the years in which the revolu- 
tions and transits agree best with the given accidents, for a particularly conformable arc of direction will 
have to be assumed from the table for this time. The same [procedure] must be considered for a rectification 
based upon some direction of the Midheaven. And from a rectification so made, in which a series of acci- 
dents will agree in time with a series of suitable directions, there need be no doubt in any respect; certainly 
this alone can be the scientific way, and not any other. But it should be noted incidentally that astrologers 
can be deceived in this in rectifying genitures, because for the foundation of their rectification they are ac- 
customed to calculate only a direction of the Ascendant for an accident pertaining to the 1 st house or a direc- 
tion of the Midheaven for an accident pertaining to the I Oth house, although these accidents can be caused 
by directions of the rulers of the Ascendant or the Midheaven, as perhaps happens in those genitures that are 
said to be of very difficult or doubtful rectification. Therefore the astrologer's skill and prudence are espe- 
cially necessary in such a case. 
But from this it is plain how foolish Sixtus ab Hemminga's opinion is in his book, Astrology Refuted, 
where he holds that either all directions agree exactly in their effects as well as in their times in every 
geniture or else astrology is altogether false. But in Section 5, Chapters 3 and 4, we shall make plain the lack 
of skill of this man, who has acquired so much authority among the haters of astrology. 
Besides, it should also be noted here that when the direction of any significator to any promittor is com- 
pleted, its effect can not only be retarded by one or two years, namely until a conformable revolution con- 
curs [with it], but even if the effect is produced at the very time of the direction, still its force can endure until 
another promittor comes to the significator. For the effects of the significators are not changed except by the 
successive change of promittors. Moreover, the force of a direction may especially endure when one 
promittor is succeeded by another of similar nature or signification. If, therefore, the Ascendant is directed 
to Mars in the 2nd, with Saturn following 4 or 5 degrees later, the native will be prone to sicknesses and dan- 
gers to his life for several years from the time when the direction to Mars is completed until the direction to 
Saturn has been accomplished, or he will die from the direction of the Ascendant to Mars, whose force and 
malignity is extended by the following Saturn, or the latter will finally terminate with death the evil begun 
by Mars. And on the contrary, if Venus or Jupiter follows Mars, especially if one of them is ruler of the As- 
cendant, the force of the direction will produce its effect from the beginning, and it will not endure until the 
succession of the second promittor; which, on the contrary will suppress and temper the effect of Mars—if 
not altogether, at least in part. 
At the same time too it was said above that the virtue of a natural direction impressed upon the native is 
something potential with respect to a future accident; yet that virtue at the time of the accident concurs actu- 
ally with other causes subordinate to itself, namely with annual and monthly revolutions, as well as transits, 
whose virtue is only actual. And this can be proved, because a revolution alone, either of the Sun, or of the 
Moon, radically conformable to the accident signified, will not produce that accident in the absence of a di- 
rection or [if the direction] is not yet mature according to the time equated to the arc of direction, as was said 
previously; therefore the direction concurs actually with the effect, along with the revolution and the transit. 
And the same thing must be considered in the case of revolutions and their directions, which will be said in 
its own place. Besides, it must be noted that a planet or a point of the caelum in the Ascendant is in actuality 
in the Ascendant, and therefore it is determined in actuality to the things signified by the Ascendant; but a 
planet in the 2nd is only [determined] by power in the Ascendant and through the diurnal motion, and there- 
fore only determined by power to the signification of the Ascendant. But a planet in the 12th is [so deter- 
mined] neither by actuality nor by power in the Ascendant, at least by its diurnal motion, but only by its own 
motion, for it has crossed over beyond the Ascendant, or if it is in power in the Ascendant, that power can 
66 

===== PAGE 77 =====

only become actual after 330 years, as many, namely, as are counted from the Ascendant to the Planet. 
Therefore, from the direction of the Ascendant to Mars in the 12th an effect will not appear before 330 years, 
which, you must understand, [is] from the reduction of Mars to the Ascendant by the prime motion. 
Besides, if the Sun is in the 12th and Mars is in the Ascendant, and an effect can be produced from the di- 
rection of the Sun to Mars, why is it not produced from the direction of Mars in the 12th to the Ascendant, or 
from the Sun in the 12th to the Ascendant, since, as Mars or the place of Mars moves by the diurnal motion 
to the Sun's circle [of position] in the 12th, so does the Ascendant degree? I reply that Mars as a promittor 
has a means of effecting [something]. But the Ascendant degree, as such, can only have a means of being 
acted upon, it might be argued that if Mars and the Ascendant have the same degree, how can this degree be 
at the same time active and passive? But I reply that it will be effecting [something] by reason of Mars and 
the significator preceding in the 12th, but it will be passive by reason of [its being] a cusp, and with respect 
to the following promittor; and thus the difficulty is resolved, and the doctrine is self-consistent, in accor- 
dance with what was said above. 
67 

===== PAGE 78 =====

Section N 
The Effects of Directions. 
Chapter 1. How Difficult it is for a Maw to Predict the Kind of Effect 
Signified by any Direction. 
The action of the planets upon man is twofold. The first is radical in the nativity through its genethliacal 
constitution, which is impressed upon the native himself at the moment of birth. The second is accidental, 
coming on top of the first by directions, revolutions, and transits of the planets. Through the first, a planet 
acts with its total determination by reason of its own nature, its celestial state, and then its terrestrial state, 
explicitly to be sure for the things then present in the native, as for example life, temperament, bodily con- 
formation, moral nature, mental qualities, etc.; and implicitly for future things, such as dignities, marriage, 
children, etc. And through the second a planet acts explicitly in accordance with the partial determinations 
of its own bodily position in the figure, its mlership, and aspects, for any of its given determinations in direc- 
tions, revolutions, and transits. 
But already in this doctrine of directions, it is a question of a summary of things. Namely, what effect any 
direction is going to define and predict. And I am not speaking of the particular forms of effects, which only 
he who is inspired by divinity [can] predict, [as is stated] in [Ptolemy's] Centiloquy, Aph. 1, as for example 
that John will be killed by Peter with such-and-such a sword, or will be drowned in the Seine, or that he will 
take Claudia as his wife, and such like; for this does not shine forth in the native's chart. But I speak only of 
that very specific kind of effect, such as whether John will be killed by an enemy, or drowned, or hung, or 
burned up, or decapitated, or whether he will marry, or obtain an ecclesiastical, political, or military dignity, 
and such like, which are only the most fundamental types of events. To hit upon these things by predicting 
from the native's chart alone, which combines such future events, is not indeed impossible for a man, but 
certainly very difficult, and it rightly produces exceptional praise for the astrologer [who can do it]. More- 
over, the difficulty will be plain, and it will occasion no surprise, if we expose its principal causes, such as 
they appear to me. 
The first, therefore, is that although the entire mundane space is divided into 12 parts, or primary houses, 
corresponding to the 12 kinds of accidents of man, still each kind is divided into various types; as, although 
the 12th house is in kind only about things adverse to the native during his life, yet these are of many types: 
namely, sicknesses, imprisonment, exile, servitude, secret enemies, and, through its opposition, servants 
and domestic animals. Similarly, although the first house is in kind only [the house] of life, nevertheless [the 
native's] temperament, bodily conformation,113 health, moral nature, and mental qualities belong to it. The 
7th is [the house] of matrimony, contracts (which are marriages of the negotiators), lawsuits, and open ene- 
mies; and so with the rest [of the houses]. And therefore when two termini concur in a direction, and one of 
them is determined in a certain manner by reason of the house it is in, or over which it predominates, so 
many types of effects occur"4 at the same time, that to discern which type may be produced, even by the 
shrewdest conjecture is [a matter] of no little difficulty. Just as, if the Ascendant is directed to Saturn in the 
1 st, ruler of the 12th. What will Saturn do or cause from being in the 1 st and ruler of the 12th? Will it be sor- 
row? Will it be investigation of secret things? Will it be sicknesses? Will it be imprisonment? Will it be ex- 
ile? And so with the rest. 
113 Reading temperamentum, corporis confirmatio instead of corporis temper amentum, conjirmatio 'bodily tempera- 
ment, conformation'. Of. the first paragraph of this chapter. 
114 The Latin has occurrunt 'occur', but perhaps we should read occurant 'may occur'. 
69 

===== PAGE 79 =====

The second reason perplexes the mind much more. For of the two termini that concur in a direction, one 
concurs by reason of its own nature, its bodily position, its rulership, and its celestial state; therefore, these 
individual things must be looked for in each terminus, and they must be combined to get a judgment about 
the kind of effect. For although a direction does not produce as many effects as combinations of these [ter- 
mini] can be made; nevertheless, the effect that will be produced is always according to some one of these 
same combinations. And consequently, the skill of rightly combining or arriving at a true combination is the 
greatest secret, and the most difficult part of all judicial [astrology], to which most things concerning the 
subject and its celestial causes must be directed. So, for the sake of an example, let the Sun and the Moon be 
assumed as termini of a direction, involving a single house and therefore a single rulership; and these three 
things only can be combined—their nature, bodily position, and rulership—when the Sun is directed to the 
Moon, or the other way around, [yet] they will be found to be combined in 49 ways. 
Figure 4 
For there are in the Sun, A its nature, B its bodily position, or the house of the figure that it occupies, and 
C its rulership, or the house of the figure over which it predominates; and in the case of the Moon, D is its na- 
ture, E its position, and F its rulership. 
The individual items A, B, and C are combined reciprocally in 9 ways with the individual items D, E, and 
F. Pairs with individual items in 18 ways. Pairs with pairs, in 9 ways. Trios with individual items, in 6 ways. 
Trios with pairs, in 6 ways. Trios with trios, once. The sum of all of these is 49. 
But in the case of the other planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, which have a dual ruler- 
ship, four items would have to be considered, and more than 300 combinations would occur.115 For of these 
four, individual items with individual items would have to be combined first. Then pairs with individual 
items and with pairs; trios with individual items, pairs, and trios; then quartos with individual items, pairs, 
trios, and quartos; and this individually and reciprocally. But if to these are added the celestial states of the 
planets also to be considered, seeing that they act or do not act, or act differently, in accordance with their 
different celestial state, and the different kinds of effects also to be considered, into which the essential sig- 
nification of each house of the figure is generally divided, then what each planet will signify in the house of 
the figure to which it is opposed, such a number of combinations will occur, that the human intellect would 
seem to be unequal to examining and pondering them for the kind of effect to be determined by a future di- 
rection, even if the necessary consideration of the fixed stars should be omitted. 
The third reason is that future accidents, depending on the free will of man (of which sort are marriage, 
litigation, travel, dignities, etc.), are very often suppressed and eluded by the mastery of the will. Namely 
1151 think the total number of combinations would actually be 225, but this is still a large number. 
70 

===== PAGE 80 =====

because the will per se is not subject to natural fate, which has authority per se only over the corporeal na- 
ture, but not over the rational spirit, which is of a spiritual order. 
Still other causes might be brought forward, but these three principal ones should suffice to show how ar- 
duous it is to define whether and what type of effect any particular direction is going to produce. Since in ad- 
dition the age of the native, and his sex, and lineage, and the law or customs of his native land must be taken 
into account, lest events should be predicted for an infant, or a girl, or a peasant that are only appropriate for 
men of the nobility, or that are alien to the customs of the native land. Therefore, this alone seems to be to be 
worthy of admiration: that human sagacity through a very intricate labyrinth of difficulties is nevertheless 
able to arrive at an idea of the type of effects, and [to do so] fairly often. And it seems to me that those who 
scorn and ridicule a learned astrologer, if he has strayed from the truth with regard to the kind and quantity 
of the effect he has predicted, are deserving of blame, rather than the astrologer himself, who chanced to err 
in this conjectural science. 
Besides, since it must be determined first whether the direction under consideration is going to produce 
any affect, rather than what type it will produce; that, of course—the question of whether there will be an ef- 
fect—should precede the question of what [kind] it may be and what sort it may be; and for that reason we 
shall unfold in the following chapter the means by which that may be known. 
Chapter 2. How it may be Known Whether a Given Direction is Going 
to Produce any Effect, and what Kind it is Going to be. 
For this purpose, both termini of the direction should be considered, i.e., the significator and the 
promittor, for the effect is from the concourse of both [as we have shown] in Section 1, Chapter 7, and the 
significator is a cusp or a planet, while the promittor is a planet, or its aspect or antiscion, or a fixed star. But 
in general, if the significator is a planet, the judgment should be made from the proper nature of that planet 
and from its celestial and terrestrial state. But if it is a cusp, the judgment should be made from the nature of 
the cusp and the state of its ruler—celestial as well as terrestrial. But as for the promittor—if it is a planet, 
judgment should also be made from its proper nature and from both its celestial and terrestrial state; but if it 
is an aspect, judge from the nature of the aspect and the planet aspecting, and from the state of both of these, 
and then from the ruler of the place of the aspect and the house in which the aspect falls. 
But for the type [of accident], the significator should be looked at first. For upon its well-perceived signi- 
fication the principal light of the prediction will depend. For since it is subjective in the effect, and the 
promittor is effective, and the efficient agent acts only in accordance with the nature and disposition of the 
subject, it follows that special account must be taken of this disposition in predicting the effect. And so it 
must be carefully investigated what the significator itself signifies with regard to that for which it is directed 
and adduced. Moreover, it is directed [first] for those things to which it is determined by its bodily position, 
and then for its rulership if it is a planet, or for the native in connection with these same things. Therefore, it 
must be carefully noted whether it signifies the same things by reason of its bodily position and its rulership, 
as the ruler of the 1 Oth in the 10th, by which it will signify these things strongly; or whether it signifies con- 
trary things, as the ruler of the 10th in the i2th, or of the 8th in the 1st. And whatever it presages more effec- 
tively will then be especially noteworthy, as also when it rules several houses. Therefore it should be seen 
whether a significator signifies good or evil for such things. Namely, in good houses a future good, or the 
deprivation or destruction of something good, or misfortune; but in evil houses, a future evil, or the depriva- 
tion, mitigation, or restoration of it; and this in accordance with Book 21, Section 2, Chapters 2,4, and 12, if 
the significator itself is a planet; or, if it is a cusp, by taking note of which ruler it is subject to, whether it is a 
benefic or a malefic and conformable in its effect, both by celestial state and by terrestrial determination, to 
71 

===== PAGE 81 =====

the fortune or misfortune of the subject that this cusp represents. 
After this, the promittor must be considered, whose function is to produce efficiently the effect of the di- 
rection, and on whom consequently that effect principally depends. And if it is a planet, it must be noted 
from its nature, analogy, celestial state, and determination whether or not it will agree with that significator 
in causing good or evil in connection with the subject for which the significator is directed. But if it is an as- 
pect, it must first be seen whether it is benefic or malefic by nature; then of what planet it is, whether a 
benefic or a malefic; then what the state and determination of that planet is, in accordance with Book 21, 
Section 2, Chapters 10 and 11; and finally, in which house that aspect falls; and from this, its concord or dis- 
cord with the significator may be seen, as was just said for a planet as promittor. For, as an aspect falling in 
any house acts on its general subject by reason of the planet aspecting, and its celestial state and determina- 
tion in the figure, then by reason of the proper nature of the aspect itself, so does that aspect, occurring to any 
significator, concur in the effect of the direction through its own force from the five things mentioned above. 
But the effects of the aspects are still to be distinguished in accordance with the house in which they fall and 
in accordance with the significators that they meet. For when Mars is posited in the 8th, its opposition ef- 
fects one thing by falling into the 2nd house and another thing when it comes to the Ascendant by direction; 
thus, in fact, in the former case it dissipates the wealth, but in the latter it causes death or dangers to the life. 
But it can be said that each effect happens at the time of the direction; and the same is true of the rest. 
Therefore, having carefully examined these things and weighed them on both sides with the proper 
amount of prudence, so that the concord or discord of the termini with regard to any subject may be 
plain as, in the case of honours and dignities, if the significator is in the 10th house, now [examine] the ter- 
mini themselves: either they will agree together in conferring honours, or they will agree together against 
those honours, or one will act for honours, and the other against, or both will be indifferent, i.e., each partly 
for honours and partly against, so that the victory is doubtful; or finally, one only is indifferent, and the other 
is for or against. In the first case, the honours will occur or some fortune in connection with honours, either 
in undertakings or in actions. Just as if the ruler of the Midheaven, well aspected and following, is directed 
to the Midheaven, also well aspected. In the second case, no honours will occur, but rather some misfortune 
in connection with them, either in undertakings or in actions. Just as if Saturn badly aspected is directed to 
the Midheaven or to the Sun badly aspected in the 10th. In the third case, although the victory of one over the 
other should be noted, yet the effect of the direction will follow the state of the promittor, for if the 
significator is for honours and the promittor against, nothing will be done, or only something evil in connec- 
tion with honours; just as if Saturn badly aspected is directed to the Midheaven well aspected; for the action 
is from the promittor, but no one gives what he does not have. And if the significator is against something 
and the promittor for it, something at least moderately good will happen because the promittor by itself is 
able to confer that unless the disposition of the subject is altogether alien. Just as if, for an honourable sol- 
dier and one famous for his actions, Mars well aspected is directed to the Midheaven badly aspected: he will 
still attain a military honour, even though a middling one. In the fourth case, something good and something 
evil can happen, or something at the same time good and evil, at least successively, or something indifferent, 
or nothing; furthermore, if something does happen, it will always be small or middling. In the fifth and final 
case, if the significator is indifferent, and the promittor is for honours, some fortune will happen in honours, 
if against, some misfortune. But if the promittor is indifferent, and the significator is for, something good 
will happen; if against, nothing. 
Further, in the concord or discord of the termini, it must be seen how great the strength of each terminus 
is for signifying about the subject of the direction. For the stronger or by the more numbers116 they have sig- 
nified either good or evil, the more certainly and abundantly the good or the evil will happen. Just as, if 
116 That is, by the number of good or evil testimonies the terminus has. 
72 

===== PAGE 82 =====

Taurus is in the Midheaven, and Mars is in Cancer in the 12th, injured by the square of Saturn, and Mars is 
directed to the Midheaven; Mars itself being powerful with more numbers will be susceptible to misfortune 
in connection with honours and actions, namely because it is malefic by nature, dejected in the 12th badly 
afflicted by the square of Saturn, and, in addition, inimical to the Midheaven. But if both termini signified 
only weakly, the direction will scarcely have any effect. 
Besides, a more serious difficulty occurs here. For, since the 10th house in which the significator is 
placed is not only [the house] of honours but especially and primarily [the house] of the native's actions and 
undertakings, which are also comparable to honours, it must be discerned by some means whether the for- 
tune or misfortune signified by its directions is going to be in connection with honours, or in connection 
with undertakings and actions, since it is known that even in the same geniture not all the directions of the 
Midheaven, or of the Sun in the 10th, confer honours, even though they are fortunate, as much by reason of 
the Midheaven itself or the Sun, as by reason of the individual promittors coming into configuration with 
them. And besides, honours do not always follow from famous deeds, do they? 
I reply: That all the possible essential significations that pertain to the 10th house combine into one ge- 
neric reason of immaterial mundane good to act upon the native in this connection; and in type this is either 
good fortune in actions, or simply glory and fame from outstanding actions, or the attainment of the dignity 
and profession [necessary] to act. And therefore, when the states of the significator and the promittor speci- 
fied above are only looked at in a general way, only the highest kind of effect of a direction can be predicted, 
namely that there may be going to be something good or evil in connection with it to act upon the native; but 
not whether it is going to be something fortunate or unfortunate in actions, or whether it win be an attain- 
ment or a loss of dignity, for misfortune in actions does not always destroy dignity. 
Moreover, for this to be determined (which is at least to find a subtype), first, it must be seen whether the 
native's radical figure in itself diverts future dignities by directions, or presages their lack or destruction. 
For directions only deploy that which is innate in the radix, or, in their own time, they reduce to an act that 
which the radical figure contains in potential; and so they do nothing that is not presignified in the radix by 
the nature, state, and determination of the signs and planets; otherwise, the nature of (he radical figure 
would make no difference for future accidents [arising] from directions; and the directions would be able to 
operate contrary to the radical constitution of the caelum and contrary to the native's disposition; and so the 
science of the stars would be absolutely contrary to itself, which is absolutely foreign to reason and experi- 
ence. Therefore, when [the figure] is consistent with a lack of honours or with deprivation of honours, it is 
certain that a direction will not have any effect with regard to honours or dignities except perhaps frustrated 
endeavors; therefore the effect will rather be with regard to actions. But if either the future occurrence or the 
destruction of honours is signified, since nothing can be overturned that was not first there, then a direction 
will be able to strengthen the effect with regard to dignities, either that there will be [dignities] or that they 
will be destroyed, or at least favored or disfavored. And it will be possible to discern in another way and 
more closely whether there is going to be a good effect or an evil one in connection with actions or dignities 
by consideration of the significator and the promittor as follows. 
If the significator itself is the cusp of the 10th house, which the Sun or the Moon, well disposed, rule by 
domicile or exaltation, or if the cusp itself is rendered fortunate by the presence of a planet that is benefic by 
nature or by determination and well disposed, but especially by exaltation, or by the presence of some royal 
fixed [star], or if it is in trine to the Sun or to the Moon, they being well disposed, or under the rulership of a 
planet that is exalted and angular, or at least in good aspect with it, and such like, the effect of the direction 
will be especially [determined] towards honours and dignities; and [these will be] more certain and out- 
standing, the more things are in concurrence with those testimonies, not however having excluded good for- 
tune in actions. 
73 

===== PAGE 83 =====

Similarly, if the signiflcator is a planet in the 10th house, or the ruler of the Midheaven, and especially if 
it is the Sun or the Moon, [or] primaryplanets, either Saturn or Jupiter, around which satellites are present117 
just as with the Sun—a sign of excellence and dignity, and [the planet] is well disposed by sign, and espe- 
cially by exaltation, or it is applying to the luminaries by aspect, especially by a good aspect, or to an exalted 
planet, or it is the ruler of the Ascendant in the 10th fortunately disposed, or with a royal fixed [star], or 
something else of excellence accompanies that significator, such as a doryphory of planets or of illustrious 
fixed [stars], the effect of the direction will also be especially in connection with dignities, perhaps through 
fortunate future actions. 
But if the planet is Mars, Venus,118 or Mercury, which lack satellites,119 and there are only single satel- 
lites of the Sun, and neither these nor the Midheaven has any excellent mode of signifying or any significa- 
tion of excellence, it is more probable that the effect of the direction will be in connection with actions 
undertaken by the native, or in connection with arts and crafts.120 
But as for the promittor, if it is a planet, and especially if it is the Sun, the Moon, Saturn, or Jupiter, well 
placed as [mentioned] above, and the ruler of its significator, or of the Midheaven, or even of the Ascendant 
is exalted or otherwise outstandingly well disposed, or also any other planet in excellent state, or with a 
royal fixed [star], the direction would be allotted its effect in connection with future honours. However, it 
must be carefully noted that if the promittor is a planet, the kind of event will have to be taken from the na- 
ture of the planet and the domicile in which it is placed rather than from that which it rules, namely because a 
planet is more efficaciously determined by its bodily position than by its rulership, unless the latter determi- 
nation is very powerful from some other location, for if this is the case, the opposite can occur. 
But if the promittor is the strong aspect of a strong planet, and especially the Sun, Saturn, or Jupiter, or 
another planet that is exalted, or the significator's ruler excellently disposed, the direction will tend more to 
honours. 
But if the promittor is Mars, Venus, or Saturn, or their aspects, or those of other planets that do not have 
an excellent means of signifying, the direction will more likely operate in connection with honours. How- 
ever, the annual revolution of the native and also his age suited or unsuited to honours or to labors will also 
help in distinguishing these. 
However, it must be noted that a significator excellently disposed does not always or in all its directions 
cause honours, but only with conformable promittors. And the same things must be said about the promittor 
with respect to the significator. Whence it is no wonder that dignities rarely occur. 
Further, the things said above about the significator and the promittor especially make known fortunate 
events in connection with honours, dignities, the profession, undertakings, and actions. But misfortunes are 
principally signified by promittors that are malefic by nature or by determination, such as Saturn and Mars, 
as well as the rulers of the 7th, 8th, and 12th badly disposed, as [when they are] in exile, fall, or otherwise, 
and in such a state joining in the direction either by body or by malefic rays, and also these same planets 
117 The reference is to the moons of Saturn and Jupiter, which had been discovered in Morin's lifetime. Galilei had dis- 
covered Jupiter's four large satellites in 1610, and he and other astronomers, seeing an appendage on either side of Satum, 
supposed that they were moons, although they were actually rings. But Satum was later found to have moons, so Morin's 
statement is correct. 
118 The Latin text has Satum, but the context seems to indicate Venus. 
119 Today, we know that Mars has satellites, but these were first announced in Swift's Gulliver's Travels (1726) as a dis- 
covery of the Lilliputians (confirmed by Hall in 1877) and were of course unknown to Morin. 
l2l) According to the classical astrologers, the three terrestrial planets, Mars, Venus, and Mercury preside over occupa- 
tions. See Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos, iv. 4 "The Quality of Action" and Firmicus, Mathesis, Mathesis iv. 21 "Actions." 
74 

===== PAGE 84 =====

strong [and] joining with bad rays effect the same thing; for of course planets malefic by nature or determi- 
nation, if they are strong, are very harmful with their malefic rays, Moreover Saturn, or a planet in the 12th, 
which is [the house] of secret enemies, imprisonment, and exile, or its ruler, especially a malefic, and evilly 
disposed, will bring misfortune more in connection with [the native's] honours, dignities, and his profes- 
sion. But Mars, and then the rulers of the 1st, 5th, 7th, or 8th, and also of the 9th and the 1 Ith, more in con- 
nection with actions. And it must be noted that Saturn badly disposed in the 10th not only portends evil in 
connection with actions or honours by its own directions to suitable following promittors, but also when as a 
promittor it comes by body or by bad aspect to the preceding Midheaven or its ruler, or to the Ascendant or 
its ruler, or to the Sun, the Moon, or the Lot [of Fortune]; and thus too with the other planets badly disposed 
in another house. For a planet causes that which it signifies by its bodily position and rulership in accor- 
dance with its own nature and state, not only as a significator, but also as a promittor, and in the latter mode 
of course effectively, but in the former subjectively through the influential disposition impressed radically, 
as has often been said. 
So, therefore, the approximate kind [of event] or the subordinate type of effect can be known in advance 
from some future direction. However, for the greater surety and glory of astrology, in directions of the 
Midheaven or of a planet in the 10th house, when there is some doubt about the kind of event, it should not 
be determined uniquely towards what it is going to be, but it may be predicted that it is going to be in con- 
nection with dignities, or actions, or other things that pertain to the 10th house, inclining nevertheless to- 
wards what seems more likely to occur if any light appears; and thus the truth of a legitimate prediction will 
rarely be lacking in one kind [of event] or another. For from the many kinds [of possible events] no one's in- 
tellect is able to determine the one that is precisely true, although the science of astrology is capable of this. 
For the thing is inherently difficult, and [it is one] in which human intellect is often shrouded in fog, but the 
intellect of a Demon is much more perspicacious, and by this science he can predict many things with cer- 
tainty that a man cannot attain to. Therefore, a wise astrologer, if he wants to look after his own reputation 
and that of astrology [itself], will only predict future things generically in the manner explained above, and 
he will not determine uniquely any minor detail unless there is an evident agreement of the testimonies and 
an evident disposition of t he subject, or unless [he has had] frequent experience in connection with a partic- 
ular type of thing, indicating that when a planet in a particular house is directed to another planet posited in 
another particular house, the effect sometimes happens in connection with the things signified by the houses 
that those planet role, rather than the things signified by the houses in which they are situated. As will be tes- 
tified by experience itself, in contradiction to the common axiom, that the presence of a planet is more pow- 
erful than the rulership of one that is absent. 
Moreover, that which was set forth above about the things essentially signified by the 10th house must 
similarly be understood about the things essentially signified by all the other houses, for example about the 
things essentially signified by the 7th house, which are marriage, contracts, lawsuits, open enemies, etc. For 
it must always be seen to which of these the significator and the promittor are more disposed by nature, by 
analogy, and by celestial state and determination in the figure. For Venus is more disposed to marriage, 
Mercury to contracts, Mars to lawsuits, quarrels, and duels, especially if these planets are in the 7th or rule 
the 7th and the [native's] age is appropriate for these accidents. Similarly, the thing essentially signified by 
the 8th house is unique in kind to the highest degree, namely death, of which there are two subordinate 
types—natural death and violent death. And there are as many minor types of natural death as there are of 
sickness, but there are also very many types of violent death: by an enemy, by wild animals, by command of 
the prince, by falling from a height, by drowning, and such like, about which there is bound to be ample dis- 
cussion in the practice of astrology; and so too with the rest of the houses. 
75 

===== PAGE 85 =====

Chapter 3. By what Means an Astrologer can Arrive at an Understanding 
of the Type of Effect from the Direction Producing it. 
If the kind of effect produced by a direction can by no means easily be determined by an astrologer, as 
was said in the previous chapter, then from this it is plain that to predict down to the finest detail is going to 
be much more difficult, especially in connection with the things signified by the 8th and 10th houses, which 
above all the rest abound in a diversity of types. Still, this can be proved to be possible from the fact that no 
other effects are produced than those that were potentially latent in their own causes; consequently, if any- 
one knows these causes exactly, he will be able to designate their effects specifically. For which purpose, it 
seems to me that the following method ought to be used. 
Firstly, the approximate kind or the subordinate type of future effect should be sought from the previous 
chapter with as much prudence of mind as possible; as in the case of a dignity or profession, whether a mili- 
tary one is signified by Mars, or a judiciary one by Jupiter, or a mechanical one, or an educational one from 
Venus or Mercury, having also looked at the rest of the things necessary for this [judgment]. In the case of 
death, whether a natural or a violent one is signified. And so with the rest. 
Secondly, if a dignity is signified, the custom of the country with regard to the distribution of dignities 
should be noted. For ecclesiastical status should be so separated from secular status that secular dignities 
would not accrue to ecclesiastics, nor ecclesiastical benefices to secular persons. Because Caesar has di- 
vided the Empire with Jupiter, and Christ said to Pilate,121 "My Kingdom is not of this world," and "No one 
can serve God and Mammon."122 And the Devil, the author of confusion, overturns that order in evil places, 
and benefices are conferred upon secular persons, the richer benefices especially upon magnates, who, per- 
mitting the title of priest to be bome by some ignorant or avaricious person when a fee has been paid, and not 
bothering with the divine service, unjustly take possession of the returns of the goods of Christ that He ac- 
quired with His Own passion for that service, and they impiously grow rich from these. But on the contrary 
very often abbots and bishops, having scorned God and the care of the souls entrusted to them, prostitute the 
sacred dignities, coveting secular things; and they become not only secular ministers of kings, but (horrible 
to say) also governors of fortresses and provinces, and sometimes even commanders and generalissimos of 
armies on the earth as well as on the sea. And this not against the Turk, pagans, or heretics, but rather 
(joining in league] with these against [other] Catholics; and so the people of Christ are oppressed with iron, 
flames, hunger, and terrible robberies, and through it all their blood is cruelly spilled for whatever these 
most unworthy pastors of souls maintain it is more worthy to be spilled for. But what astrologer will proph- 
esy these monstrous things about a man distinguished by ecclesiastical dignities, from whose depraved will 
(which is not subject to the stars) and insatiable ambition these things come forth? For granted that they may 
also be inclined to such things by their natal stars, who will say that such ecclesiastics can be restrained nei- 
ther by the fear of God, nor by respect for their own dignity, nor by everyday shame, and will be worse than 
secular men? 
Besides, dignities are so called because they ought by the law of nature and were formerly accustomed to 
be conferred upon those more worthy; and this justice may still be observed among the barbarians of the 
New World, not yet infected by the poison of gold, who in fact elect leaders for their own wars, whose pre- 
eminence of talent and body, whose strength, eloquence, and outstanding deeds recommend them before all 
the rest [of their tribe], obviously because they judge it to be reasonable that those inferior in the gifts of na- 
ture should be under those who are superior, and because it is unjust and disgraceful to prefer idlers to those 
who are strong and noble. And among the Chinese, whose very great and populous kingdom is governed 
121 John 18:36. 
122 Matt. 5:24. 
76 

===== PAGE 86 =====

with the highest political skill, all dignities are conferred, free of charge, by the king, along with the most 
ample and appropriate stipends to every [recipient], and only on worthy men who also dispense the king's 
justice without charge. But among Christians (for shame!) this order of nature is inverted, and gold, which is 
said to be incorruptible, thus already corrupts everything, so that there is no dignity, secular, or judicial, or 
military, or political, or fiscal, and no office even so insignificant that it is not very disgracefully sold; in- 
deed on account of such foul avarice, not only are the offices or dignities multiplied these days, but new 
ones without 123 any absolute necessity; indeed they are introduced for the destruction of the republic 
against [existing] laws, old customs, and liberty, and they are bought at an immense price, when on the con- 
trary it should be most necessary to devote attention to suppressing the old ones or to decreasing their num- 
ber. And so for the nobles, the learned, and for those who are most skilled in their own professions, as well 
as for men outstanding in virtue, the iron door to honours and dignities is shut unless the golden key to open- 
ing it is in their hands. Would that kings understood how disgraceful and pernicious this is! 
Moreover, I am expounding these few things, and passing over much more in silence that should be care- 
fully noted by an astrologer; lest on astral indications of outstanding character, or of eminence in some sci- 
ence or virtue, or of dignities promised by the stars, he should on that account pronounce dignities to a 
native in France, unless that native shall have been rich enough from his inheritance or otherwise to buy 
them. For even though all men bom to dignities will be aroused by the stars at the time of suitable directions 
to seek them out or to qualify for them, yet very seldom will they be obtained in France, except by those who 
have the money available to buy them, and very often they are sold to those who are unworthy because of ig- 
norance or offenses. And no one can doubt that such venality of offices is of all evils before God and man as 
detestable as bilge-water, and consequently it is tinder constantly [ready to excite] the burning wrath of God 
upon us, presaging the overthrow of the kingdom after stupendous and ruinous punishments are inflicted 
upon those who have introduced this venality and made it hereditary.124 
Similarly, in France, violent death, at least from an open enemy, is more frequent than elsewhere because 
of the frequent duels and homicides, for which punishment is fairly rare on account of the infamous and per- 
nicious venality of justice; whence, more impudently the boldness for killing, pillaging, and carrying out 
other crimes with impunity. But in Italy violent death is more to be feared from poison than from dueling. 
Furthermore, in the case of judicial death, there is one kind of punishment in France and another elsewhere, 
as well as one kind for a noble and another for a commoner. Therefore these and similar things must be 
known in advance by the astrologer in the part of the earth or in whatever kingdom [he is concerned with], so 
that he may pronounce more surely on future effects, since it is certain that the stars in acting follow the dis- 
position of the subject to which the foregoing belong. 
Third, the lineage of the native must be taken into account. For one dignity must be sought out from a di- 
rection of the same virtue for the son of a prince, another for the son of a baron, another for the son of a sena- 
tor, another for the son of a merchant, and another for the son of a peasant. Nor should the native's age be 
omitted either, nor his kind of life, for the same things are not suitable for a boy, a man, and an old man, nor 
the same things for an ecclesiastic and a secular person, unless the order, as mentioned above, is perverted. 
Having taken all this into account, he must now arrive at the more proximate cause of the type of future 
accident. Which is of course the significator and the promittor, of which the former, by its bodily position, 
mlership, or opposition aspect, on account of the mutual conformity in signifying of opposed houses, repre- 
sents the subject that is going to be affected, while the latter signifies the future effect in these same ways. 
Firstly, therefore, the strength of the termini of the direction must be noted, for the greater it is, the more 
123 Reading sine 'without' instead of sint 'are'. 
124 The pervasive corruption described by Morin did in fact ultimately lead to the French Revolution. 
77 

===== PAGE 87 =====

noticeable is the effect that is signified. Which effect, thus from the smallest or from moderate things distin- 
guished from the [appropriate] part of the caelum, and with the native's lineage, character, profession, state 
of health and reputation taken into account, will now begin to make known its own type to some extent at 
least. 
Secondly, see whether the significator and the promittor agree in signification or disagree and in what, 
both from their own nature and from their accidental celestial state and terrestrial determination; for the ef- 
fect will very often be in accord with that agreement or disagreement, for [when] Mars [is] principally the 
ruler of the 8th and the Ascendant, they greatly disagree for life, and the Midheaven and Saturn badly dis- 
posed [disagree] for honours; but the Sun, or Jupiter ruler of the Midheaven coming to the Midheaven itself, 
is the greatest agreement for honours; and the reasoning is the same in the rest 
Thirdly, since the promittor, according to Section 1, Chapter 5, acts in the effect of the direction as the 
[terminus] acting and conferring the form of the future event, it must especially be inspected to determine 
the type of that event. And the promittor is either a planet or an aspect; consequently, if from the foregoing 
the kind of future event is conjectured to be a dignity, and the promittor is a planet, the sort of dignities that 
correspond to that planet as their cause may be seen in the Table of Universal Rulership of the Planets fol- 
lowing Book 8, Section 3, Chapter 3; then [it should be decided], which of these dignities agrees more with 
the lineage, character, age, and kind of life of the native. For Mars coming to the Midheaven causes military 
honours; Mercury, senatorial honours, or professions of learning, as in my case. But in addition, it must be 
seen in which house of the figure Mars is; for, coming to the Midheaven from the 11 Ith, it will cause hon- 
ours through the help of friends; from the 12th, it will harm honours through secret enemies; and finally, it is 
necessary to see which house Mars itself rules, for the ruler of the 2nd coming to the Midheaven will effect 
something other than if it were the ruler of the 12th. And having looked at all these things the type of effect 
can be judged. For the promittor brings to the effect of the direction all its own complete signification, even 
though it very often acts only according to some part [of that signification] in connection with the disposi- 
tion of the subject. But if the promittor is an aspect, see what planet makes it, and what the nature of the as- 
pect is, and in what house the aspecting planet is placed, and which [houses] it rules. And judge according to 
these. For a benefic aspect of a benefic planet will easily confer a dignity analogous to that planet [as shown] 
in the table previously mentioned. And if it is the Sun or the Moon, especially in its own exaltation, or with 
rulership in the 10th house, the dignity will be an illustrious one in consideration of the native's lineage and 
kind of life. But if it is a malefic aspect of a benefic, either the dignity will be a minor one, or oppositions and 
surmountable obstacles will occur in connection with it. 
But if the event is conjectured to be contrary to dignity, it will be necessary to see what type of contrari- 
ety is signified. And the significator and promittor will indicate this. For if the significator, that is the 
Midheaven, or its ruler, or a planet in the 10th, is badly disposed by celestial and terrestrial state, and that 
planet is malefic by nature, that bad state of the significator portends a fall from a dignity. And if the 
promittor is a planet malefic by nature in the 6th, 8th, or 12th house, it will be a loss accompanied by death, 
or exile, or incarceration, and that on account of crimes or secret enemies. If the evils are minor, only a sus- 
pension of the dignity will occur, or a suppression of it, or some sort of misfortune or opposition in the exer- 
cise of it. 
But since in this [kind of] variety it is very difficult for the human intellect to define exactly by the in- 
spection of the natal figure alone the most minute detail of the future event, therefore in the prediction all the 
types of events should be expounded that can very likely arise from that direction, taking into consideration 
the native's lineage, age, and condition; and thus the honour of the science will be preserved. But if the fig- 
ure of the revolution for that time is erected, it can be detected from it much more accurately and certainly 
whether the direction is going to produce an effect and what sort down to the least detail. For which the daily 
practice in connection with observations of the effects of the stars in these directions will especially make 
78 

===== PAGE 88 =====

known, having taken into consideration the lineage and kind of life of the natives, according to Aphorism 1 
of the Centiloquy "By you and by the science.. .",25 For even though he is one who is knowledgeable (i.e., 
he judges from the science), he cannot declare the particular forms of things as this same aphorism states, 
because in fact the science is not concerned with particulars,126 although he will also be able to predict the 
special form of the effect, as that the native will be the commander of an army, a counselor, a bishop, etc., 
but not that he will be commander of a particular army, or counselor of a particular parliament, or bishop of 
a particular church, etc. But doubtless with all these aids from annual revolutions and lengthy observations, 
he will always be safer if he stops with the subordinate kind [of effect], predicting only a military, judicial, 
or ecclesiastical dignity for men qualified by condition [for these dignities], or individual types of events 
pertaining to the proposed direction, and to expound the most appropriate ones to the native, at least when, 
without inspection of the revolutions, the prognostications of the directions are given out for the native's 
whole life. For thus his prediction will seldom be false, and its truth demands a sublime theoretical and prac- 
tical notice of the causes, with notable prudence, or indeed wisdom, on account of the sublimity of this sci- 
ence. 
But, for the greater elucidation of this doctrine, some examples should be added. Therefore, let it be sup- 
posed that the promittor Mars, ruler of the 12th, is directed from the 2nd house to the Ascendant, which sig- 
nifies, or represents, the native's person, his life, health, moral nature, and mental qualities. It is sought, 
then, what the future effect will be. And firstly, it will be evil because Mars is naturally malefic, and there- 
fore inimical to life. Secondly, since life, health, and moral nature are affected, so also by extension are ei- 
ther death, or sickness, or anger, or a quarrel; and this will be the more certain if the Ascendant is otherwise 
badly afflicted or Mars is inimical to it. Thirdly, because Mars is the ruler of the 12th, it also signifies sick- 
ness, imprisonment, or exile; but if it is also ruler of the 7th, namely if the Ascendant is in the sign T aurus, it 
will also signify quarrels and duels, and, because Mars is in the 2nd and it does not signify wealth there, but 
rather dissipation of wealth, then the native will not experience an increase in assets, but rather a dissipation 
of them, and, because it is opposite the 8th house, it signifies death or at least danger to his life. And from all 
this, to say precisely which of these things will happen is by no means so easy, but to this end two things in 
particular should be noted. First, which one of them is more strongly or more frequently signified, in the rad- 
ical influx as well as by [the indications of) each terminus of the direction. Second, which of them is signi- 
fied more in the revolution, in which the radical places of the significator and the promittor will have to be 
taken into account and also Mars, the promittor, and Venus, ruler of the Ascendant. Then, on which days of 
that revolution the transits of the planets become more appropriate for inferring evil, as will be taught in its 
own place. Moreover, it frequently happens that many things are signified at the same time by the same di- 
rection, things either distinct among themselves or connected by some subordination. Just as from the pre- 
ceding direction there can be signified, in the same year or at the same time, sicknesses and quarrels, distinct 
among themselves, or anger, a quarrel, a duel, a wound, and death, or imprisonment—accidents connected 
by subordination. But whether one of the abovesaid accidents will be signified to happen from that direc- 
tion, or several distinct accidents, or several subordinated accidents; and of what sort they are will have to be 
enunciated from the radical signification of the chart, which will contain either imprisonment, or violent 
death, or the absence of these, from what is more strongly signified in the direction, and from the agreement 
or disagreement of the revolution. Next, especially, from the native's state and his circumstances or busi- 
ness affairs in that same year. Also, if he has an open enemy, or if he will have gone to war, you will be able 
125 Pseudo-Ptolemy, Centiloquy, Aph. 1, "By you and by the science. For it is not possible that one who is knowledgeable 
can declare the particular forms of things, just as a sense cannot perceive a particular but only some general form of a thing it 
senses, and [so] the one discussing a thing must use conjectures about it. Moreover, only those inspired by a divinity can pre- 
dict particulars." The point is that astrology can supply general information, but the astrologer must supply the details, based 
on his knowledge of the native and the native's circumstances, etc. Morin states this repeatedly. 
126 An important statement of principle. 
79 

===== PAGE 89 =====

to predict wounds only or death, especially if the figure of the nativity inclines to violent death; and the same 
prudence will have to be exercised in the other cases. 
Or, let Jupiter be in the 11 th, directed to the Sun in the 1 Oth, and the effect of the direction be sought. The 
Sun by its nature is analogous to honours, glory, and fame; and in the 1 Oth it is determined to honours, digni- 
ties, and action; and consequently if it is fortunate in its celestial state, it presages illustrious actions, glory, 
and fame, as well as notable dignities. Moreover, Jupiter in the 11th is favorably determined to friends by its 
position, but potentially to honours; therefore the things signified by this significator and this promittor will 
be favorably combined, and that direction will therefore bring about honours for the native through the as- 
sistance of his friends, or the native's friends will themselves be the cause of his honours, which is the same 
thing. Or else, the native will win over to himself many friends through his profession or through outstand- 
ing actions and widespread fame, or those friends will be the cause of his outstanding actions and fame. But 
now, since the Sun concurs subjectively in this direction, and both by its position in the 10th and also by its 
nature it signifies great and regal honours as the kind [of the effect], and Jupiter effectively concurs; there- 
fore the form or the type of honours at least will be [indicated] by Jupiter, taking into account Jupiter's ruler- 
ship. For if it is ruler of the 7th, a dignity connected with warfare, such as governor of a fortress or a 
province, or command of an army, or something similar will be signified. If it is the ruler of the 9th, the dig- 
nity will be an ecclesiastical or ambassadorial one. If of the 1 Oth, the dignity will be judicial rather than mili- 
tary or ecclesiastical, unless by chance the ruler of the 7th or the 9th is also the ruler of Jupiter, or is in strong 
and benefic aspect with it, or the ruler of Jupiter is in the 7th or the 9th. But the minor details of the effect, as 
that the native will be a captain, governor of a fortress, etc., or the pastor of a church, a bishop, or a coun- 
selor, or a chairman, etc., must be sought from the native's lineage, age, natural aptitude, and the strength or 
debility of the celestial causes in the radix and in the direction, since such is the strength of these causes at 
times, that they can lift a pauper up out of dung and set him down with princes, by God's will, Whose natural 
providence is dispensed principally through celestial causes. 
So again, the Moon in the 10th house, ruler of that house, whose square aspect is directed into the 7th to 
Saturn, ruler of the 4th in the 6th. What, by probable reasoning, will be the effect of this direction? Since the 
effect of the direction is temporarily from the motion of the primum mobile, by which the promittor is borne 
to the significator, and since the promittor itself is determined by power (on account of that motion, which 
successively measures the time of future things) to that to which the significator127 is determined by its posi- 
tion; therefore, since that square is in the 7th, it will signify misfortune in lawsuits, contracts, or in marriage; 
and because it is from the Moon, ruler of the 10th in the 10th, misfortunes will be caused either by a power- 
ful woman or by the native's actions and profession. And because that square is carried to Saturn, ruler of 
the 4th in the 6th, that misfortune in lawsuits, contracts, or marriage will happen in connection with domes- 
tic servants, or subordinates, or animals, or in connection with parents or inheritances; and the reasoning is 
the same in other cases. For the entire prudence of this science is engaged to the highest degree in success- 
fully establishing the combinations of those things that can be presaged by the promittor as well as by the 
significator. Which, since it is of itself very difficult if only the celestial causes are looked at, will always be 
increased [in difficulty] by the consideration of the disposition of the subject, namely the native, having 
taken into consideration his lineage, age, character, and kind of life, as has often been said. Finally too, [by a 
consideration] of his circumstances and business affairs, if the special effect of a present or imminent direc- 
tion is sought. For the caelum acts in accordance with the present disposition of the subject, not only at the 
time of his nativity, as if the son of a prince and the son of a kitchen servant were bom at the same time under 
the same roof, but also at the time of the directions, whose virtue is the same in both natives, but which will 
effect different things in the individuals by reason of the disposition of the subject, as the same Sun at the 
same time and in the same place hardens mud and liquefies wax. 
127 Reading 'significator' instead of significatur 'is signified'. 
80 

===== PAGE 90 =====

Chapter 4. From what [Sources] the Certitude and Intensity of Effects 
may be Chosen through the Directions of the Significators. 
They are chosen from many considerations. For in the first place, if the significator is strong, either for 
good or evil—i.e., if for good it is a benefic planet and well disposed in celestial state, but for evil, a malefic 
badly disposed by sign, by conjunction, by aspect, etc.,—the direction will receive a more certain and in- 
tense effect, the latter being evil and the former good, provided that a similar promittor moves to it. And the 
same may be said about the cusps, for whose celestial state the nature of the sign must be noted, along with 
the conjunctions or aspects to that cusp. And the weaker the significator is, or the promittor, or both, the 
milder the direction will act, or it will do nothing at all. 
But the following things come to mind that ought to be noted in connection with strength and debility: 
1. A benefic planet well disposed by celestial state, is strong to do good and to ward off evil or to mitigate 
it according to its own determination, radical as well as directional, at least bodily and by its good rays. But 
badly disposed, it is weak, even with benefic rays, but it is stronger for evil, especially with malefic rays. But 
a malefic planet well disposed is strong to do good or to do evil according to its determination and the nature 
of its aspects. But evilly disposed, it is strong to do evil and to ward off good according to its determination, 
especially by body and malefic rays, for it cannot be helpful [even] with benefic [rays]. Finally, a planet that 
is peregrine and without any aspect from other planets, at least without a strong aspect, must properly be 
said to be weak for doing good as well as for doing evil. But it acts in accordance with its own nature and de- 
termination. 
2. The stronger a promittor is, either for good or for evil, the greater and more certain the effect that must 
be expected, provided that its virtue128 is transferred to a similar significator, and consequently the intensity 
and certitude of the effect will depend upon (he strength of both termini. 
3. A planet that is a significator or promittor and analogous, or configured with an analogous planet, is 
scarcely ever frustrated in the effect, and a notable one at that, which it also produces easily and quickly. 
And so, when the Sun in the 10th, especially when well disposed, is directed for honours, it presages out- 
standing honours when it meets a suitable promittor; or when that same Sun in the 11th comes to the 
Midheaven well disposed, or in which the Sun itself rules by domicile or exaltation; for in the prior mode as 
a significator and in the latter as a promittor it is analogous to honours; and the same thing should be judged 
if in the direction of Jupiter, ruler of the Midheaven, for dignities or undertakings, Jupiter itself or [another] 
planet [as] promittor is trine the Sun. And if the Sun is directed from the 12th to the Midheaven, which is 
ruled by Saturn in the 2nd, great secret enemies and great impediments in undertakings and actions will be 
signified, as [they were] to me in the year 1634 with Cardinal Richelieu in connection with the knowledge of 
longitudes that I had invented.129 For then I obtained considerable fame but no dignity, and I suffered much 
from unfair judges and secret enemies. 
4. If the significator and the promittor are in appropriate aspects with their rulers, that is in benefic aspect 
for a good action and in malefic aspect for an evil one, and both of them concur efficaciously in the effect, it 
will also make the effect greater. More or less the same should be judged if the significator aspects the ruler 
of the promittor, or the promittor aspects the ruler of the significator. 
5. If the Ascendant, the significator of life, or its ruler is quite strong, a planet that is promittor will only 
128 Reading eius virtus 'its virtue' instead of ad virtute. 
129 This refers to Morin's method of finding the longitude of ships at sea by astronomical observations. It is explained in 
his book Longitudinum terrestrium nec non coelestium nova ac hactenus optata scientia ... (Paris: J. Libert, 1634). 
81 

===== PAGE 91 =====

kill if it is anaeretic by determination, i.e., one that is in the 8th or is ruler of the 8th, especially one that is 
malefic by nature. If it is of moderate strength, the ruler of the place of that promittor will be able to kill. But 
if it is notably weak, any ray that is malefic by its nature or by a malefic determination will kill. Moreover, 
the significator is judged notably weak if its ruler is badly disposed by celestial state and determination, and 
especially if that significator is injured by malefics without any help from the benefics. Furthermore, that 
promittor may be judged to have the force for killing, which, especially malefic by nature, makes a hostile 
aspect to the apheta, not receiving [it], and not being received [by it] by domicile. Then, one that is contrary 
to the apheta, either by its own nature, as Saturn is to the Sun or the Moon, and Mars and Saturn to the As- 
cendant, or by its own determination, as the ruler of the 8th is to the Ascendant, or by its state, as Mars in 
Scorpio is a stronger enemy to the Ascendant in Libra. However, it must be noted that a strong apheta should 
be judged to be weak in [the native's] old age on account of the debility of his body. And so a strong 
significator of honours in boyhood should be considered to be of no virtue on account of the disposition of 
age to honours, unless the natural order is violated because of the native's lineage or the depraved customs 
of his native land. 
6. A direction naturally signifying matrimony, as Venus ruler of the 7th house to the Ascendant or to the 
preceding Midheaven, will not be allotted any effect if by any other means the signification may be over- 
thrown, either [because the native is] celibate or the entrance to religion is signified, as happened in my case 
from the direction of the Midheaven to Venus ruler of the 7th in the 12th combust along with Saturn and Ju- 
piter ruler of the 9th; and the same reasoning applies to other cases. 
7. Since directions are made by the revolution of the primum mobile, by which the promittor is trans- 
ferred to the location of the significator, then when the significator and the promittor each have the same 
declination and are of the same name,130 from this they promise more certain and greater effects because 
they are thus united partilely in the circle of position; but, when they are disposed in the contrary mode and 
widely separated, they accomplish little or nothing. 
8. From a weak or unfortunate significator, as the Ascendant, the Midheaven, or the Sun in the 10th, and 
a strong malefic promittor, a very bad and intense effect will follow—cutting off, overturning, or destroying 
the thing signified by the significator. For not every promittor cuts off in this manner, but only and espe- 
cially one that is contrary in signification to the significator. 
9. The significator of good things, whether it is a cusp or a planet, directed to its own benefic and strong 
ruler is very good, but to a planet that is in exile or in its fall in the place of the significator, it is bad; and it is 
worse if the planet that is the promittor is badly disposed. 
10. If the Sun or its trine is directed to a planet in the 10th, or to the preceding ruler of the 10th, or to Jupi- 
ter, or to its trine to a planet in the 2nd, or to the ruler of the 2nd, in the latter case wealth and in the former 
honours are certainly signified, unless the state and determination of the promittors is contrary. 
11. If a planet that is significator of good is strong and its ruler is weak, the thing will go well in the begin- 
ning and will bring hope, but it will not be able to be brought to perfection. But if the significator is weak and 
its ruler is strong, then the thing will seem difficult in the beginning, but finally it will be easily brought to 
perfection. But if the significator is strong and its mler is strong, the thing will move forward easily and out- 
standingly from beginning to end; and it will be a great effect. But if both of them are weak, the thing can in 
no way be accomplished or begun; and this must be understood of radical positions as well as of directions 
of that significator in which consideration will still have to be given to the strength or weakness of the 
promittor according to Article 2 [above]. The same should be judged about a cusp as significator; and the 
same from a similar judgment in the case of an evil significator. 
130 That is, north or south. 
82 

===== PAGE 92 =====

12. A benefic planet conjoined to benefic significators will increase their effects when they are directed 
to benefic promittors. For if the planet conjoined follows, it disposes the significator to the effect; if it pre- 
cedes, it strengthens that same significator or increases it. But when a malefic promittor comes [to a benefic 
significator], it weakens its force, and it diminishes and guards131 the significator or its subject. But a ma- 
lefic planet conjoined to benefic significators diminishes and deters their effects: indeed, it frustrates the 
preceding [significator] in its effect, or overturns it, or otherwise disposes it to misfortune. 
13. In every direction the kind, the type, the quality, the quantity and the time of the effect must be con- 
sidered. And in fact the kind is taken from the property of the house of the figure that the significator occu- 
pies, or, if it is a cusp, as the Sun in the 10th signifies royal honours only in kind, according as the 
significator is in such a house. The type and the quality from the nature and state of the promittor, the quan- 
tity from the strength or debility of the promittor and the significator, and finally the time from the distance 
of both, as was explained previously. 
14. In the direction of the Ascendant to the following Saturn, if Saturn itself is ruler of the Ascendant, and 
not a particular significator of sicknesses or of death, it will only signify sicknesses or danger to life in gen- 
eral on account of Saturn's malefic nature, and no sicknesses or danger of any great importance will happen, 
because Saturn rules the Ascendant. But if Saturn is inimical to the Ascendant, a greater sickness or a greater 
danger will be signified, also a more certain one, even though it is only general. But if Saturn is allotted no 
dignity in the Ascendant, or rather it is inimical to it, and in addition it is the particular significator of death 
or of sicknesses through its own determination by body, rulership, or opposition aspect, [then its indication] 
about sickness and danger to life cannot be doubted; and the same reasoning applies to other cases, whether 
to good or to evil; and this must be carefully noted. Consequently, if the Midheaven is in Virgo, the fall of 
Venus, and it is directed to the trine of Venus, especially in Scorpio, the detriment of Venus, this direction 
will produce no good, as I know by experience.132 
Chapter 5. Some things Universal as well as Particular that mast lie Noted in 
Connection with Directions. 
I have reckoned that it is better to put these things together in a single chapter rather than to explain each 
one in a different chapter, since from what has already been said the individual items can be easily under- 
stood. And first, in connection with the direction of any significator, such as the Midheaven for undertak- 
ings [and] dignities, the following may briefly be noted. 
1. The Midheaven insofar as it is just a significator only signifies in connection with honours or actions, 
but not whether the honours are going to come to pass or whether the actions will turn out favorably. 
2. A dignity happens from the motion of the promittor when it is transferred to the place or site of the 
significator; and consequently the promittor confers those dignities through its own action, as far as the 
type. 
3. A dignity is not conferred by just any promittor that comes to the Midheaven, but only by one that is 
conformable and powerful by nature and by state or by affinity of signification; and even this one will not al- 
ways confer [a dignity], namely if the Midheaven, or its ruler, or both are badly disposed and disposed to- 
131 The word tutatur 'guards' or 'protects' seems inappropriate here. Perhaps we should read'frustrates' as in the 
following sentence. 
132 That is, when the Midheaven in Virgo comes to Scorpio and encounters a trine from Venus in Cancer or Pisces. 
83 

===== PAGE 93 =====

wards something to which they are not suited. And from this it can be clearly deduced that the future 
occurrence of a dignity depends upon the suitability of the Midheaven and the efficacy of the promittors that 
come together with it. 
4. The suitability of the Midheaven to dignities is taken from the nature of the sign, the nature and anal- 
ogy of its ruler or from the planets posited in the 1 Oth, and from their propitious state, both celestial and ter- 
restrial, and especially from a favorable connection with the luminaries, or from the nature of the planets, or 
from the determination of the beneflcs with the Midheaven itself and its ruler. And similarly, the strength 
and efficacy of the promittor is taken from its own, its ruler's, and the aspecting planets' nature, state, posi- 
tion, and connection with favorable [planets]. But in the case of the unsuitability of the significator and the 
promittor, the reverse [of these configurations] will have to be considered. However, it is proved by ordi- 
nary experience that a dignity does not happen unless the promittor or those [planets] from which it takes its 
efficacy is connected with the Midheaven, or with those [planets] by which it is made suitable, either by rul- 
ership, or by aspect, or by similarity of signification, or by excellence of state. As happened to me from the 
direction of Mercury to the Midheaven, by which I was made Regius Professor of Mathematics, even 
though Mercury did not behold either the Midheaven or its ruler, Saturn, nor did it rule [either of] them; but, 
from the fact that it was ruler of the 2nd, and consequently the significator of wealth, applying to its ruler, 
Venus, [which was] strong and in an important doryphory of the Sun, [while Mercury] itself was oriental 
and preceded all [the other planets]; and consequently it had an excellent state, and by reason of [its 
rulership over] wealth it had a similarity of signification with dignity and profession, from which those 
things necessary to livelihood are obtained. Besides, among the [various kinds of] dignities. Mercury, by its 
own nature or essentially, signifies mathematics. And a planet is never devoid of its own essential significa- 
tions; and consequently it acts through its essential as well as through its accidental [significations] from its 
position or rulership in the houses of the figure, along with the nature or disposition of the significator to 
which the promittor moves; and the same thing must be judged about any other significator. 
5. The native's lineage, bodily constitution, moral nature and mental qualities, must also be carefully 
contemplated in directions: for it sometimes happens that the first house is quite favorably constituted for 
the endowments of mind and body, and long life, so that from this are taken certainly the indications of fu- 
ture dignities, apart from any particular aptitude of the Midheaven, as in the nativity of the Blessed Charles 
de Condren,133 whose 10th is occupied by Mars in exile; moreover, the Sun was in the 1 st, and its ruler, Jupi- 
ter, in the 9th and trine its own ruler, consequently, he was made General of the Congregation of Oratory of 
Jesus, and was a man very well known for his knowledge and piety. But the 2nd house is also no less power- 
fill for the same thing, as was shown above in my case with Mercury ruler of the second; then too the 9th for 
ecclesiastical and ambassadorial dignities and such like; for the one who has the 1st, 2nd, and 9th favorably 
disposed, or their rulers, will scarcely lack dignities. Therefore, it will have to be seen how the planets in 
these houses, or their rulers, are related to the planets in the 10th, or their rulers, so that what is going to be 
may be perceived from the occourse of the [pertinent] significators and promittors. And these things that are 
said here about the 10th house, must be understood similarly about the significations of the other houses. 
Second, to any direction we shall note that it and frequently many [other] effects are signifying at the 
same time in the same year; and it is no wonder. For since every significator may signify many things at the 
same time, as the Ascendant signifies life, moral nature, and mental qualities, and the Midheaven dignities, 
undertakings, and actions; and each planet signifies those things to which it is determined by body, ruler- 
ship, and aspect, and the planet that is the promittor also acts according to the significations of its own deter- 
mination by body, rulership, and aspect, it almost always happens that the same direction produces many 
effects; from which it is plain that it is safer to predict all the effects that can be produced by the concourse of 
133 Charles de Condren (1588-1641), French theologian and politician. 
84 

===== PAGE 94 =====

the significator and the promittor, having taken both of them totally into account, rather than to predict just 
one effect. But one should always pay attention to the effect that is most strongly and principally signified, 
so that it is not overlooked and can be predicted more certainly; then pay attention to the revolution, so that 
one can note which signification it favors most. 
Third, it sometimes happens that many new directions occur in the same year. And a more certain effect 
will have to be expected in that year if they concern the same signification, as directions of the Ascendant 
and its ruler for life, or of the Midheaven and its ruler for honours and actions, and if these directions agree 
among themselves as to good or evil. But if they disagree, the judgment will have to be made in accordance 
with the one that is evidently stronger, tempered nevertheless by reason of the contrary [indication]. And the 
exact time of both must be observed, for in this case quite often such an order of nature is observed, that 
from the effect of one the effect of another follows, as from a homicide [indicated] by one direction a public 
and shameful death [follows] from another, on which account the effect of the first direction must be pru- 
dently noted and predicted. 
But when the directions that happen in the same year are of diverse signification, as directions of the As- 
cendant and the Midheaven, it must be seen whether they can agree in anything, either for good or evil. And 
that thing must be predicted boldly, and the times must also be carefully sought out, so that it may be plain 
whether some subordination can be discovered in these effects, that are diverse in type, like that which ex- 
ists in their times, and the judgment made accordingly; for some directions occasionally happen in the same 
year, subordinated in accordance with some total effect, such as directions of the Ascendant and the 
Midheaven for a depraved inclination, a bad crime, imprisonment, and death by judicial decree. And so with 
the others; but if no agreement in any total effect is found among them, then plainly they will signify differ- 
ent things. 
Fourth, some of those things that happen after birth happen unexpectedly, such as a duel, drowning, a fall 
from a height, but others step-by-step, such as the highest dignities. For the former, a single suitable direc- 
tion suffices; but for the latter, several are required, at least if the progress from the least through the middle 
to the greatest requires a notable length of time. But there is in human affairs some prime direction, from 
which many effects follow closely. As if there is a direction of Mercury to the Ascendant for the beginning 
of studies, there is no need for new directions for particular individual advances in the studies, such as pas- 
sage from one class to a higher one. Similarly, if anyone perpetrates a homicide from the direction of the 
Midheaven to the square of Mars, ruler of the 12th, in the 8th, there is no need for new directions for his in- 
carceration and violent death, which will follow that homicide, but that direction alone will suffice which 
portends all these effects; and in the same fashion, if anyone should be made Prime Minister of the Kingdom 
from a direction of the Midheaven to the Sun, since many good things and other dignities follow upon such a 
prime dignity without [any] new directions. Moreover, this [fact] must be noted in contradiction to those 
who wish to give particular directions to individual effects, and who do not perceive that from any prime di- 
rection many effects can follow, in which its force will appear after a concordant revolution or a concordant 
transit. 
Fifth, when many planets are in the same house, and consequently determined to the same kind of signi- 
fication, as in my case Venus, the Sun, Jupiter, Saturn, and the Moon are conjoined in the 12th, and the pre- 
ceding [planets] are directed to the following, each promittor produces its own effect individually and in 
accordance with its own nature. And the same thing may be said for the other significators, whether they are 
cusps, or other planets that are directed either directly or conversely to the those planets posited in the same 
house, as 1 experienced in my nativity from the directions of the Midheaven and the Ascendant to the 
abovesaid planets. 
Sixth, in future effects that are inevitably from the same fate, a particular direction is not required for 
85 

===== PAGE 95 =====

each effect, e.g. for succession, which happens to a son or to a brother from the death of the father or brother, 
a suitable direction is not necessarily required in the nativity of a son or a surviving brother, but it suffices 
that the son or brother survives. For the law from which he receives the succession to the benefice is for him 
a fate of a lower order, equivalent to a particular direction. But in successions through selection by the will 
of another person, or depending upon chance, such as to an empire, the Papacy, a bishopric, the dignity of 
chancellor, and such like, a suitable direction is required. For such things happen to the native through supe- 
rior fate, in which it is necessary that it should be the cause of the accident. And from this may be detected 
the notable error of those who wish to correct the nativities of the kings of France by means of the time of 
their coronation, and those who presage the death of the father from the directions of a future successor, 
when the kingdom has been received by the appropriate persons; for, as the death of the father principally 
depends upon his own fate and not on the fate of his son (unless he should be slain violently by his own son), 
so the succession from the father to the son is in fact assured to the son from the demise of his father, since 
aside from that nothing is necessary for the son to succeed; therefore no direction is required for this, al- 
though it can happen then with a suitable direction. Thus in fact the law by itself confers succession without 
any other consideration. And the same thing must be judged about the succession of children into the pur- 
chasable dignities belonging to their parents, by which the order of nature and justice is perverted in France, 
when a son who, from ignorance, offenses, or something else, is plainly unworthy of such a succession, is 
made a counselor, or a prefect, or some similar dignity. 
Seventh, the proper, or determined significators of the father, the mother, or the spouse, etc., are directed 
for their accidents, not only [those that they have in] common with the native, such as love, hate, and con- 
tracts, but also their own, so that it may be known what should happen to them after the birth of the native 
from their fated connection with the native through his nativity, for otherwise this cannot be known from the 
native's chart. But it may be known far more certainly from the directions of the chart of the father, the 
mother, the brother, the spouse, etc.; thus in fact the accidents of any man depend more upon his own natal 
constitution of the caelum than on someone else's or upon a common one, but this will be stated more fully 
below. 
Eighth, in the directions of significators to the aspects of planets, see whether the nature of the aspect 
agrees with the nature and determination of the planet making such an aspect; that is, whether, when it is a 
benefic aspect, the aspecting planet is also benefic by nature and in a good house of the caelum, or whether 
on the contrary, when it is a malefic aspect, the aspecting planet is also malefic by nature in an evil house of 
the celestial figure; [for] if so, a notable effect will indeed follow in either case—in the first case, good; in 
the latter case, evil. And consequently, from the direction of the Ascendant to the opposition of Mars in the 
8th, death will have to be predicted, as well as from the direction of (he Midheaven to the square of Saturn in 
the 8th, on account of some criminal undertaking; and the effect will be more certain and worse if the celes- 
tial state of the planet is unfavorable; but from the direction of the Midheaven to the trine of the Sun in the 
7th, it will be necessary to predict an excellent marriage for a woman, or a notable military dignity for a man. 
Ninth, in an accident signified by the conjunction of one planet with another planet, or with the 
Midheaven, an accident must not be predicted from the direction of one of the conjoined planets to the other 
if they are mutually separated, unless account is taken of the age of the native and the nature of the accident, 
lest dignities or matrimony be predicted for an infant; and often no effect is produced by that direction, but 
by others, of which the termini conjoined are the significator or the promittor: for Venus, ruler of the 7th, 
following the Ascendant by two degrees, and signifying marriage, will not cause it two years after birth. 
Tenth, when the Ascendant is directed for its own significations—temperament, health, life, moral na- 
ture, or mental qualities—the prediction must be made in accordance with the nature and state of the 
promittor. And the procedure is the same with the rest of the significators: when different promittors come 
to them successively, the promittor's state must be looked at, not only in the radix but also in the revolution; 
86 

===== PAGE 96 =====

in fact, at the time when the direction is completed and the promittor itself takes up the rulership in the divi- 
sion of time—not having omitted the state of the significator too. And this must be carefully noted in all di- 
rections, as a secret of astrology. 
Eleventh, those who have promittors in angles will experience their effects in the first part of life; those 
who have them in succedent houses, in the second part; and those who have them in cadent houses, in the 
third and last part.134 However, understand this with relation to the things essentially signified by the 
significators of the angle of the figure most closely preceding [the promittors], and with regard to those [na- 
tives] who will arrive at old age. 
Twelfth, a direction of the Ascendant causes effects through an accident involving the things signified by 
the 10th, as when it is directed to the ruler of the Midheaven or a strong aspect with it, or when it is directed 
to a malefic, ruler of the 12 th, whence [comes] imprisonment or exile, from which a loss of dignity follows; 
and similarly, the direction of the Midheaven causes effects through an accident involving life or death, as 
when it is directed to a malefic, ruler of the 8th, r its square or opposition. And thus Mr. de Chavigny135 from 
the direction of Mars, ruler of the 12th, was incarcerated, exiled, and deprived of dignity. And the King of 
Sweden,136 from the direction of the Midheaven to Saturn, badly disposed in the 8th, and at the same time to 
the body of Mars in the 12th, was killed. And the reasoning is the same with the rest. 
Chapter 6. The Extraction of Figures from the Figure of the NatiW for other Persons 
Related to Him. Then, the Directions of Significators of these Persons, and their Effects. 
Persons related to the native from his own nativity are his parents, brothers, spouse, children, servants, 
friends, and enemies. And for these persons, Cardan, in his Commentary on the Text of Ptolemy's [Quadri- 
partite], Book 3, Chapter 4, Text 14,137 teaches in it how to extract figures from the genethliacal figure of the 
native, through which the astrologer will be able to judge about the fate of these persons. And for the father 
he wants to take the place of the Sun by day and the place of Saturn by night. And for the mother, the place of 
the Moon by night and of Venus by day; similarly, for the wife, the place of the Moon by night and of Venus 
by day; but for the husband in a woman's figure, the place of the Sun by day and of Mars by night. And from 
these places, he wants to erect figures, always putting these places on the Ascendant of the [extracted] fig- 
ure. As, for the father in a diurnal nativity he takes the place of the Sun, which he puts on the Ascendant in 
erecting the figure, from which and from the directions of the Sun itself he judges about the father's acci- 
dents or fate, no differently than one is accustomed to make judgment about the native's fate from his fig- 
ure.138 
Furthermore, Ptolemy did not distinguish for which elevation of the pole the figure ought to be 
elected,139 but Cardan always erects it for the latitude of the place of the nativity [regardless] of where the 
134 This aphorism follows naturally from taking the cusps of the Ascendant and the Midheaven as principal significators. 
135 Leon Bouthillier, Count of Chavigny (1608-1652), French official under Cardinal Richelieu (1585-1642). 
136 Gustavus II Adolphus (1594-1632). 
137 Opera Omnia, V, pp. 257-258, etJf. 
138 That is, the extracted chart is read according to the same rules as a regular chart. 
139 Naturally not, since Ptolemy evidently accepted the Equal House system of house division for charts, for which it is 
sufficient to know the Ascendant, and probably had nothing more in mind than a simple inspection of the extracted chart. By 
adopting quadrant systems, the latter-day astrologers created problems for themselves (such as the appropriate latitude to 
use in an extracted chart) that did not exist for Ptolemy. 
87 

===== PAGE 97 =====

significator is located in the native's figure, whether it is the significator of the father, or the mother, or the 
spouse, etc.; but Junctinus in his comment on the same Book 4, Chapter 3, asserting many times that this 
doctrine is marvelous and very true, erects individual figures for the elevation of the pole above the circle of 
position of each significator, whether father, or mother, etc. In which he at least errs less that Cardan [when 
the latter], whose nativity is nocturnal, puts for the figure of his father the place of Saturn on the horizon of 
his nativity, even though Saturn would still be under the horizon, namely in the 2nd house of his own natal 
figure; and he also puts the place of the Moon in the same horizon for the figure of his mother, even though 
the Moon was already above the horizon on the cusp of the 12th house. But now the primum mobile does not 
move back to the rising point, so that the Moon can be put on the horizon, and when by its continued motion 
through the meridian, the setting, and the imum caelum it restores the Moon to the horizon, then the Moon 
will be more than 10° distant from the place in the zodiac that it occupied at the moment of the nativity. But 
Cardan himself, thinking about it, says: Someone will wonder how the significator of thefather can be put in 
the Ascendant when it is not; and when it will be. or when it was, the places of the planets, at least of the 
Moon, are sensibly unchanged? And he answers: That just as material is placed in material, so both the 
forms and the causes of the native and of his parent are others placed in others without the succession of 
time. But this reply is absurd. For in the first place Cardan says "where material is put in material," i.e., 
where material is subject to material, against the principles of philosophy? Second, even if the forms and 
causes of the native and of his parent were others placed in others, yet from this it does not follow that Saturn 
must be put on the horizon for the father and the Moon for the mother when they were not there at the mo- 
ment of the nativity. Indeed, because they are others placed in others without any succession of time, as he 
will have it, it rather follows from this that they must be seen in the circles of position that they occupy at the 
moment of the nativity, which Junctinus at least observed. And Cardan, in his Astronomical Aphorisms, 
Segment II, Aph. 54, in fact prescribed this incidentally for children, but didn't use it.140 
And yet Junctinus and Cardan, [following] after Ptolemy and the other old [astrologers], err especially in 
this: that they extract these figures from such universal significators, which Cardan calls "according to their 
essential nature," the worthlessness of which we have already shown many times. For the judgments taken 
from such figures and significators and their directions must necessarily be erroneous from what we have 
said in Book 21, Section 2, Chapter 13, and because from this it would follow that for those individual men 
bom on the same artificial day141 at Paris (of whom there is no small number) the same things would in gen- 
eral have to be predicted about their mothers and wives from the extracted figures, of which (as they will 
have it) Venus is the universal significator, for the same things would be for every figure; and for the indi- 
vidual women bom during the day, the same things would have to be predicted about their fathers and hus- 
bands, of whom the Sun is the significator. But these things are contrary to experience.142 
Second, if these figures are valid for judging by the individual houses about things pertaining to the par- 
ents, such as about things pertaining to the native from the native's figure, and also if they can serve for 
judging about the mother, brothers, spouse, children, etc., as Cardan says in that place, then they will be 
valid for judging about the father's father, or the native's grandfather, and if in both the native's genethliacal 
140 Opera Omnia, p. 37. "When you extract a figure from another figure, you will put the Ascendant according to the 
elevation of the pole above the circle of position of the significator, and especially in the case of [charts extracted for] chil- 
dren." 
141 By "artificial day" Morin means the day as distinguished from the night, rather than the time measure called "day" 
that includes the night and consists of 24 hours. 
142 This is a valid argument against using universal significators to represent persons related to the native. For, as Morin 
says, if we adopt it, then everyone bom on the same "artificial day" would have virtually the same extracted chart for each of 
the persons mentioned. Whereas, if we adopt his accidental significators, there would be six different types of each person, 
with some intermediate variations. This at least allows more individuality than the other way. 
88 

===== PAGE 98 =====

figure and the extracted [figure] of the father, the Sun is under the earth (as happens in Cardan's figure), then 
the figure will be the same both for the father and the grandfather through Saturn in the Ascendant and in the 
same circle of position for both.143 Wherefore, the same things had to be predicted about the father and the 
grandfather, as far as moral nature, the state of fortune, and the time of death. Indeed, the same things would 
have had to be predicted about the grandfather, the great-grandfather, the great-great-grandfather, and so on 
back to Adam, if they were still alive, because for all of them the figure with Saturn in the Ascendant would 
be one and the same, which is utterly absurd to contemplate. But on the contrary through this figure of the 
father, in judging about children, not only would a figure for children be extracted contrary to the native's 
own figure, as well as to the figure of children from the father's genethliacal figure, but also one which could 
be the same for the children of the children until the end of the world; and consequently, to presage the same 
things for them, which anyone can see is also absurd.144 
Third, erecting the figure of the father from the native's figure, and from this figure of the father again the 
figure of a son, and from this again the figure of the father, would give a circular [procedure] that is abso- 
lutely worthless.145 
Fourth, in the diurnal nativity of a woman, in the year in which her father will die from a direction of the 
Sun to Mars, in that same [year] her husband will also die; or at least, by whatever time after the woman's 
birth her father will die, by that same time after her marriage her husband will die; or they will experience 
sicknesses, wounds, etc., which is also contrary to experience. But if you say that the father's and husband's 
own genethliacal figures ought to be looked at to see whether these agree with those [extracted charts], it 
will be a worthless reply, for if they agree, then one set of them is seen to be superfluous. Will it be the fa- 
ther's own [chart] and the husband's? But if they disagree, will these extracted figures be credited rather 
than their own proper ones, through which the father and the husband received the impression of their own 
fates from the caelum, especially when this extraction of figures by means of universal significators is lack- 
ing in any fundamental rationality, as has already often been said. 
And although Cardan tries to prove these figures, namely the figure of his own father, [and] by the direc- 
tion of the Moon (which he wrongly holds to be the apheta in the figure) to the opposition of the Sun for the 
death of the father 23 years after the birth of Cardan himself, he abuses his incautious readers who are igno- 
rant of these matters. Thus in fact the oblique ascension of Saturn in the latitude of the place of the nativity, 
45°, is 57°33', that is if the latitude of Saturn is taken into account, which Cardan wrongly omits here. And 
having subtracted 90°, there remains 327°33' for the right ascension of the Midheaven, which, subtracted 
from the right ascension of the Moon with latitude, 344049', leaves 17° 16' for the distance of the Moon 
from the Midheaven, from which and from the declination of the Moon, 11012',146 the altitude of the pole 
above the circle of position of the Moon is found to be 20°. At which [latitude] the oblique ascension of the 
Moon is 348057', and the oblique ascension of the opposition to the Sun is 368012'. And, subtracting the 
143 Here and in what follows Morin erects a straw man to belabor, since Cardan says nothing in the cited passage about 
extracting charts from extracted charts. In another place, in his Book of Twelve Genitures, Cardan does extract a chart C 
531 A) for himself from his orphaned grandson's chart C 531Q by putting Saturn on the Ascendant, since he says Satum 
represents old persons, and finds that the extracted chart conforms in some respects to his own life. However, he gives no 
general rule for doing this sort of thing. 
144 Here again Morin is arguing against a straw man. And it is perhaps worth pointing out that his argument could be ap- 
plied by analogy to prove that derived houses are of no value; for if the 4th house represents the native's father, then the 8th 
house represents the father's children, of which the native is one; and, by Morin's reasoning, this means that the native is 
represented simultaneously by the 1 st house and the 8th, which (as he would say) is absurd. 
!4S This is certainly true, but pointless, as noted above. 
146 The Latin text has I l02r, but recalculation shows that the figures of the minutes have been transposed. 
89 

===== PAGE 99 =====

former from the latter, there remains 19° 15', not [even] equivalent to 20 years; therefore. Cardan is in error 
by more than 3 years.147 
But in the figure extracted for his mother, Clara Micheria, he errs far more seriously on account of the 
Moon, which he places in the Ascendant with the latitude omitted, which latitude is 4o20' South.148 For the 
Moon, i.e., the Ascendant, comes to the opposition of the Sun, or the Sun itself to the Descendant, in 9 years 
and not 20, as Cardan will have it,149 for the nearly lethal hysterical passion of his mother. He will also direct 
the Sun to the opposition of Mars in 36 years from his own birth for the death of his mother, although it actu- 
ally comes to the opposition in 43 years.150 From which it is plainly evident what should be known about 
Cardan's doctrine and its verification. 
And yet, it is certain that many things can be predicted about the father, the brothers, the spouse, the chil- 
dren, etc., from the natal figure alone. For experience proves that the malefics, Saturn and Mars, in the 3rd 
signify that the brothers and sisters will die before the native, in the 5th the children, in the 7th spouses, etc. 
In fact, the ruler of the 3rd in the 10th threatens the brothers with death and the ruler of the 5 th in the 12th 
threatens the children, as I have often observed: namely, because the 10th is the 8th with respect to the 3rd, 
and the 12th is the 8th with respect to the 5th, which is [the house] of children; and the same thing is to be 
judged in similar fashion about other persons. Since the signs and planets involved in the individual signifi- 
cations of the natal figure related to the native are determined in the same general manner that we have set 
forth in detail in Book 21, therefore, as the Ascendant, its ruler, and a planet in the 1 st are determined to the 
native's life, moral nature, and mental qualities, and signify about these things, and are also directed for 
them, and similarly in the case of the Midheaven, its ruler, and a planet in the 10th for honours and actions; 
therefore, the imum caelum, its ruler, and a planet in the 4th, determined in similar fashion towards the na- 
tive's parents, will also signify about them; and if they should be directed, they should only be directed for 
them, and not for others to which they are not determined. And the reasoning is the same about brothers, the 
spouse, children, servants, and friends, always considering the three significators of each thing—the cusp, 
its ruler, and the planet in the house of the cusp, if the same number of distinct significators are found, with 
the observation put at the end of Section 1, Chapter 3. For this general doctrine agrees closely with itself and 
with experience. 
Further, when these significators are directed, whether they are cusps or planets, their circle of position is 
sought, as well as their own horizon and above it the altitude of the pole, just as if a new figure had been con- 
structed for this horizon. And yet it must be known that these significators have a dual relationship. One to 
the native, by signifying for him any accidents [that occur] in connection with such persons, i.e., to them, 
from them, with them, or through their agency. The other, to those persons, by signifying their own acci- 
147 The discrepancy between Cardan's calculation and Morin's is due to Cardan's having calculated what we would call 
a zodiacal primary direction, while Morin has calculated a mundane direction. Recalculation of both types of directions 
yields 22038' for the zodiacal direction (which Cardan rounded to 23°) and 19015' mundane. As Morin notes, the difference 
amounts to more than 3 years in the time of the event. 
148 Here Morin assumes that the Moon should be in the Ascendant by mundane position, rather than by zodiacal position. 
Since the Moon has considerable latitude, it would rise with 22044' Pisces instead of 11042'. Morin neglects to mention that 
this would put the Moon in the 12th house instead of on the cusp of the Ascendant, in violation of the rule that says to put the 
significator on the Ascendant. And neither he nor Cardan judges a planet by its mundane position, but only by its zodiacal 
one. Hence, his argument is groundless. 
149 Recalculation shows a zodiacal arc or direction of 15o09' and a mundane one of 9° 18'. Cardan seems to have erred in 
calculating the direction, since he derived an arc of 20°. 
150 Since Mars has only 36' of south latitude, the difference between the two modes of calculation is not so marked. I find 
40o48' (versus Cardan's 36) for the zodiacal arc of direction and 41037' for the mundane. Converted by Naibod's measure, 
this is equivalent to 4203T or roughly 43 years. Here again Cardan seems to have made an error. 
90 

===== PAGE 100 =====

dents for them, such as honours, wealth, an early death, or the contrary of these. By reason of the first, the 
circle of position is only inquired into, so that the arc of direction interposed between the significator and the 
promittor may be known for the time of the accident for the native, and, from such a direction, future things 
concerning the parents, if it is the significator of parents, or concerning brothers if it is the significator of 
brothers, etc., judging about the accident according to the rules we have prescribed, without any consider- 
ation of fitting the houses of the figure to this circle or horizon. But by reason of the latter, the figure can be 
set to that horizon, so that from it the accidents that are peculiar to those persons will be apparent, as will be 
explained below. 
But again it can be asked whether many figures should be erected and examined for a general judgment 
about the father's state—namely from the 4th cusp, from its rulership or the rulers of the 4th, also from the 
planets posited in the 4th, and each one of these put for an Ascendant in its own circle—or whether a single 
figure ought to be erected, and [if so], with which of these significators? For a plurality of figures would cer- 
tainly beget confusion, since they could differ among themselves both by quadrant and by half of the 
caelum, but a single figure will signify the same thing for both the father and the mother, or for all the [na- 
tive's] wives, or all his brothers, or for the native [himself! with these individual persons, which seems to be 
another inconvenience. 
But looking at this difficulty attentively, it seems to me that a single figure should generally be erected to 
judge about the parents, or the brothers, or the wife, or the children;151 and it should be erected from the cusp 
proper to those persons themselves and not from the planets that are rulers or from those that are posited in 
the appropriate house. 
The reason is because the science of astrology ought to be uniform, and yet there is no general judgment 
about the native from a figure erected from a planet that was the ruler of the Ascendant at the moment of the 
nativity or that was in the 1 st house, but only from a figure erected from the point of the ecliptic or of the 
equator that was ascending at the moment of the nativity, even though the ruler of the Ascendant and a 
planet in the 1st can be directed for the accidents of the native pertaining to the 1st house, and so they are 
valid not for a universal but for a particular judgment. Therefore, the same thing must be done for the figure 
of the father, which will be erected from the 4th cusp to judge generally about the state of the parents, but the 
ruler of that cusp, that is the Ascendant of the erected figure, will only be directed for the health and life of 
the parents. It is proved in the second place because the ruler of the cusp of the 4th does not have force in the 
matter of parents except by reason of that cusp or the degree of the ecliptic occupying it, therefore there is a 
greater force for parents in that degree. For on account of that, every single one such, and that more,152 It is 
most efficaciously proved in the third place because a malefic in the 12th house of the native's figure por- 
tends death to his children, in the 11 th to his parents, and in the 1 Oth to his brothers, as I have often observed. 
And the reason for this is that the ruler of the native's 12th is the 8th with respect to the 5th, which is [the 
house] of his children, and consequently when you have erected a figure from the cusp of the 5th for the chil- 
dren, that malefic will fall in the 8th. And similarly, the native's 11 th house is the 8th with respect to the 4th, 
and the 10th house is also the 8th with respect to the 3rd, which correctly demonstrates that the figures of 
those persons must be erected from the cusps to which those persons belong, and not from the planets that 
are rulers, for a like signification is not found in them. 
But against this [we can repeat] what was objected to above: it is absurd for a single figure to signify the 
same things for individual persons of the same class, such as individual wives, children, brothers, and both 
parents. I reply; the figure does not signify separately or particularly for the individual persons, but jointly 
151 Here, and in the discussion that follows, I have translated /l/n and its singular/z/tus as 'children' and 'child' rather than 
'sons' and 'son', since the topic under discussion is "parents and children" rather than the more specific "fathers and sons." 
152 An unidentified axiom. 
91 

===== PAGE 101 =====

and universally for all of them. And this signification is universally determined by the individual natal con- 
stitutions of these persons, and by the sympathy or antipathy of each of these with the native's figure and the 
figure extracted for the parents, the brothers, etc. And if both figures of the father, namely his natal chart and 
the extracted figure are unfortunate, it is certain that the father will become more unfortunate because of that 
extracted figure, and so with the others. And yet the sex of the sign or the planet occupying the 4th house in 
the native's figure will, however, distinguish the sex of the parent principally signified. 
And from this it follows that if the same father has many children, his fates following the generation of 
the children will be moved forward by the genitures of the individual children, according as the individual 
figures of the father extracted from their genitures will be concordant or discordant with the natal figure of 
the father, and the same thing must be judged in the case of the mother. And then in the case of the native 
who is going to have many brothers or many wives. 
Besides, it seems that this should put an end to the difficulty of all astrology unless I am greatly mistaken. 
Namely, whether the figure, or celestial constitution of the native, works in parents, brothers, the spouse, 
etc., which neither Lucio Bellantio [in his book] against Pico, nor Junctinus in the book cited above, were 
able to resolve. And it is still more difficult to define how the native's celestial constitution can act in broth- 
ers, the spouse, friends, and enemies, since between these persons and the native there is no natural subordi- 
nation, which at least is found among parents and children. Junctinus, in the book cited above, holds that the 
natural constitution of the child is as a particular, and the natal constitution of the father as a universal, 
which converts a particular into itself. And he says that a father begetting a child imprints upon it something 
of his own celestial constitution, and this is recognized afterward in (he nativity of the child. And therefore 
the nativity of the child brings us into some acquaintance with the father, not as a cause, but as a sign, for it 
does not bring about the father's fate, but it [merely] signifies it. 
But in fact this heaps up difficulties, none of which it resolves. For in the first place the universal cause 
and the particular cause are not of the same order, but the former is superior and the latter inferior, just as the 
Sun is with respect to man in the generation of another man, the annual revolution of the world with respect 
to lunations, and the figure of the nativity with respect to its revolutions, but the celestial constitutions of the 
father and the child are of the same order; that is, neither is inferior to the other, although one is posterior to 
the other in time. 
Second, What does Junctinus mean when he says that the father's constitution, as a universal, converts 
into itself the particular constitution of the child? For there is no conversion of one into the other, but each 
one remains as it is. But if by "converts" he means "determines," then it is particular or posterior to deter- 
mine a universal or prior thing, but not the other way around, as is plain in the case of lunations with respect 
to the annual revolutions of the world, and the annual revolutions of nativities with respect to the natal fig- 
ure. 
Third, if Junctinus would assert that the father could be known through that which is imprinted upon the 
child, it would be a valid argument; for it is certainly true that the father imprints something upon the child 
as its efficient cause, but he wants to know the father through the celestial constitution of the child, in which 
nothing was made by the father, and [consequently] no impression can be made. Therefore he does not re- 
solve the difficulties that he stirs up here, Lucio Bellantio on the other hand wants the posterior figures, such 
as those of children, to determine, to help, to impede, or to modify prior figures, such as those of fathers. Not 
in connection with all the fates of the father, but in connection with some, i.e., those following birth; but 
Junctinus confesses that he doesn't understand how this can be done. And then this same Bellantio plainly 
asserts the opposite, and holds that the effects of following figures can be helped, impeded, increased, or di- 
minished by prior figures. 
92 

===== PAGE 102 =====

But since neither [opinion] is satisfactory, we must try to loosen this knot as follows. The celestial consti- 
tution of the father is the cause of the father and his fate or accidents by common agreement of astrologers, 
and the father is the cause of the child; therefore, the celestial constitution of the father is the cause of the 
child, according to the common axiom, that which is the cause of the cause, is the cause of the thing caused. 
Therefore, the father's constitution passes to the children, though with the father as intermediary. And hav- 
ing done this, it will assimilate them to itself as much as it can, for this is common to all causes; and through 
this assimilation, as [it manifests itself] in the native, some obscure likeness to such a cause may be detected 
in the native. But the native himself has immediately from his own figure what sort [of person] he is, and he 
has an obvious similitude to that figure, as is known to astrologers; therefore, there must be between (he fig- 
ures of the father and the child either some similitude or some fated connection, from which also the true fa- 
ther of the native is recognized, and consequently among the effects of these [figures], which [effects] are 
the father and the child; and this [can be seen] in personal fate as well as in external fate. But for the child, his 
own proper constitution, from which he immediately received the impression of his own fate, is very much 
more powerful; therefore, this is not converted from the father's constitution or determined by it, but con- 
versely. And so I think I am satisfied [with the resolution] of this difficulty, at least for subordinated consti- 
tutions and persons, such as father and child. 
But in fact this does not suffice. For the question is not only about parents and children, but about broth- 
ers, the spouse, servants, friends, and enemies, between whom and the native there is no natural subordina- 
tion, and yet true predictions about these [persons] are made from the native's figure. What then should be 
said about them? Certainly recourse must be had to something universal that is applicable or common to the 
native as well as to them. 
It could be said by some that God, Whose Providence the heavens and all things serve, brought forth the 
native into light through natural causes at that moment of the diumal rotation of the caelum which, from the 
position of the stars in the caelum as well as in the genethliacal figure, most agreed with the native's temper- 
ament [as regards his] moral nature and mental qualities [on the one hand] and his own proper fate and [that 
which he shares] in common with his father, mother, brothers, spouse, children, etc.; and by consequence 
such a constitution signifies for the native himself, for his parents, for his spouse, etc. But, having conceded 
Divine Providence, which none of those things that are made in the world evade, and [acknowledging that] 
God acts through natural causes or with them, one always asks, by what natural cause and by what means the 
native's own fate, and the fate that [he shares in] common with other persons, is caused? To which question 
a suitable response is lacking. 
It may be said by others that the celestial constitution is the cause of this—-that [the native] may have 
such parents, brothers, spouse, children, etc.—and it subjects him passively to such accidents. But insofar as 
that constitution is referred to other persons, it is only a sign that they are going to be [persons] of such a sort 
in moral nature, life, fortune, and agreement with the native, as his genethliacal constitution is a cause to the 
native for his marriage with a noble, rich, or beautiful woman, for it subjects the native passively to this acci- 
dent; but the native's figure is not the cause that the woman herself is noble, rich, or beautiful, for it does not 
bring about such a woman, [who is] generally older than the native; therefore it is only a sign. Similarly, for 
this native the cause that he may have friends among kings and princes is his celestial constitution; but this 
constitution does not makes his friends kings; therefore, with respect to them it is not the cause, but only a 
sign; and the reasoning is the same with the rest. Therefore, in the case of the spouse, children, servants, and 
friends it seems that one should not inquire from the native's figure what sort [of persons] these are going to 
be in sex, form, character, fortune, and the rest of the accidents proper to them, but only what sort of [per- 
sons] they are going to be with respect to the native, such as whether servants or friends are going to be faith- 
ful or useful; but this is not altogether satisfactory. For if the native's figure is only a sign of such a future 
spouse or of future friends, but the signification itself, i.e., such a marriage, is some effect that cannot lack 
93 

===== PAGE 103 =====

its own cause, what will be its effective cause? Besides, the father's natal figure is not only a sign with re- 
spect to children, namely that they may be of a certain sort in their life, moral nature, and fortune, but it is 
also their cause, as was said above—namely, that the father generates in accordance with his own constitu- 
tion received from the stars; here then that universal that fits all cases is lacking up to this point. But having 
considered these things with as much attention as I could, I think that such a difficulty can be resolved as fol- 
lows. Certainly, in the truth of the matter, the genethliacal constitution of the native subjects him first to his 
own proper fate, or the accidents of life, moral nature, mental qualities, actions, profession, assets, etc., then 
to that [which he shares] in common with other persons according to the strength and quality of his own fig- 
ure. Moreover, the native's own fate is from his nativity first and per se, but there are two kinds of common 
fate—namely that which is properly common which is participated in equally by the native and by another 
person, such as a duel, a friendship, marriage, or quarrel, and that which is improperly common which is not 
participated in equally by the native and another person, such as those of brothers, parents, the wife, or the 
death of children before the native, or friends' misfortune. For these accidents are common to the native in 
this respect: that by the death of his parents, brothers, or spouse he loses something: namely, these persons 
that belong to him, as is related afterwards. But already, in common accidents of the first kind, such as that 
the native is going to marry a beautiful woman, three things must be noticed: namely, the native himself, the 
wife he is going to many, and the marriage of both. The native's marriage to a beautiful wife is caused by the 
native's nativity subjecting him efficiently to that accident; but the figure, which is generally later in time, is 
not the cause of the wife's beauty but is only a sign of it; for her beauty comes from her own nativity, the 
cause per se. But that they should marry, whether freely or unwillingly, is the product of the astral consensus 
of their genethliacal figures to such an effect, as we have already said in Book 21, Section 2, Chapter 13, and 
neither of the figures accomplishes this by itself, for just as such a wife is signified for the native, so in turn 
such a husband is signified for such a wife by her own nativity. Moreover, it is not apparent in his nativity, at 
least to human intelligence, that the native is going to many a beautiful wife as number so-and-so [of his 
wives]. Consequently it is rightly said in the Centiloquy that only those inspired by a divinity can predict 
particulars" In fact demons know not only the native's chart, but also the chart of a beautiful woman whose 
nativity is more agreeable to his, and the circumstances of location, lineage, etc., yet they do not know for 
certain whether the native is going to marry this particular one because in fact the concourse of these indi- 
viduals is subject to the secret Providence of God. But because demons diligently observe the practice, in 
natural things at least, of the ordinary Providence of God [acting] through secondary causes, it happens from 
this that very often by a subtle conjecture they arrive at a preconception of individual effects; and so in a 
dream or in a mirror or otherwise they show virgins practicing certain superstitions for this purpose the true 
vision or image of a husband never before seen, as a certain duchess, outstanding in beauty and mental qual- 
ities, told me had happened to her. And the reasoning is the same with the rest. 
But in common accidents of the second kind, such as that the wife, children, or brothers should die before 
[the native] or be elevated [in rank], of course the natal figure of the person to whom such good or evil hap- 
pens is the principal cause per se of the accident, but the native's figure is only a sign, or at most an acciden- 
tal cause, i.e., insofar as the native is passively subjected by his own figure to accidents of that sort, in which 
he either loses or gains something and is consequently disposed to fortune or misfortune in connection with 
such persons—of which passive subjection and disposition in the native, his own figure is the cause per se 
for him. Therefore, the effect is also, as [mentioned] above, from the common consensus of the figures, by 
which these make their influx into it; and consequently all accidents that the native has in common with 
other persons are efficiently [produced] by the common consent of the figures to those accidents. In fact it is 
apparent from this, because the more strongly these things are signified in the native's figure, the more cer- 
tain it is that they will happen to those persons; which certainly argues that the native's figure brings some 
influx to the common effect. Besides, since the effect is made by the common signification and consensus of 
the figures, it is necessary for both of them to have an influx upon it. From which it is plain that the native's 
94 

===== PAGE 104 =====

figure acts as a significator and a universal cause of all those things that pertain to the native himself, 
whether they are proper to him, or whether they are in common with other persons; but in common [acci- 
dents] the [cause] is determined by the figures of the other persons in the manner of universal causes. And 
this is my opinion about this difficulty, but if anyone offers a better one, I shall willingly embrace it. 
But it can be asked whether those things that are signified for the native concerning his parents, spouse, 
children, servants, etc., either in them, or by them, or, on the contrary, those things that are signified for 
those persons by the native's figure will always happen? 
I reply first that the more strongly they are signified in the native's figure, the more certain they will be; 
and the more weakly they are signified, the more uncertain they will be. Second, they will not always and in- 
evitably occur, but only as [we might say] usually and contingently. For the things signified do not happen 
unless they are given to that person and unless they concur actively or passively in the effect. But there is no 
necessary cause that they should be given, but only a contingent one; and consequently they are not inevita- 
ble, but only a hypothetical and conjectural prediction can be made about them. For example, if misfortunes 
are strongly signified for someone from his wife, he will, if he marries, very probably experience such 
things. And so with the rest. Moreover, the concourse of contingencies is from the secret Providence of God, 
also through secondary causes, and especially through universal ones; [and] the celestial causes that subject 
particular sublunar events to themselves are of this sort. 
Having settled [these matters] thus, now the following general rules may be noted. 
First, since it was said above that the 4th cusp, its ruler, and then the planets that are in the 4th are 
significators of the parents, therefore if the ruler of the cusp or another planet is on that cusp, there will arise 
from this a much more effective significator, whether for directions for the native or for a new figure for 
those persons themselves, than would be the case if the cusp and its ruler were separated and seen in differ- 
ent places: For a united virtue is stronger than a divided one. 
Second, if the significators are separated for the parents, or the wife, or someone else, the circle of posi- 
tion will have to be found for each of them and individual directions established for the native. For from 
these and from an astrological speculum of the aspects, the particular accidents of the native involving these 
persons, and hence involving their own fates will be more abundantly and evidently apparent; but in figures 
erected from cusps [alone], the proper accidents of these persons may be known, at least in a general way, 
[as they are] contained in the native's figure. 
Third, since the Sun and Saturn are analogous to fathers and husbands, and the Moon and Venus to moth- 
ers and wives, Jupiter and Venus to brothers and children, Saturn and Mars to enemies, etc. (for each planet 
is said to be analogous to those things that it brings, not to those that it takes away), for this reason the proper 
significators of parents, brothers, etc,—significators by determination—when they are [also] analogous to 
those things [they signify], will be especially significative of those same persons. From which it perhaps 
happened that they were once taken to be the primary and true significators [of those persons], especially 
since analogous [planets], if they are also determined, produce effects in connection with those persons that 
are much greater than [those produced by] the others. 
Fourth, when several planets are in the same 4th house, or in the 7th, etc., notice which of them is the 
strongest in (hat house, or the closest to the cusp, or which is analogous in its signification, and choose that 
one for the principal significator among the planets; but do not despise the ruler of the house, for it is more 
powerful than the rest [of the planets in the house]. 
Fifth, the individual significators of the parents, the spouse, the children, etc. signify only generally for 
those persons, and not every significator for every person. For the native has only one father and one mother 
95 

===== PAGE 105 =====

with whom he can have a natural connection, and yet there can be 5 or 6 significators of parents, namely the 
cusp of the 4th, two or three rulers of the 4th, and 3 or 4 planets in the 4th. But on the contrary there can be 15 
or 20 brothers or children, and there cannot be that many significators of children or brothers; therefore, 
whether there is one significator of parents or several, they can only signify generally, both for the native 
about his parents, and for the parents themselves, at least insofar as they refer to the proper fates of those 
persons. But the more significators there are, the more things they will signify about the parents, brothers, 
etc. And yet a planet which by sex and analogy agrees more with the father will signify more particularly for 
the father, and one that agrees more with the mother will signify more particularly for the mother. And the 
reasoning is the same in the case of brothers, children, servants, etc. in which the sex of the planets and the 
signs will have to be admitted for discerning the sex of the persons. 
Sixth, in a figure erected for the parents, proper fates should not be sought for the father and the mother in 
connection with the individual houses—riches, brothers, parents, children, etc., although Cardan wants to 
do this. For this figure is not that of one person only, but of more than one, namely of the father and the 
mother, and therefore common to both and proper to neither; therefore, one will have to pronounce only uni- 
versally and indiscriminately about their fates from this figure. And the Ascendant and its ruler will have to 
be especially noted. Namely, whether the ruler is in the 7th, 8th, 10th, etc. of that figure; and according to 
this one will judge about parents in a general way as if in the native's figure, for if in that figure the ruler of 
the Ascendant is in the 5th, the parents, or one of them, will have other children; if in the 7th, they will have 
lawsuits, or one of them will marry again; if in the 8 th, they will die before the native, etc. And in this figure 
directions cannot be made for the particular accidents of one of these parents, such as ' marriage, children, 
dignities, death, etc., as in the native's figure; for that would be extracting proper and particular fates from a 
common figure, which was rejected above. And the same thing must be said about [figures for] the spouse, 
the brothers, etc.; therefore, directions of these significators are only made for the native's particular acci- 
dents in connection with these persons, from which some general conjecture can be made as to what is going 
to come to light for them in the future, as was said above, or, in sum, for the accidents of these persons only 
indiscriminately and universally, unless some means of distinguishing them becomes known from some 
other source, as from the sex of the sign or the planet occupying the cusp. 
Seventh, among the significators of persons, i.e., of parents, the spouse, brothers, etc. the cusp is the pri- 
mary significator, as is also plain in the case of the native, for whom the Ascendant is the primary 
significator. And yet it cannot be said that judgment should be made about individual persons of the same 
order (as of individual brothers) from a single significator, whether it is a cusp or a planet. For otherwise the 
same thing would have to be predicted for the native from each of his children or brothers, or if from ex- 
tracted figures the fates of persons were predicted, they would be the same for the individual brothers, or 
children, or for the father and the mother, or for individual wives, because the significators of these persons 
in the native's nativity are not changed. Moreover, this is contrary to experience. Since, therefore, a plural- 
ity of figures extracted for parents has been rejected by us above, it is sufficient to say that the individual 
significators of the parents signify only generally and indiscriminately for both parents; and that the native's 
figure and those things which are deduced from it are like a material or something universal with respect to 
other persons, but their own figures are like a particular form. For the native's figure signifies only generally 
good or evil for the parents, the spouse, the children, etc. by reason of the state of the significators, and this 
general signification will be confirmed or refuted by the natal horoscope of each one, and it overcomes them 
if they are contrary to itself. But for the native himself it signifies particularly those things which are going 
to happen to him in connection with those persons, as was said above. 
Eight, all directions of the significators begin from the native's birth, and not the directions for the 
spouse from the time when he marries, or the directions for children from the time when he begins to have 
children; for the force of the directions is not imprinted upon the father, the spouse, the children, the broth- 
96 

===== PAGE 106 =====

ers, etc., but upon the native through the first natural and successive revolution which is made from the mo- 
ment of the nativity. And by reason of this impression, all the effects of the directions pertain and are 
referred to the native first and per se, as particular effects happening to him in connection with the subjects 
of each of the significators of those [persons], whether it is the father, the brothers, the spouse, etc. And 
therefore when the 7th cusp is directed before marriage for a native not yet of marriageable age, it only sig- 
nifies about enemies and lawsuits or about contracts; but for a native of marriageable age it signifies 
whether he will many or not, then it signifies about a wife, lawsuits, enemies, contracts, and, through its op- 
position, about life. But after marriage it is directed for accidents involving the wife, lawsuits, enemies, and 
contracts; and after the wife's death it can be directed for anew wife; but always moving forward the cusp of 
the 7th or its ruler by directions to other promittors; otherwise the same accidents would be signified with 
[each of] the individual wives and with equal intervals of time from the moment of each marriage, if for the 
individual [wives] the cusp of the 7th or its ruler were to be directed to the promittors next following itself. 
Ninth, for every person it is especially necessary to know the natal figures of those with whom he is asso- 
ciated by any connection, whether they are parents, or brothers, or spouse, or children, or servants, or 
friends, or enemies, so that he may understand the consensus or disagreement of these with his own figure 
for good or evil, and consequently be able to foresee whom he should trust and from whom be may have 
hopes or whom he should fear for his own safety and advantage. 
It can be objected about the things predicted that the directions of the significators of the father, the 
spouse, the brothers, etc. made for particular accidents of the native involving these persons ought to be as 
certain as the directions of the Midheaven for the things signified by the 10th house in the natal figure, or of 
the ruler of the 2nd for riches, etc. For the general procedure is the same for [all] the individual significators 
of the natal chart. But the directions of the Midheaven are certain in these effects, so why shouldn't the par- 
ticular fates of these persons be known with equal certainty? For they are common to them and to the native, 
for when the native's wife dies, the native himself loses his own wife; therefore, the particular fates of these 
persons can be known through the directions. 
But i reply that it is false that directions of the significators of the father, the spouse, etc. are as certain in 
their effects, insofar as those persons are particularly or commonly involved, as the directions of the 
Midheaven for the things signified by the 10th house. For the parents have their own genethliacal figures, to 
which they are more subject than to the native's figure; but the things signified by the 10th house do not 
have their own proper figure different from the native's figure; and consequently they are more subject to 
the latter than are the parents, the spouse, etc., and especially for accidents that are not property common to 
the native himself, such as for the death of the wife or the father. 
Moreover, it must be carefully noted that when we speak here about the fate of the native and the fates of 
other persons closely related to him, such as his father, brother, spouse, enemies, etc., we are speaking only 
about fates to be predicted from the directions of those significators or from extracted figures; but not about 
other things that are generally predicted from the planets that are significators of persons, from the fact that 
they are in this or that house of the native's figure, according as the signification of the house is referred to the 
native. For example, the mler of the 4th in the 11th will signify that a parent is a friend to the native before all 
others; but because the 11 Ih is the 8th from the cusp of the 4th, for which cusp, if the figure of the father is ex- 
tracted, the mler itself will be found in the 8th, consequently it presages a short life for the father. Moreover, it 
must be distinguished what the planets that are significators of persons signify, both as they are determined in 
the native's figure and in the figure that is extracted for parents, the spouse, etc. Yet it can be said that when 
these planets are directed in the natal figure, they are directed for those things that they signify for the native, 
both by reason of their bodily position and by their rulership; therefore, in directions one must take into ac- 
count the scheme of all those things that they can signify particularly for the native himself and also those that 
they can signify for these persons by reason of their own determination in the extracted figure. 
97 

===== PAGE 107 =====

But, so that the truth of the doctrine we have given above may be set forth more plainly, we shall append 
some examples of nativities taken from Junctinus in which he judges falsely about the quality of the parents, 
fortune, and death from the universal significators Saturn and the Sun, but in which we judge much more 
correctly from particular significators153 or determinations. His figures and judgments may be seen in the 
chapter of his book cited above,154 but the following (judgments] are ours. 
In the nativity of Pietro de' Medici (p. 154) Venus is ruler of the 4th in Aquarius, a masculine sign,155 
and its ruler Saturn, analogous to the father and masculine, was in the masculine sign Gemini. And conse- 
quently the father was signified by these [positions] rather than the mother, and he was [a man] of out- 
standing moral nature and famous because of Venus, which applied to Saturn by trine. But because Saturn 
was with the Eye of Taurus,156 a violent fixed (star], and square the Sun, it therefore signified a short life 
for the father.157 
In the nativity of Giuliano de' Medici, the Sun, Mercury, and the Part of Fortune are in Aries in the 4th 
house, and the Sun, masculine and analogous, occupies the cusp exalted. And indeed from this a truly il- 
lustrious father was signified, especially because the Sun was in partile trine to the Moon. But because 
Mars, ruler of the Sun and the 4th was also ruler of the 11th, which is the 8th from the 4th, and conse- 
quently the ruler of the 8th in the figure extracted from the cusp of the 4th in the right sphere,158 and Mars 
is in the antiscion of Saturn; consequently a short life was signified for the father. And these two were 
brothers.159 
In the nativity of Lorenzo de' Medici, Duke of Urbino,160 Mars ruler of the 4th was conjoined to Jupiter 
in Leo, which signified an illustrious father, besides, the Sun and the Moon had their exaltations in the 4th, 
and they were in mutual trine. But because Mars was also ruler of the 11 th as above, that is of the 8th in the 
figure extracted from the 4th cusp in the right sphere, which is the principal significator of parents, and it 
was opposed to Saturn, a short life was consequently portended for the father—I say the father, rather than 
the mother, because Aries in the 4th and Mars, its ruler, are masculine. 
In the nativity of Catherine de' Medici (daughter of the abovesaid Lorenzo), who married Henry II, 
King of France, the Moon and Jupiter, rulers of the 4th, were conjunct, and their ruler, Venus, is in Taurus 
with the Sun; and consequently the nobility of the parents will be indicated. But because Mars was in its 
fall in the 4th, square the Moon and Jupiter, and opposed to Saturn, ruler of the 11th, her mother survived 
her [birth] by only one day, and her father by two days, as if paying a penalty for the birth of his off 
153 That is, from accidental significators. 
154 Morin does not give the charts, but I have put them in Appendix 3 as they are cited from Junctinus's Speculum 
astrologiae in Alan Leo's Notable Nativities. They contain a number of errors, a few of which I have noted in the Appendix, 
but Morin evidently used them as he found them. AW does not give the birth times, so I have had to establish them from the 
house cusps. They may, therefore, differ by a few minutes from the times given by Junctinus; they are LAT. 
155 Giuntini's chart shows Venus in 1 Aquarius, but actually it was in 29 Capricorn, a feminine sign, which somewhat re- 
duces the validity of Morin's argument. 
156 Aldebaran or Alpha Tauri, which was in 3 Gemini in 1472. 
157 Pietro II's father was Lorenzo the Magnificent (1449-1492), who died of gout at the age of 43. 
158 As Morin directed above, an extracted chart should be erected for the pole of the house from which it is extracted, not 
for the pole of the place (the latitude of the place). The pole of the 4th house is zero, so a chart extracted from it will have 
cusps as shown in a table of houses for 0° latitude (the right sphere in the older terminology). Note that this is contrary to the 
usual procedure in horary astrology, where the houses are simply renumbered and the original cusps remain unchanged. 
159 Giuliano II was a younger brother of Pietro II de' Medici. 
160 The son of Pietro II de' Medici and a grandson of Lorenzo the Magnificent. 
98 

===== PAGE 108 =====

spring;161 for this woman was of bad morals, as her figure indicates, notwithstanding the touch of Venus in 
the Ascendant and in Taurus with the Sun, which made her very famous; and she was also very pernicious. 
Would that before the King of France had married he had consulted a learned astrologer about her nativity 
and his; for he would have seen that a violent death was strongly portended—both from his own nativity, in 
which the Sun in the 1st is afflicted by the squares of Saturn and Mars, then by the opposition of Jupiter, 
ruler of the 8th, but also in the nativity of this woman, in which Mars, ruler of the 7th and consequently 
significator of her husband, was afflicted by the opposition of Saturn and the squares of Jupiter and the 
Moon, then the square of Mercury, which was ruler of the 2nd, i.e., ruler of the 8 th of the figure extracted for 
the husband from the cusp of the 7th. Certainly, that figure of Catherine de Medici is frightful, whence it is 
no wonder that it was unfavorable for the parents and the husband; and such a consensus of the figures of 
Henry and Catherine herself caused Henry's death in accordance with the doctrine set forth above. There- 
fore, let these kings and princes consult astrologers when contracting matrimony, undertaking wars, enter- 
ing battles, and things of similar moment—not ignorant astrologers to be sure, but those distinguished by 
their learning and experience, and experts in fate, without the knowledge of which the greatest errors are 
wont to occur in royal councils and in the administration of the kingdom, so that on this account the Secret 
Council of the most powerful King of the Chinese should be greatly praised, since no one is admitted to it 
who is not an astrologer—but this is only mentioned incidentally. 
In the nativity of Ottavio Famese on p. 156 the Moon was ruler of the 4th, and its ruler, Jupiter, in the As- 
cendant and in Aries, and Venus, ruler of the Sun, in partile trine to the cusp of the 4th; and consequently, il- 
lustrious parents were signified. But because the Moon was conjunct Saturn, ruler of the 11 th, i.e., of the 8 th 
in the figure extracted from the 4th cusp; a premature death, which was also violent, was consequently pres- 
aged for him.162 
In the nativity of Francis, Grand Duke of Florence, the Moon is the ruler of the 4th, conjunct Venus in 
Pisces, afflicted by Mars and Saturn,163 ruler of the 11th. And the Sun was exalted in the 1 st, which is the 
1 Oth of the figure extracted from the cusp of the 4th. Therefore, this nativity signified the glory and princely 
status of the father.164 
Whoever wishes to do so can apply the doctrine given above to other genitures, and he will find it agree- 
ing with the truth. And from the genitures explained here and the abovesaid general doctrine the following 
particular rules can be deduced. 
1. If the Sun and Saturn, analogous to fathers, or the Moon and Venus, analogous to mothers, are in the 
4th, or are rulers of the 4th, they strongly signify parents before all other [planets]. 
2. If the 4th or its ruler is well disposed, it will be good for the parents; if evilly disposed, it will be evil for 
their life and fortune, 
3. Planets in the 4th or rulers of the 4th exalted, and especially the Sun and the Moon, signify the parents' 
161 These intervals are not quite correct: Catherine's mother, Madeleine de laTourd'Auvergne, died on 29 April; and her 
father, Lorenzo II de' Medici, died on 5 May. Shortly after Lorenzo's death, his mother, Alfonsina Orsini. and his aunt, 
Maddalenade' Medici Cibo, died. In fact, Catherine's only remaining close relation was her father's sister, Clarice, the wife 
of Filippo Strozzi. At the age of 6 months Catherine was entrusted to this aunt, who raised her until she was 6 years old. 
162 That is, for his father, Pierluigi (1503-1547), Duke of Parma and Piacenza, who was murdered in his bed on 10 Sep- 
tember 1547 by political enemies acting under orders of the Emperor Charles V. Interestingly, Duke Ottavio's wife was 
Margherita, an illegitimate daughter of Charles V, and Duke Pierluigi was the son of Pope Paul VI (1468-1549). 
1631 fail to see how the Moon in 18 Pisces or Venus in 12 Pisces is afflicted by Mars in 27 Aries opposite Saturn in 25 Li- 
bra. 
164 His father was Cosimo I de' Medici (1519-1574), Grand Duke of Tuscany. 
99 

===== PAGE 109 =====

nobility; but if, on the contrary, they are in their fall, it is very bad, and they give at least fathers-in-law165 of 
inferior condition. 
4. If Saturn or the Sun is ruler of the 4th, or is well disposed and in aspect to the 4th and applying to an ex- 
alted planet, it will be fortunate for the parents, especially if that planet is ruler of the 4th house. 
5. The same [planet] ruler of the 4th and the 11th, or the 8th in the extracted figure, or the ruler of the 4th 
with the ruler of the 11 th, especially configured with a malefic, either by body or by malefic aspect, shortens 
the life of the parents. And the ruler of the 4th in the 11 th, or the ruler of the 11 th in the fourth, does the same 
thing. 
6. The ruler of the 4th in the 1 st, which is the 1 Oth in the extracted figure, or the ruler of the 1 st in the 4th, 
especially well disposed, exalted, and analogous, presages an illustrious fortune for and the elevation of the 
parents. 
7. What is said here about parents should similarly be understood about brothers, the spouse, children, 
etc. And if the native rejects marriage, or has only one brother, or one wife, or one child, the fate of his pro- 
genitors, or his brother, or his wife,166 or his children will appear more evidently and distinctly from his natal 
figure than if he has many such persons of the same order. And I call "persons of the same order" those who 
belong to the same house, such as the father, grandfather, father-in-law, and uncle to the 4th; brothers and 
relations'67 to the 3rd; children and grandchildren to the 5th. In fact, I believe that all these persons should be 
divided into only three orders, viz. those who are superior, equal, and inferior to the native. Of the first order 
are the father, grandfather, father-in-law, and uncle; of the second, brothers and relations; and of the third, 
children and grandchildren. And it must be noted that accidents that are signified by the natal figure to hap- 
pen to the father-in-law or the spouse must only be understood to be going to happen after they have actually 
become [the native's] father-in-law or wife; and so with the other relatives by marriage. 
8. By way of conclusion, it must be noted here that when a figure for the father has been erected in the 
manner we have specified, a figure for the grandfather must not be erected from it. Nor from a figure for the 
grandfather, another for the great-grandfather. Both because the father, grandfather, great-grandfather be- 
long to the same 4th house of the native's figure, and also because there is a common influx of the caelum 
upon the native for these persons, it [consequently] touches only the closest ones effectively or noticeably, 
but in the remoter ones it fades out. 
Chapter 7. Whether at the Native's Death there is a Cessation of the Celestial 
Influx from his Natal Figure upon his Parents, Brothers, Spouse, Children, 
and other Persons Belonging to him and Surviving him. 
This question, it seems to me, is the most subtle in all astrology, and one of no little importance, espe- 
cially in connection with astrological interrogations.168 
Indeed, it seems that it ought to be asserted that that influx ceases. For at the moment of the native's 
geniture his children are not yet [bom], nor possibly his wife [or] brothers, and his father can [already] be 
165 See Rule 7 below. 
166 The Latin text has fratris uxoris 'brother's wife', but this is a blunder for fratris, aut uxoris 'brother, or wife'. 
16? principally) cousins. 
168 Horary questions, treated in Book 26. 
100 

===== PAGE 110 =====

dead; consequently, these persons have not received the celestial influx relating to themselves, but only the 
native has received the influx [that indicates] that he is going to have parents, brothers, a spouse, etc., of a 
certain sort; consequently, this influx is inherent only in the native; from which it follows that, with the na- 
tive dead, that influx is extinguished, or leaves off. 
But on the other hand it seems that it must be denied that it ceases. For if from the native's figure a violent 
death is signified for the wife whom he is going to marry, and, with her husband dead, she has no further risk 
of a violent death or other presages of her own figure extracted from the husband's nativity, it is plain that 
those presages were groundless both before and after the native's death, which, however, must not be as- 
serted, since it is certain that the native's figure does signify for such persons, because otherwise the effects 
of the houses of parents, brothers, the spouse, etc., would be groundless. 
So then this question seems to me capable of being resolved with a few [considerations] from what was 
already said in Chapter 6. [For] when the native dies, that influx certainly ceases to be or leaves off that was 
impressed on him by the caelum in his nativity with regard to accidents that are particularly his or that he 
shares in common with such persons. But the source of that influx, i.e., the virtue of the celestial figure, re- 
maining in ihtprimum mobile through determination, and acting upon the native during his life through the 
correspondence with the similar figure impressed upon that same native, although it may cease to act upon 
the deceased native, nevertheless does not then lose its force upon those persons, insofar as they were [re- 
lated] to that native, but [in fact] retains it for so long as all these persons live—relics, as it were, of the na- 
tive himself [and] participants in his fate. And although this virtue may be very slight in comparison with the 
virtue of the proper geniture of each of these persons, as if [when] the wife's figure is lacking in the signs of 
violent death, but the husband's figure presages the contrary, she will not die violently on this account, be- 
cause of course everyone depends more upon his own fate than on someone else's; yet, if both the wife's 
own figure and her figure extracted from the nativity of her husband should signify a violent death, then she 
will all the more certainly perish by a violent death. And if this is still signified for her by a figure extracted 
from the figure of her own brother, or from that of some one of her children, it will be a presage even more to 
be feared. And this solution, in addition to the fact that it is agreeable to reason, also confirms its truth by ex- 
perience. 
101 

===== PAGE 111 =====

Section V 
In Which Objections against the Doctrine of Directions 
are Considered and Disproved. 
Chapter I. Pico Mirandola's Objections to Astrological Directions and 
the Refutation of those Objections. 
Since nothing in astrology is more worthy of admiration than the evident effects of directions, nothing 
has hitherto been more obscure or confused in the explanation of its causes and in the variety of opinions. It 
would certainly be surprising if the haters of this divine science had left this part of it untouched by their 
teeth—this part by which both the types and the times of future events are predicted, which for that reason 
must be considered to be the crown of all astrology. And if many of the leading astrologers have been de- 
ceived with regard to the doctrine of directions, what must we expect from those ignorant of it, such as Pico 
della Mirandola, Alessandro de Angelis, Sixtus ab Hemminga, and such like persons when they subject and 
condemn it to their own examination? Nothing more than the absurd things that we have already refilled 
here. 
And so Pico della Mirandola,169 in Book 7, Chapter 7, supposes That if the Ascendant is in 15 Leo, and 
Saturn is in 6 Virgo, that since the Ascendant is distant from Saturn by 21 degrees, the astrologers contend 
that the first degree of its distance from the Ascendant ought to be the first-year; the second degree, the sec- 
ond year; and so on; then it would be that the 21st year would be dangerous from the rays of Saturn and 
would threaten the danger of death to the native. This is (he says) the position astrologers take on direc- 
tions. From which Ptolemy pronounces on the length of life and the whole crowd of astrologers pronounce 
all the accidents and changes of fortune. 
But with this, Pico already imposes upon astrologers, and especially on Ptolemy. For that position on di- 
rections is by equal degrees of the ecliptic without latitude, contrary to the opinion of Ptolemy and the wiser 
astrologers, as we have taught previously. Besides, it is false that they attribute the first degree of the dis- 
tance to the first year, and from this judge about that, as Pico will have it, and then about the second year 
from the second degree; but [the astrologers] only measure the equatorial distance between the circles of po- 
sition of the significator and the promittor, and if this is 21 degrees, they say that in his 21st year or there- 
abouts the native will be seized with a sickness, with no account taken of the intermediate degrees between 
the two termini, whose effect will only happen in the 21st year. But Pico didn't understand this.170 
But then against the doctrine of directions Pico rises up thus in his own manner with exclamations devoid 
of reason. What can be thought to be more frivolous, more irrational? For in the first place, this distribution 
of the degrees to the years—is it not made rather arbitrarily, especially since the division ofthe signs into 30 
degrees depends entirely upon the judgment of the mathematicians that that number is more convenient for 
arithmetical divisions? 
169 Giovanni 11 Pico (1463-1494), Lord of Mirandola (usually called Pico della Mirandola), Italian humanist. His book 
Disputations Against Astrology was published posthumously at Bologna in 1496. It is divided into twelve books whose con- 
tents are summarized by Lynn Thomdike, History of Magic and Experimental Science 4, Chapter LXI (pp. 529-543). 
170 Pico may have erred only in putting the cart before the horse: by giving a specific instance first (Ascendant to the con- 
junction of Satum), followed by a general statement (the first degree following the Ascendant corresponds to the first year of 
life). If so, then both of his statements are true. But Morin assumes (perhaps merely to disagree with him) that he meant that 
the specific influence of the direction to Satum begins in the native's first year and continues until his 21st year, which is of 
course contrary to the theory of directions. 
103 

===== PAGE 112 =====

To this, I reply that the division of the caelum into 12 signs is not fictitious, but natural, as we have shown 
in Book 12, Section 1, Chapter 4, but a division of the signs into 30 degrees or the whole of the ecliptic or the 
equator into 360 degrees is in fact artificial for convenience in calculation, since if a natural division [taken] 
from the Sun with its 365 and Va days had been instituted for the zodiac or the equator, it would have been 
too inconvenient.171 But in Section 3, Chapter 3, we said that the measure of a year is not a whole degree, but 
only the mean diurnal [motion] of the Sun, which we proved there to be real and to have a value of only 59' 
08", 365/4 of which are equivalent to 360 degrees, into which the circumference of the caelum is divided. 
Consequently, the division of the arc of direction into years in this manner is not fictitious. But if one ques- 
tions even further as to why the diurnal [motion] of the Sun is equivalent to one year, let him see Chapter 5 of 
that same section. 
But then he exclaims thus again and asks, How can Saturn placed in 6 Scorpio when I was born harm me, 
even if we grant to the astrologers that its influx in the 21st year pertains to me? For at the time when it will 
pertain to me. Saturn will not be there.m And when Saturn will be there, that degree will not pertain to me. 
But I reply that it is no wonder that Pico was unable to conceive how Saturn in the abovesaid hypothe- 
sis could bring harm in the 21 st year from the nativity, for he has completely ignored the mode of action of 
the stars, in the nativity as well as in directions, which we explained in detail above. For it is not necessary 
that it remain in the same place that it occupied at birth, so that the place itself might make its influx upon 
the native, but only that in the nativity that part173 of the caelum was determined by Saturn to its nature 
with respect to the native, having taken into consideration its own celestial and terrestrial state. This being 
the case, the Saturnine influx of that part [of the caelum] will pertain to the native, not only in the 21 st year 
from his birth, but throughout the whole course of his life, as is demonstrated by the transits of the planets 
over that place or part. Nor is it necessary that in the 21 st year, when the effect of the direction of the As- 
cendant to the radical place of Saturn is produced, Saturn should be there in substance (although this 
would be efficacious), but only virtually through its previously mentioned determination. But when he 
says "when Saturn will be there, that part will not pertain to me," Pico himself doesn't know why he says 
that. For by the transits of the planets over it that part is proved to pertain to the native throughout his 
whole life. But perhaps he understood that then there will not be a 21 st year from the native's birth, to en- 
able effect of the direction to be produced through the influx of this part and Saturn. But the effect of the 
direction is not produced by Saturn's transit through that part, but by the concourse of the Ascendant as 
significator and that part as promittor, whether Saturn is in that part or whether it is not, as we have ex- 
plained in detail previously. 
After this he says, If the astrologers should say thatjust as clothes infected by a pestilence do not losem 
their poison at some particular time, so also it may happen in the case of the parts of the caelum that they 
may retain for a long time the contagion received from an evil star. Pico replies that if the philosophers had 
this saying, it would order them to remember that the affection of light does not remain in the subject, but 
departs with the bodyfrom which it emanated. And light is the vehicle and thefomentation of all these celes- 
tial impressions, as Avicenna says in his [account] of meteors. 
171 It was in fact tried by the Chinese, but eventually abandoned. 
172 Since Saturn's period is 2914 years, at age 21 it would be in dexter trine or square to its natal position, rather than in 
conjunction with it. 
173 Here, and in what follows, both Pico and Morin use pars 'part' as well as gradus (literally, 'step') for "degree." 1 have 
preserved the distinction, since the word 'part' seems to emphasize the idea that a degree is a part of the caelum, although (at 
least in Pico's case) it may be merely a classicism (the Greek word for degree is moira 'part', and both Manilius and 
Firmicus use its Latin equivalent pars.) 
174 Reading Am it tun t 'lose' instead of admittunt 'admit'. 
104 

===== PAGE 113 =====

But I reply, Pico and Avicenna175 were ignorant of this celestial philosophy. For it is not by [the action 
of) Saturn that the force is impressed upon those parts of the caelum in which it formally inheres, as a pesti- 
lence impresses its poison upon the clothes. But only the part of the caelum in which Saturn is present at the 
moment of the nativity is determined to the nature of Saturn with respect to the native for as long as he may 
live subject to the influences of the stars. But consequently that force of Saturn is only virtually present in 
that part through its determination, as has been very often said and proved elsewhere. But [as for) Pico's 
statement that "light is the vehicle and fomentation of all the impressions" or celestial influxes, we have 
plainly proved this to be false in Book 11, Chapter 13, where we have discussed light in opposition to Pico. 
And its falsity is plainly evident from the fact that planets and stars when they are under the earth—indeed 
the Sun and the Moon when they are above the horizon—experience total eclipses and with [some] 
duration176 and yet they powerfully influence the earth and men being bom in accordance with their own 
formal forces and their proper natures, no less than when they shine above the horizon, as should be well 
known to everyone, even to an astrological tyro. Besides, the planets, the Sun excepted, do not shine with 
their own light but only reflect the light of the Sun. 
Pico continues in this fashion, The astrologers say in reply that when it comes to the same degree (i.e., 
Saturn's place mentioned above) there is an advent of the other planets in the same number of intervening 
years (viz., 21); do they think that that virus can be abolished or lessened by the arrival of salutary lights? 
I reply that the force of Saturn, which is present by determination in the abovesaid part, can neither be di- 
minished nor abolished by the transit of the other planets over that part so long as [Saturn's] efficacious de- 
termination lasts, and it will last as long as the subject with respect to which it was allotted a determination, 
that is as long as the native remains in the nature of things, subject to that determination and to the influences 
of the stars. And when Mars, during the life of the native, transits over the abovesaid place of Saturn, the na- 
tive will suffer from [the effects of] Mars by reason of its own nature and its determination in the native's 
figure, according to the force of Saturn's place which it is crossing, as will be related in more detail when we 
take up the subject of transits specifically. And the same reasoning applies to the rest of the planets when 
they make a transit—always with the virtue of Saturn in that part surviving by determination throughout the 
whole life of the native. 
Again Pico rises [to the issue] thus: If the qualities accepted and receivedfrom the stars do endure in the 
regions of the caelum and are not confined to a narrow space of time, it will not only have to be observed in 
fates what planet is found in what place of the caelum either in the current year or in the hour of the 
geniture, but also which [planets] have passed over these same places in the preceding years. 
But I reply that this is not necessary, and in fact it is absolutely contrary to the principles of astrology. For 
the places of the planets preceding the nativity were not determined with respect to the native, as the 
abovesaid place of Saturn; thus indeed such a determination of the parts of the caelum is made only at the 
moment of the nativity for the individual places of the planets and their aspects and the cusps of the figure. 
And Pico's scheme would be valid if the virtues of the planets were impressed upon the parts of the caelum 
and became formally inherent in them, but this is hardly the case, as we have explained before. 
Finally, (he says) this invention of directing is nothing other than to subject things not only to the con- 
stellations which are (supply: 'at the time of the geniture'), but also to those which will be. For what else is it 
175 Ibn Sina (c. 979-1037) was primarily a philosopher and physician. 
1761 suppose Morin is referring to the duration of totality in eclipses. The maximum duration of a total lunar eclipse is 
about 1 hour and 40 minutes, but of a total solar eclipse only about 7 minutes and 30 seconds. His point is that, if the influ- 
ence of a planet depends upon its light, planets and stars would have no influence while they were under the earth (roughly 
50 percent of the time), and to make matters worse the Sun and Moon would lose their influence when eclipsed above the 
earth. 
105 

===== PAGE 114 =====

to say that the Moon, which at my birth was 
moving away from the sextile rays of the 
Sun^11 is, however, going to produce a mis- 
fortune at some time then from the square 
aspect of the Sun, which [the Moon] was 
not in fact under when 1 was born; but it 
would have been if it had stood more dis- 
tant from the Sun with more parts inter- 
jected; which parts (namely, those by 
which it was distant from the square radia- 
tion), when it passes over [them] after a 
certain number of years from it, will that 
calamity be inflicted? But that constella- 
tion was not [in effect] at the time of my or- 
igin; and if it is going to be [in effect] at 
some time afterwards, [it will] neverthe- 
less [mean] nothing to me; for whom, if 
there is any fate, the previous disposition 
of the caelum gave it. it is plain, therefore, 
how absurd, how false, how unsuitable the 
proposition of directing is, which the as- I 7ft trologers use daily. 
K3 t07>\ ^ 
00 
Figure 5 
Giovanni Pico del la Mirandola 
But I reply that Pico, because of his lack Mirandola 45°N 
of undersianding of astrology, has in- 24Feb ,463.8:22 PM-,7Nov ,494 
volved himself more and more in the en- , n ^ , r- . NN462 tanglements of falsity. In the first place, 
because he supposes that in a direction the 
Moon, the significator, or the force of its radical place, is moved to the promittor, the square of the Sun. But 
we have shown this to be false in Section 3, Chapter 1. Second, because it is false that astrologers, by direc- 
tions, subject things or the native to constellations that are not [in effect at the time of birth], but can be [in 
the future], since [in actuality] they will only subject him by directions to the constellations or celestial 
causes that are [present] at the moment of his nativity. For if the Moon is then in sinister sextile to the Sun, a 
square to the Sun may follow that, which square is given at the moment of the nativity and its distance from 
the Moon itself; which distance, the Moon's force that was impressed virtually on the Moon's place does 
not traverse, so that the effect of the direction of the Moon to the square of the Sun may be produced, as Pico 
thought, but it is only necessary that the promittor, or the Sun's square, be transferred to the position of the 
Moon's place through the prime revolution of the caelum after [the native's] birth; and the formal impres- 
sion of that natural direction having thus been made upon the native, its effect can be produced in as many 
years from his birth as the number of degrees of the equator by which the promittor is distant from the circle 
of position of the Moon, just as is explained in detail in Section 3, Chapter 2, which see. 
Thus far, then, it has been evident how absurd, how false, and how inappropriate Pico's reasons against 
astrological directions are; the truth of which he himself experienced very bitterly, when, in the 33rd year of 
An actual reference to his own chart (which see). 
178 This is the sort of Latin eloquence that excited admiration in Italy in the 1490s. Both Morin and 1 have added words 
and explanations to it to try to make it understandable, but it would be necessary to abandon the original format altogether 
and write a paraphrase to put it into acceptable English. 
106 

===== PAGE 115 =====

his age,179 immediately after he had written his twelve books against astrologers, he had to die from the di- 
rection of his Ascendant to the body of Mars in the 2nd,180 opposed to the Moon in the 8th, and square Saturn 
and Mars, as had been predicted to him by Lucio Bellantio, a physician of Siena, Antonio Syrigato of Flor- ••181 * * ••• • ence, and Angelo de Catastini, a Carmelite, as is reported by Giuntini on p. 540, where he puts [Pico's] 
celestial figure.182 And how uncommonly well and easily Pico's objections can be resolved by the self-con- 
sistent doctrine we have set forth. 
Chapter 2. in which Alessandro de Angelis's Reasons against Directions 
are Proposed and Refuted. 
De Angelis,183 in Book 4, Chapter 20, rises up strongly against directions. And I omit that afterwards in 
imitation of Pico he supposed the place of the significator to be moved to the place of the promittor accord- 
ing to some astrologers; then, from Cardan's Book on the Judgments of Genitures, Chapter 6, he selects for 
rebuttal many things about directions that Cardan himself only intended to apply to revolutions—which De 
Angelis did not know enough to discern. And [so at length] I come to the arguments of his that follow. 
First he says that He cannot conceive what a "place " is to the astrologers, and he argues against it from 
the properties of a place as defined by Aristotle, and he does this with many words and passages that are 
plainly of no importance for this matter. 
I reply then that Alessandro de Angelis had not thought that the place of a star is one thing to physicists 
and another to astrologers. For the physical place of a star is the surface of a body immediately encircling the 
star, as Aristotle holds, [and] against which we have written in Book 5, Chapter 4. But the astrological place 
is a part of the primum mobile under which that star is seen from the earth, and which determines that star to 
its own virtue with respect to the earth, [as we have explained] in Book 4, Chapter 7. 
But he argues, It is insane to say that the signs of the zodiac are places of the planets, which are seen in 
them because ofan error of the eye; and no less insane than ifsomeone should say that the Moon or its orb is 
the place of a mountain which is seen in the direction of the Moon. 
179 Pico was bora on 24 Feb 1463 and died on 17 Nov 1494 at the age of 31 years and not quite 9 months, that is to say in 
his 32nd year. However, the statement that he died in his 33rd year may have resulted from the calendar used by the two 
writers cited below. Bellantio was from Florence and Syrigato from Siena, both of which towns used the style of the Incar- 
nation, i.e.. New Year's Day was 25 March rather than 1 January. Pico's birthdate would have been considered to be 24 Feb 
1462 in that version of the calendar, which by simple subtraction from the death date, 17 Nov 1494, would have made his 
age at death 32 years and not quite nine months, which would have been his 33 rd year. 
!80 Recalculation shows that 12 Scorpio, the reported longitude of Mars, would have come to the Ascendant (17° 12' Li- 
bra) with an arc of direction of 32056' or very nearly 33°, as the Italian astrologers recorded. However. Mars was actually in 
13048' Scorpio with latitude 1N55, so its zodiacal rising would have yielded an arc of direction of 35021' and its mundane 
rising an arc of33054'. In the true latitude of Mirandola, 44053', the arcs of the recalculated place would have been: zodia- 
cal, 35° 17' and mundane, 33o50'. 
181 John Gadbury, Collectio Geniturarum (London: James Cottrel, 1662), p. 51. has Catastivi, Not having Junctinus's 
original at hand, I do not know which spelling is correct. 
1821 have added Pico's chart from NN 462 (presumably cited from Junctinus). It has Ascendant 18 Libra, while Cardan's 
chart C 490C) has Ascendant 6 Libra, but the latter was perhaps drawn incorrectly, as it apparently gave the same birth time 
(it actually has "ho. l.min.42.post.merid.," but this must be a blunder for "ho. 2.min.42.post.occasum."). 
'83 Alessandro Angeli (1562-1620), a Jesuit from Spoleto, was the author of a book Against the Astrologers published in 
1604. 
107 

===== PAGE 116 =====

But I reply that there is a great difference between the two. First because that mountain, seen from any di- 
rection—from the east, from the west, from the north, from the south, and from regions in between—will 
not be seen in the direction of the Moon, while a planet, especially one not liable to [be affected by] paral- 
lax,184 and any fixed star, can be seen in the same part of the caelum from anywhere on earth. Second, be- 
cause the place of the stars in the caelum is independent of the eye and only depends upon nature, which God 
himself made. For even if all men were bom blind, as some are bom, nevertheless the places of the planets in 
the caelum would be given with respect to those bora; that is, the parts of the caelum would be determined 
by the planets with respect to those bora. Third, because the place of a mountain imagined to be in the [the 
place of the ] orb of the Moon is of no virtue. But the place of a planet in the zodiac is of great virtue, as expe- 
rience testifies. 
After this he asks, where does this vicarious power of a star reside, seeing that the star does not remain 
in the place it occupied at the moment ofthe geniture. But then he cites the authority of Cardan, who says in 
his [Seven Segments of Astronomical Aphorisms], Seg. 1, Aph. 38, Those impressions from the geniture, 
which remain in place up until the time in which they are perfected, are partly in the place and partly in the 
material De Angelis exclaims, Therefore, does the caelum, impervious to contrary qualities, contract this 
disease? How does this contagion lurkfor so many years? Why, or by what, is it calledforth after 20 years? 
I reply first that Cardan, Bellantio, and some others have been deceived in thinking that the force of a star 
is formally impressed upon the caelum and that it remains in that place only up to the time when the effect of 
the direction is produced, since no formal impression upon the caelum can be made by the stars, but the 
place of a star in the caelum is determined with respect to the native, on whom there is a formal impression 
of the whole celestial constitution at the moment of his nativity, [which lasts] for the native's whole life, as 
we have quite often stated. I reply secondly that De Angelis is mistaken when he supposes that the force of 
the celestial bodies, which is the source of the effects of a direction, is of some kind of contrary qualities, 
i.e., in his mountain of elements, since he denies and rejects their influences. And that force does not "lurk," 
but flourishes continually with respect to the native until, at the time of his death, he is released from the in- 
flux of the stars and the domination of the caelum, as is proved by the transits of the planets over the princi- 
pal places of the horoscope before and after the exact time of a direction. 
And these transits are in fact effective on the native even though they are far weaker than the directions, 
especially solitary ones that are not reinforced by directions or revolutions. And why and by what the 
abovesaid force is brought forth after 20 years may be read in Section 3, Chapter 6. 
Then he asks, why doesn't Saturn exude a force of this sort continuously? Or why doesn't it infect the 
whole caelum through which it passes, but only that certain part of the circle that it occupies, or seems to 
occupy, at the time of birth and conception? Since men are born at every time and every moment oftime, it is 
necessary for Saturn to exude its force continuously; therefore, when the Ascendantfinds the whole caelum 
drenched with Saturn's poison, there is no reason why its efficacy should be called forth in the 21st year, 
rather than in those following or preceding. 
But I reply that Saturn does continuously exude its force on these inferior things, and the whole path of Sat- 
urn in the caelum is similarly infected with the determinative virtue of Saturn mentioned above, but not with 
respect to each native. But only that part of the caelum is determined with respect to a native, under which it is 
or can be discerned at the moment of that native's nativity; and consequently only it can produce the effect of a 
direction from the concourse of the Ascendant with that part [of the caelum] and not with any other. 
He obj ects further that that part of the zodiac that was the place ofSaturn in the nativity ofone person, is 
184 By "one not liable to parallax" he presumably means Mars, Jupiter, or Saturn, for which Kepler had been unable to de- 
tect any parallax in Tycho's observations. 
108 

===== PAGE 117 =====

very often the place of Jupiter, Mars, or another [planet] in the natal [figure] ofanother person; and it must 
be acknowledged by these [interpreters] of the planets if they wish to be consistent, that that [part] at the 
same time obtains the powers of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars. Why then Saturn discharges its effect, when the 
Ascendant approaches, rather than another planet, is difficult to explain. 
I reply that it would certainly be difficult for Alessandro de Angelis, who is absolutely ignorant of these 
matters, but very easy for us from the principles that we have expounded. For we say that the caelum is the first 
cause in nature, eminently embracing the forces of the causes of the inferior celestial [bodies]; and therefore 
from the individual ones of these [causes] determinable in accordance with the nature of each. And in conse- 
quence the same part of the primum caelum can be determined with respect to one native to the nature of Sat- 
urn, with respect to another to the nature of Jupiter at a different time, with respect to still another to the nature 
of Mars, etc. And consequently that part can act in different ways in each individual by reason of its own deter- 
mination with respect to each of them without any confusion whatsoever, because, of course, determinations 
are formally different.185 And from this it happens that when in one native's figure the direction of the Ascen- 
dant to the following place of Saturn is completed, an effect of Saturn is produced, but not an effect of Jupiter 
or Mars. And it is much more remarkable that at the same time the same part of the caelum is determined to the 
nature of Saturn or Jupiter with respect to those who are bom under different meridians: to one it becomes the 
cause of life, to another, of riches, to another, of brothers, parents, children, etc., by reason of the different po- 
sition of that part with respect to each individual native, since here a twofold determination of that part ap- 
pears: first, to the nature of Saturn, which can be common to many, and then to this type of accident rather than 
to another, by reason of its particular position in the figure with respect to each native. And still, nothing in as- 
trology is clearer, not of course to those who are ignorant of the science, but rather to those who are skilled in 
it; from which it is plain how marvelous is the force of action of the celestial bodies, displaying in this regard 
the most excellent character of divine virtue and omnipotence. 
Therefore, when Alessandro de Angelis concludes in this manner: What, therefore, could be fashioned 
that is more insane than directions? What could be thought up that is crazier? [For] every "place " of the 
planets is fictitious, the motion by which the contrived division of degrees approaches to it is fabulous, and 
the force that a planet is said to bestow upon a place is imaginary. And shall we believe that the length of 
life, the time ofdeath, the causes of sicknesses, and all the important affairs of human activity depend upon 
all these ridiculous occurrences and upon the "forces " of things? Oh happy minds that had the goodfortune 
to contrive such things! Oh fertile fields of ridiculous things in which the principles of all things that are 
made on sea or land are contained! 
We may only say that it is absolutely insane to judge openly about things one knows nothing about and to 
exhibit with a fecundity of ridiculous exclamations a sterility of reasons and one's own stupidity. But our 
doctrine of directions is fixed on very sound fundamentals, so that nothing can be objected against direc- 
tions that cannot be resolved through it easily and clearly, as was shown above. 
Chapter 3. \n which Sixtus ah Hemminga's Reasons against Astrology, 
and especially against Directions are Refuted. 
Origen, St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, and other fathers of religion, excited by zeal, especially in a time in 
which the distortion and abuse of astrology was greater, must, I think, be excused for having written about 
this science, which was not sufficiently well known to them; for God did not give them to us as doctors of 
185 That is, each determination is specific for the individual for whom it is made; hence, it is necessarily different from ev- 
ery other determination. 
109 

===== PAGE 118 =====

physical things, but of everyday affairs; and in this role they at least had good intentions. But in the case of 
others [equally] unskilled, who undertake with utter arrogance to overthrow the same thing either with writ- 
ings or with public speeches, their madness is really immoderate, since it is nothing else than spouting into 
the caelum, to attest publicly to their own ignorance, and to wish to deceive God of the glory due Him on ac- 
count of the marvelous gifts granted by the celestial bodies, when, labouring vainly in a talent not entrusted 
to them, they think themselves capable of doing great things. 
But in the case of Sixtus ab Hemminga,186 M.D., of Frisia, who, in his knowledge of astronomy and as- 
trology, far surpassed Pico Mirandola, Alessandro de Angelis, and the rest of the haters of astrology, both 
old and new, he has erected a number of natal figures, judged them, and discussed the mysteries of direc- 
tions and revolutions, based on lengthy reading and comparison of the [astrological] authors' [works], and 
yet he writes very vehemently against astrologers, so that now he is a shield for De Angelis himself, and 
now a spear to stab into astrology. What else shall we say of him other than that he has sinned more from 
malice than from ignorance; and, having become a spontaneous apostate, the most impudent of all, he has 
nevertheless laboured under a dense ignorance; but malice predominated in this, as shows here and there in 
his book, Astrology Refuted.187 For that reason he is called by Alessandro de Angelis, in the last chapter of 
Book 5, a man by far the most eminent in astrological principles, and so he is introduced, speaking of him- 
self in Geniture 22, But (says ab Hemminga), since I took up the practice of astrology, [and] acquired it by 
long use and constant practice, I think 1 have experience absolutely contrary to the experience of the astrol- 
ogers—not fallacious and doubtful, but true and consistent, by which the counterfeit truth of all this doc- 
trine of theirs is convicted of the most open falsity. For I have learnedfrom innumerable experiments with 
genitures that nothing at all can be apprehended from the position of the stars. And in the geniture of [the 
Emperor] Charles V: Moreover, since I have inspected the matter thoroughly—having been taught by long 
use and much experience—/ have found the doctrine of astrology, which I favored earlier before it was 
well known [to me], to be impossible, not worthy of faith, and useless. But since it would have been stupid 
for a philosopher and physician to have favored this science very much without any persuading cause, it is 
credible that the same thing happened to Sixtus ab Hemminga that once happened to me. Namely that, 
misled by the evidence of many, even marvelous, experiences, he wanted to scrutinize the innermost parts 
of this science, i.e., the principles, reasons, and fundamentals with whatever skill he possessed; and in 
[doing] this he was astounded because this very celebrated science was seen to depend more on trifles and 
figments than on genuine reasons. And not being able to discern the true from the false to unlock the sanc- 
tuary of nature and to build for himself a suitable foundation for knowledge, he seized an opportunity 
from the trivialities of the Arabs and the other old [astrologers) that defile this very noble science and re- 
solved to write against it and to render it infamous to posterity. But really from his principal reasons 
against astrology, now referring, and now rebutting by means of argumentation, one concludes with little 
doubt that he had only affected the practice of this discipline to the end that he would be able to rage with 
atrocious fury against the science with a greater evidence of probability. But in truth he was quite ignorant 
of the fundamentals of this science, a fallacious writer and a deceiver of the inexperienced, even though 
he occasionally rises up rightly and neatly against the trifles of the Arabs and the false dogmatic state- 
ments of some of the other old [astrologers]. 
But since our task here is [to deal] with the least sensible of all the enemies of astrology, and since his 
whole book188 cannot be discussed in detail and disproved with less effort than by [writing] a volume that 
186 A Dutch physician who lived from 1533 to 1586. 
m Aslro-logiae ratione et experientia refutatae liber... nuncprinum... editiis contra C. Leovitium, H. Cardanum et L. 
Gauricum. [Astrology Refuted by Reason and Experience ... now Published for the first time... against C(yprian) Leovitius, 
J(erome) Cardan, and L(uca) Gaurico] (Antwerp, 1583). Sixtus took Leovitius as his principal target. See Lynn Thomdike, 
HMES 6, pp. 193-196, for a summary of the contents of Sixtus's book. 
110 

===== PAGE 119 =====

would be more or less equal in size to Junctinus's volume on astrology on account of the multitude of 
genitures that he cites in addition to the thirty he has explained [in detail], as well as the aphorisms handed 
down by the astrologers, which he rises up against; for this reason, it seems to us to be right to reveal the lion 
by his claws—to expose his principal reasons, both the ones against astrology in general and those against 
directions in particular, for all the other objections that he raises can easily be refuted by the doctrine we 
have set forth. 
And so in the first place he holds in his demonstration that ifany things are done or signified by the stars, 
they ought also to be comprehended with certainty and known in advance, not by some obscure conjectures. 
But 1 reply that this is plainly stupid; since by this very reason not only would medicine have to be re- 
moved from the number of the sciences, but also, like astrology, it would plainly have to be rejected as being 
false and useless. Doesn't ab Hemminga know that his own medicine is conjectural—at least in practice? 
Moreover, that it should not be rejected is proved, not only by authority of Ecclesiasticus, Chapter 38, Hon- 
our the physician because in fact the most High created him, etc.,189 but also by the public need [for it]. For 
astrology and medicine agree absolutely in this [respect]: that the theory of both is certain, and founded on 
valid principles, even though these principles are not perfectly known by men; but the practice of both re- 
quires conjecture on account of the concourse of various causes, the diversity of the subjects, and the muta- 
bility arising from the various concurrent causes. And from this it is easy to conjecture that Sixtus ab 
Hemminga was no better a physician than he was an astrologer, since he neglected the science, which, Hip- 
pocrates, in many places, and Galen, in the whole of Book 3 of his Critical Days, recommended as being 
very necessary to a physician.190 
Secondly, he wants astrologers to demonstrate that, just as everyone understands and feels the efficacy of 
the Sun and the Moon, so he may [also] pronounce things that are [equally] certain about the rest of the stars. 
And by "the rest of the stars" he means even the smallest fixed [stars].191 
I reply that an astrologer pronounces no less true things about the 12 twelfths192 and the 5 lesser planets, 
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, than he does about the Sun and the Moon, since he will only pro- 
nounce about all of these in connection with their celestial state and their determination with respect to the 
native; and these are the principal celestial causes that change this inferior world,193 and ab Hemminga is de- 
ceived if he thinks that the influence of the Sun is better known than the influence of Saturn or Mars, al- 
though its light and heat are better known than their light and heat and cold. But many true things may also 
be pronounced about the principal fixed stars, such as Spica Virginis, Caput Medusae, the Eye of Taurus,194 
and other similar stars. But as for the smallest [fixed stars], their force is insensible, at least on humans. See 
what we have said about this matter in Book 8, Section 3, Chapter 4. 
188 A quarto volume of some three hundred pages, 
189 Ecclus. 38:1. 
190 Astrological works are ascribed to both Hippocrates (c.460-c. 370) and Galen (129-199). Hippocrates lived two cen- 
turies before the invention of horoscopic astrology, so his use of astrology, if any, would have been limited to Moon phases 
or something similar. Galen wrote or is said to have written a book on Critical Days (No. 14 of the "Sixteen Books of Galen" 
compiled by John of Alexandria in the seventh century. See George Sarton, Introduction to the History of Science [Balti- 
more, 1927], I; 480, and Lynn Thomdike, HMES 1,178-179. 
The last sentence is also italicized in the Latin text, but it seems to be Morin's comment rather than a continuation of 
the citation from ab Hemminga. 
192 That is, the signs of the zodiac. 
193 That is, the world below the stars. 
194 These stars are Spica, or Alpha Virginis; Algol, or Beta Persei; and Aldebaran, or Alpha Tauri. 
Ill 

===== PAGE 120 =====

Thirdly, he holds it to be necessary in the judgment offuture things to know absolutely all of the fixed 
stars, even the smallest, and theirforces, also, the variation of their forces for different motion and different 
position; from which he asserts that astrologicaljudgments must necessarily be false because of the contin- 
uous alteration of the position and configuration of the fixed stars, which is incomprehensible to the astrol- 
oger, who also cannot demonstrate that the smallest of the fixed [stars] is useless in this regard, since the 
smallestfixed [star] is 702 times greater than the Moon]95 But I reply: 1) That ab Hemminga cannot dem- 
onstrate the necessity he has supposed [to exist], since it is plainly false. And we have proved this in most 
evident fashion, because if astrologers do not in fact judge about any accident, such as life, honours, mar- 
riage, etc. from all 7 planets and all 12 signs, but only from those which are determined to that accident in ac- 
cordance with the true principles of this science that we have stated—and whoever would judge otherwise 
would be altogether confused and deceived—how much less will they judge about life, honours, or other 
things from the concourse of all the fixed [stars], even the smallest; 2) But this error, common to Pico 
Mirandola, Sixtus ab Hemminga, and Alessandro de Angelis, as if by tradition, has taken its origin from the 
fact that they have wrongly supposed that every accident of the native depends upon the whole (as they say) 
substance of the decree, i.e., from the entire natal constitution, which, however, we have shown to be false in 
Book 10 in opposition to [the opinions of] Pico and de Angelis. 
I reply secondly that astrologers do not deny that the smallest fixed [star], i.e., at least of the 6th magni- 
tude, is far greater than the Moon, but they only deny that their force is perceptible to us like the Moon's vir- 
tue is on account of the stupendous distance of these [stars] from the earth—[one so great that] if the Moon 
were removed [from the earth by] a hundredth part of it, it could not be seen, and it would act upon us much 
less perceptibly. For in similar fashion, a great fire 1,000 paces distant from us does not warm us at all, while 
the flame of a candle two inches away from the hand will warm it. And it is not because of this that the as- 
trologers say that these [stars] are unnecessary, for God, who calls them by their names, knows their use. 
But in fact their distance from us is so great that only the force of the more notable [stars] is strong enough 
to be perceived and discerned by us; whence, the imperceptible effects of the others are rightly held to be 
naught by the astrologers. But as regards the change of configuration and position of the more notable 
[stars], the configuration can be viewed with respect to the fixed [stars] and the planets. The configuration 
is not changed with respect to the fixed [stars], else they would not be fixed and always at the same dis- 
tances among themselves,196 but it is changed with respect to the planets; however, aside from their con- 
junctions with the planets, they are not perceived to have any efficacious connections with them in the 
caelum]91 although with respect to the earth they have their own risings and settings that are potent and 
not unknown to astrologers. Moreover, their positions are varied with respect to the caelum and the earth: 
with respect to the caelum by reason of the motion of the fixed [stars] through the twelfths,198 through 
which circumstance they are subjected to the rulership of the planets in whose domiciles they are placed, 
just as the planets themselves; but their motion is very slow, so that in 2,000 years they may not change their 
rulership.199 And with respect to the earth, so far as through that motion, with a similar slowness, they are 
195 If he was comparing diameters, ab Hemminga had the right order of magnitude. Our Sun is said to be rather smaller 
than average as stars go, and it is about 400 times the diameter of the Moon. In volume, of course, it is 64,000,000 times 
greater than the Moon; and in mass, about 27,000,000 times greater. Thus, a star is much greater than the Moon, and this is 
ab Hemminga's point. But he did not know that the distance of the nearest star is something like 25,000,000,000,000 miles, 
while the Moon is only 240,000 miles distant. 
196 Their changes with respect to each other (calledproper motion) are so slow that they had not yet been recognized in 
Morin's day. 
197 He means that the planets' conjunctions with the more notable fixed stars have a perceptible influence, but their as- 
pects to them do not. 
198 The signs of the zodiac. 
112 

===== PAGE 121 =====

raised or lowered insensibly in the meridian circle, which is of no sensible efficacy, seeing that a greater or 
lesser declination of the planets, causing a greater or lesser altitude in the meridian circle, is perceived to in- 
troduce no sensible variation of effects—in particular, none peculiar to itself. And the universal immutabil- 
ity of the fixed stars in their configuration and position, which was incomprehensible to Sixtus ab 
Hemminga, is reduced to this. However, we do not deny that research in the astrology of the fixed stars and 
the understanding of the constellations is needful, as far as their proper and formal virtues; but how many 
and how great are the desiderata in medicine, the whole of physics, theology, and pure mathematics? 
Should, therefore, so many noble sciences be rejected as useless? A perfect knowledge of any science does 
not belong to this wretched life, especially since Adam's sin, which infected all men with ignorance and 
malice, but to the blessed and eternal life in which we shall see God just as He is, and in this simplest truth 
every possible verity with the clearest view. Meanwhile, we all labour with the search for truth in a manner 
suitable to our lot; and it should be sufficient for us that at least the primary celestial causes and their 
forces—-the principal modes of acting—should finally become known to us, as they are established in this 
work; concerning which, posterity will pass judgment upon what we have provided for it. 
Fourth. He laughs at astrologers because after comets, eclipses, and similar universal configurations, 
they attach some succeeding effects, such as wars, pestilences, and the deaths of princes to those causes; 
and they do not predict such things from these [configurations] in particular—at least, not without false- 
hood, such as that such-and-such a prince will die, or the plague will rage in such-and-such a city. 
I reply that from the places of comets, eclipses, and the rest of the universal configurations, only univer- 
sal predictions can be had, but not particular ones for princes or others, unless their exactly rectified natal 
figures are available. And an error can occur in such [universal configurations] from two causes. First, since 
the motions of the luminaries are not yet exactly determined, the true hour of an ecliptic configuration can- 
not be had, and the hour of the generation of a comet200 is known with even less accuracy. Second, because 
the accurately rectified figures of princes are not available, for this [accuracy of rectification] is not [within 
the capability] of every astrologer, but only of one who is highly skilled. But that a plague should invade this 
city rather than that one depends not only upon the universal configuration of the caelum, which by itself 
can signify a pestilence, but also upon the situation and position of the city [in question]. And all these 
things are not known to every astrologer; but it cannot be proved that they are impossible to know. For if 
princes would bring together men capable of [investigating] this matter, or if by the help of these princes [so 
that they would] not be indigent,201 they would devote themselves to this task, marvelous things would be 
done in this regard; and there would not be attributed to the science [itself] what is solely caused by the lack 
of human curiosity. 
Fifth. He holds that judgment about the native depends upon the celestial configuration of conception, 
quickening, birth, and other intermediate [phases of the birth process], whose beginnings, he says, are un- 
known to the astrologer; and the [native's] temperament and moral nature is varied by his rearing, exer- 
cise, way of life, etc. 
I reply that these objections, which have no weight, have already been abundantly satisfied in Book 21, 
Section 2, especially in Chapters 15,16, and 19 in opposition to [the objections of] Alessandro de Angelis, 
who offers the same song as Sixtus ab Hemminga in connection with this matter. See those chapters. 
199 He means that if a star, at some epoch, were at the beginning of a sign, it would stay in that same sign for 2,000 years. 
In fact, it would take about 2,150 years for the star to move into the next sign. 
200 Presumably, he means the time when a comet first becomes visible. 
201 In other words, if astrologers could get government grants to pay for their research and provide them with a reason- 
able stipend at the same time—the goal of every modem scientist. 
113 

===== PAGE 122 =====

Sixth. He argues from Marsilio ficino's [book] on Plotinus,202 that if from the coming together of two 
rays anything more may be done than by a single ray, then much more [still may be done] with the coming 
together ofall the planets and all thefixed [stars]; but, the more causes that flow together, the more difficult 
the judgment [becomes], because all the perfected causes are not known individually, nor, ifall are known, 
would it be immediately known what new things would be effected [by their combination], especially if the 
sublunar causes2^ are taken into account. Therefore, the knowledge [of these things] is impossible. 
I reply that Hemminga always clings to this confusion—that all the planets and fixed [stars] concur with 
whatever type of accident the native is going to have, which is rejected above at Objection 3. And so we 
have conceded that the more causes are determined by body, by aspect, and by rulership to the same type of 
accident, the more difficult it is to judge about it. Moreover, it would be impossible, and no less false, to ren- 
der an opinion about a sickness from a combination of many, [different] causes of sickness. And these are 
the more potent arguments, but [still] of no importance, raised by Sixtus ab Hemminga against universal as- 
trology. 
Now we may see in how many different ways he errs in [his discussion of] directions, which comprise 
the principal argument for the verity of astrology, but in which he professes to have perceived no verity at 
all, but only perpetual falsity, having displayed for this [purpose] 30 nativities notable for a variety of 
events, which he examines in his own fashion through the decrees and directions of the astrologers. 
And so first he judges about this science from nativities, either not rectified by any method, or only by 
one or two accidents. Which, however, is not sufficient to give one faith in the rectification if many acci- 
dents that are important have preceded, as they have in the nativities that he explains. And from this to pre- 
dict future [accidents] at their own time through their own proper causes, or to refer the rest of the accidents 
to their own proper causes according to their time, is absolutely impossible if one should have erred in the 
rectification from a single accident. In fact, ab Hemminga judges from figures that differ in [the longitude 
of] the Ascendant by 10,15, or 20 degrees and more from [those given by] Junctinus. And it is more likely 
that Junctinus, a famous astrologer and very diligent in the collection of nativities, has given the figures 
which he displayed in good faith [than that ab Hemminga has done so]. 
Second. If, in the figures he has selected, 2 or 3 accidents are found to agree as far as the time and the type 
of effect with his own causes of direction, but not to the minute of the arc of direction or of the time, he 
thinks the doctrine of directions ought to be rejected, and he gives vent to useless questions as to why one di- 
rection anticipates its effect by 4 or 5 minutes of the equator or about one month, or another one follows its 
effect by the same amount. Concerning which futile reasoning, we have said enough in Section 3, Chapter 3, 
which see. 
Third. He has not used any directions other than those of the Sun, the Moon, the Ascendant, and the 
Midheaven for all the native's accidents. Which is mere ignorance, even though prescribed by Ptolemy; 
who, however, adds the Lot [of Fortune], rejected by Sixtus without [having given] any reason. For the Sun, 
the Moon, the Ascendant and the Midheaven are not significators determined to all the native's accidents, 
but only to some of them: namely, the Ascendant to accidents of the 1st house, the Midheaven to accidents 
of the 10th, and the Sun and the Moon to the accidents of those houses in which they are [posited] and those 
which they rule. But the other planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, and the other cusps are no 
less determined to the native than the Sun, the Moon, the Ascendant, and the Midheaven; therefore, they 
must be directed for those things to which they are determined by position or rulership, which we have very 
202 Marsilio Picino (1433-1499) was an Italian humanist scholar and philosopher, famed for his translations of Plato and 
Plotinus. The reference is probably to his commentary on Plotinus, published in 1491. 
203 The non-astrological causes. 
114 

===== PAGE 123 =====

plainly stated in Section 7, Chapters 4,5, and 6, against [the opinions of] Ptolemy, Cardan, and the other old 
[astrologers], so that there is no need of any other response here. 
Fourth. In the directions which he selects and calculates to refute astrology, he does not refer the effects 
to the proper causes, but [he assumes] foreign [causes] from the effects, and similarly [he assigns] causes to 
foreign effects. For what else could he do, since he only directs 4 significators and does not pay any atten- 
tion either to their determinations or to the determinations of those that he omits? 
Fifth. The greater part of the directions he proposes are to the terms of the planets, which we have proved 
in Book 13, Chapter 13, to be mere figments and of no virtue. How then could he establish true directions 
with them? But since he omitted the greater part of the significators in the geniture, it was necessary to in- 
crease the number of promittors by figments. 
Sixth. If, for example, the direction of the Moon to the square of Mars in [the chart of] one native is said 
to have produced some effect, he wants it to produce the same effect in every chart, without taking any ac- 
count of the determinations of the significator and the promittor in these diverse genitures, nor of the lin- 
eage, sex, condition, or any other dispositions of the subject native. And if he can show the contrary in any 
nativity, he denies that the abovesaid effect was produced by such a cause. And in addition he asks why the 
same effect or a similar one could not be produced by celestial causes other than those which be refers to, 
without any consideration of their determination? And what else is this than to be swayed by ignorance, to 
totter, and to fall into the greatest absurdities through the lack of [consideration of] the determination of the 
true significators and promittors in individual genitures, observed and applied to judgment; and conse- 
quently to commend outstandingly the very great force of that determination in astrology? 
Seventh. In the universal judgment of life, riches, the wife, honours, etc., the judgments are not argued 
from the true and genuine causes of these accidents through determinations to such things, but principally 
and indiscriminately from causes universally analogous, which Cardan calls significators "according to 
substance." We have shown in Section 1, Chapters 3, 4, 5, and 6, how great a mental aberration this is. 
Therefore, why is it surprising if Sixtus ab Hemminga, entangled in so many errors, was unable to appre- 
hend the verity of astrology either in the charts of others or in his own, especially when he was mostly prov- 
ing wrong the dogmatic statements of Ptolemy, Cardan, Leovitius, and others and no few of their aphorisms 
of manifest falsity? 
Besides, for the greater confounding of this writer, we may expound here his geniture and accidents, the 
causes of which he could never find from his own figure rectified by himself. 
Chapter 4. In which the Truth of the Doctrine of Directions is Demonstrated 
in the Chart of Sixtus ab Hemminga. 
The exact figure of the nativity is the cause of future accidents for the native, as far as their type and time; 
and in turn, these accidents are due to this cause; and consequently, given this [figure], the accidents can be 
found as far as the type and the time. And in turn, with these given as far as the type and the time, the exact 
figure of the nativity can be determined from some other [figure] that is close to it, i.e., one preceding or fol- 
lowing the exact one by some minutes of an hour, indeed by some hours. But this is not [within the capabil- 
ity] of every artist, but only of one very skilled in the recognition of the celestial causes, who of course 
knows how to connect the effects rightly with their own true causes. And the entire effort consists of this: to 
take some accident, and through directions connect it with its causes, that is its significator and promittor, 
capable of producing it from their own nature and determination. For if, with this connection made, the rest 
115 

===== PAGE 124 =====

of the accidents as far as their type and time may be found by directions similarly connected to causes capa- 
ble of producing those things, the exact figure of the nativity will have been found; but if not, the hypothesis 
of the first connection is false, in which the significator should always be the Ascendant or the Midheaven, 
since these are what is sought.204 
Therefore, Sixtus ab Hemminga, for the rectification of his own geniture, takes a sickness in the year 
1559 on the 8th of December at 5 A.M., which was a very acute fever, with pleurisy and inflammation of the 
liver, and in which his life was almost despaired of; which, according to astrological opinion, supposes that 
it was caused by the direction of the Ascendant to the antiscion of Mars, whose oblique ascension under the 
pole of the figure was 284o02And the time of the accident converted into degrees of the equator according 
to Ptolemy, 26o50,. 
Therefore, having subtracted this from 284o02', there remains 257° 12' for the oblique ascension of the 
Ascendant; from which the true time of the nativity comes out as 13 hours 6 '30 But in order to confirm this 
Ascendant, again he directs it for a sudden 
sickness with lack of breath and a sudden 
discharge of poison, which began on 2 De- 
cember 1566 at 7 o'clock, followed by a 
quotidian fever, to the square of Mercury, 
whose oblique ascension was 290o25'; and 
the convened time of the accident, 33o50'. 
And having made the subtraction of the lat- 
ter arc from the former, there remains 
257035' for the oblique ascension of the 
Ascendant, but not precisely 257°!2', as 
above. Therefore, he rejects both directions 
because he wants both of them to agree to 
the minute; otherwise, he denies that such 
effects are from such causes and that there 
is any truth to be had in astrology. Besides, 
he cannot find any causes by directions for 
the rest of his accidents. 
141^07 
Jat. 
h 0S29A 
« 0N28D 
<x ^08450 
o 9 IN21D 
9 2N3IA 
D 3S15A 
MK07 
Figure 6 
Moreover, Sixtus ab Hemminga is de- Sixtus ab Hemminga 
ceived in many places in his own figure and Bellocomi in Frisia 53N00 
the others. First, because he has quite a few 6 February 1533, 13:01 True Time 
erroneous places for the planets. For he has from The Rudolphine Tables 
Mars in 17033' Capricorn, when in The 
Rudolphine Tables it is only and he has Mercury in 17025/ Pisces, when from The Rudolphine Ta- 
bles it is only 13041'. Second, because he omits the required correction of the aspects. Third, because the 
conversion of time into degrees of the equator taken from Ptolemy is not legitimate, as we have said in Sec- 
tion 3, Chapter 3. Fourth, because he only directs four significators: the Ascendant, the Midheaven, the Sun, 
204 That is, the chart should be rectified by accidents arising from directions of the angles, since the time of such direc- 
tions is directly dependent upon the birth time, while the time of interplanetary directions is only indirectly dependent on the 
birth time and is consequently much less sensitive to a change in that time. For example, in ab Hemminga's chart Mercury 
comes to the conjunction of Mars with an (unadjusted) arc of 38046'; but if we add 15° to the RAMC and recalculate the di- 
rection, the arc is reduced to 34048'—a difference of only 3058'. And the Moon comes to the conjunction of Saturn in the 
original chart with an arc of 16058': but i f 15° is added to the RAMC and the direction is recalculated, the arc is reduced to 
15048'—a difference of only lo10'. 
116 

===== PAGE 125 =====

and the Moon. Fifth, because he uses fictitious promittors, such as the terms of the planets. Sixth, because he 
absolutely did not know how to determine the true causes of effects,205 so that he could connect the one with 
the other. 
But, having taken his accidents and their times from ab Hemminga himself, I find their proper causes, 
and thus 1 show the truth of astrology.206 For the basis of the rectification I take his marriage, celebrated on 2 
August 1563, which accident simply and per se is a kind of action, and therefore it pertains to the 
Midheaven, even though by inclination it may pertain to the Ascendant. And Venus, ruler of the 7th, was the 
analogous significator of the wife, and conjoined to Mars, ruler of the Ascendant, i.e., to the significator of 
inclinations, evidently promised marriage. Therefore, for the time of the marriage I direct the square of Ve- 
nus to the Midheaven thus: 
Right Ascension of the square to Venus 
corrected by our table 195o04' 
Naibod's Table 30o03/ 
Right Ascension of the Midheaven 165 o01' 
And consequently the true time of the nativity was 12:59; this is only 7'30" earlier than ab Hemminga 
puts it.207 And I take his marriage because in a man of 30 years it cannot be said that it was not spontaneous 
and from the inclination that Mars, ruler of the Ascendant, strong and conjunct Venus, ruler of the 7th house, 
had impressed. Now we may see whether the rest of his accidents have celestial causes that are no less in 
agreement with their own times. 
And so in the year 1542, at the end of April, he was first attacked by a sickness of 12 days arising from in- 
digestion. And this was from the direction of the Ascendant to the square of the Sun in the domicile of 
Saturn, which, through its antiscion, is on the cusp of the 12th, which is intrinsically [the house] of sick- 
nesses. 
Oblique Ascension of the square to the Sun 
Oblique Ascension of the Ascendant 
Difference 
Converted Time of the Accident 
In the year 1544, on the 10th of December, at the 3rd hour, [he had] pleuritis with delirium and danger. 
And it was from two causes. One is the direction of Jupiter, ruler of the 1st house and consequently the 
significator of life, to the opposition of Saturn posited in the 8th house. 
264°18' 264o20' 
255o0r 255o01' 
9017' 9019' 
9o05' 
205 Reading ejfectuum 'effects' for affectuum 'dispositions'. 
206 Recalculation shows that a few of the planetary parameters that follow are correct (i.e., within 1' of the stated value), 
but the majority display errors of 10' or 15'. And the recalculated arcs of direction are generally 10' to 15' further away from 
matching the arcs of the event. To facilitate comparison, I have placed Morin's figures on the left and my recalculation on 
the right. 
207 Since I do not know what value Morin took for the maximum inclination of Venus, I am unable to verily his calcula- 
tion of the right ascension of the corrected square. Modem tables give the succeeding maximum as 1 o40This would yield a 
corrected dexter square at 15o40' Libra and 0N59, which would have RA I94048'—16' less than Morin's figure. 
117 

===== PAGE 126 =====

Oblique Ascension of the opposition to Saturn 
in the circle of position of Jupiter 301035' 
Oblique Ascension of Jupiter 290o06> 
Difference 11029' 
Converted Time of the Accident 11035' 
302o08' 
290Q30/ 
ll^S' 
And the other [cause] is the Sun, significator of sicknesses on account of its antiscion [falling] on the 
cusp of the 12th and its square to the Ascendant, [directed] to Mercury, ruler of the 8th; and this caused the 
delirium and the danger to life; but first also the danger to life on account of Saturn's being in the 8th. 
Oblique Ascension of Mercury in the 
circle of position of the Sun 
Oblique Ascension of the Sun 
Difference 
345o06/ 
333036/ 
1 lo30' 
345o07' 
333037, 
1 lo30' 
And because the effects of Saturn are usually longer lasting than the effects of the rest of the planets, an- 
other but less serious pleuritis happened again from the concurrence of these two directions by the virtue 
still subsisting on 14 January 1546, of which the converted time was 12048/. 
In the year 1551, in the month of August, he had a tumor of the foot that hindered his walking and lasted 
for two years. And the direction of Saturn to the Moon made this long sickness, Saturn being badly disposed 
in a water sign in the 8th, with the Moon also in the same sign and in the 8th house, and Mars, ruler of the As- 
cendant and the 12th, opposed to them. And Saturn, as it often does, delayed its effect by almost a year, but it 
compensated for its delay by the long duration of its evil, as is its characteristic. 
Oblique Descension of the Moon in the 
circle of position of Saturn 
Oblique Descension of Saturn 
Difference 
Converted time of the accident 
135051' 
HS^ 
17o07' 
ISW 
135049' 
\\Z05\' 
16058' 
In the year 1555, on the 15th of April, he suffered a colic or diarrhea lasting a month with danger to his 
life; which was followed by bulimia lasting for two years. And this sickness was from the direction of Jupi- 
ter, ruler of the 1st and therefore significator of life, to Venus, in the 2nd house and in a sign of Saturn, con- 
joined to Mars, ruler of the 12th, in opposition to Saturn in exile in the 8th, with Mars closely following 
Venus, whence Venus itself, also inimical to the Ascendant, was very contrary to life, especially since it was 
opposite the 8th. 
Oblique Ascension of Venus in the 
circle of position of Jupiter 
Oblique Ascension of Jupiter 
Difference 
Converted time 
312o05' 
290Q06/ 
21059/ 
21051/ 
311049/ 
290o30/ 
21019/ 
And the bulimia lasting for two years certainly happened on account of some error in the things under- 
taken and done for the recovery of his health, or in exercises, in which things ab Hemminga, as a physician 
was unlucky, on account of the direction of the Midheaven, the primary significator of actions, to the square 
118 

===== PAGE 127 =====

of Saturn in the 8th, corrected by our method. The arc of this direction was 21033'. 
In the year 1559, on the 8 th of December at the 5th hour of the morning, a very severe fever occurred with 
pleuritis and inflammation of the liver, from which his life was almost despaired of. And this sickness was 
from the direction of Jupiter, ruler of the 1st, to Mars in the 2nd, ruler of the 12th. But not from the direction 
of the Ascendant to the antiscion of Mars, as ab Hemminga supposed; for Jupiter rules the liver, and the for- 
mer cause is unequal to the effect. 
Oblique Ascension of Mars in the 
circle of position of Jupiter 
Oblique Ascension of Jupiter 
Difference 
Converted time of the accident 26°28' 
In the year 1566, on the 2nd of December, there occurred a sudden sickness with lack of breath and a sud- 
den discharge of poison, which ended in a quotidian fever. And how specially this sickness squares with the 
direction of Mars, ruler of the Ascendant and the 12th, to the Sun, which essentially rules the heart and the 
vital faculty, is plain to all who are skilled in astrology. But because both of them are under the rulership of 
Saturn in exile in the 8 th and in the domicile of the Moon, which is also in the 8 th, it is no wonder that their 
effect was delayed until the year in which a revolution corresponding to this sickness occurred—namely, 
one in which Saturn was in partile opposition to the Sun and square the Moon, and Mars was on the cusp of 
the radical 8th; For the state of the planets in the preceding revolution was not indicative of sickness. Indeed, 
it was delayed thus until the 2nd of December, on which the Sun, Mars, and Mercury were conjoined by 
transit in opposition to the cusp of the radical 8th, and Saturn was with the Moon squaring those [planets] 
and the Midheaven. 
Oblique Ascension of the Sun in the 
circle of position of Mars 
Oblique Ascension of Mars 
Difference 
Converted time of the accident 33017' 33017' 
Difference lo30' r39' 
Therefore it delayed [its effect] through a whole year for which there was no corresponding revolution 
and through half of the one following that did correspond. But in truth, such an effect was from such a cause. 
In the year 1572, on the 10th day of November, he was made captive, and he suffered many losses in 
wealth and possessions, and other evils in connection with cures and bodily afflictions. And these things 
sprang from the direction of Mars, ruler of the 12th and the Ascendant, in the 2nd, to Mercury, ruler of the 
8th and the 10th, in its exile and fall on the cusp of the 4th. And these causes are very evident. 
Oblique Ascension of Mercury in the 
circle of position of Mars 347° 14' 
Oblique Ascension of Mars 308°! 3' 
Difference 39o01' 
Converted time of the accident 39° 16' 
Finally, on 3 May 1577, by the force of the wind, he fell into some water with great danger of drowning. 
316052' 316016' 
290o06/ 29Qo30' 
26046' 25046' 
340o00' 340o09' 
308o13' 308o31' 
31047' 31038' 
347017' 
308o3r 
38046' 
119 

===== PAGE 128 =====

Which effect happened from the direction of Saturn, in exile in a water sign and in the 8th house, to the op- 
position of the Sun, also in exile in an air sign and a domicile of Saturn, as is evident per se. 
[Oblique] Descension of the opposition of 
the Sun in the circle of position of Saturn 
Oblique Descension of Saturn 
Difference 
Converted time of the accident 43037' 
What, I ask, can be wished for in this nativity that is more in agreement with the effects of the causes as 
far as the kind—indeed the type and time of the ten accidents above? Or, having seen this, would ab 
Hemminga, Pico, and de Angelis have dared, or would it not have shamed them to write against astrology 
and to rage furiously against it? Do 1 not demonstrate with these [accidents] a thousand times more evi- 
dently the truth of this divine science than they were able to show its falsity with all their books? But we may 
conclude with the axiom we have used—nothing is more unjust than an ignorant man.208 
Chapter 5. \n which Wg Propose and Resolve Objections of no small Import. 
Having explained the objections of others, some occur to us that are a little more subtle, nor so easy to re- 
solve as the former—at least not by every astrologer—but which are clearly resolved by the doctrine we 
have given down to this point. 
And so, first I object that the ecliptic coincides with the horizon at an elevation of the pole of 66o30' or 
with some other circle of position above that latitude. And let the Sun in the former case be situated in the 
Ascendant. The question is whether the Sun and the Ascendant are two [separate] significators or one? And 
if they are one, for what [subjects] and in what way should it be directed? [But] if they are two, how should 
they be distinguished, and for what should each be directed? 
I reply that the Sun and the Ascendant in this case are two distinct significators. Namely, there is the As- 
cendant, viewed with regard to its celestial state, which is the presence of the Sun and its aspects falling on 
the ortive part of the horizon. For the Ascendant must be directed as a significator, as it is thus disposed, ac- 
cording to the principles we have given above, namely that every significator should be directed by reason 
of its own state and determination in the figure. And in addition there is the Sun, since it is in the Ascendant 
with its own aspects; for the Sun must be directed by reason of its own determination and state on account of 
the same cause. And it is plain that these things should be considered separately because the Sun will be the 
ruler of the 5th by our universal method of erecting a celestial figure, and consequently the significator of 
children; and in consequence it must be directed, not only for the native, whom it signifies, but also for his 
children, because the Ascendant per se is incapable of doing this. And the reasoning is the same in the rest. 
I object secondly: Let 2,3,4, or all of the planets be partilely conjoined in the same point or degree of the 
ecliptic. Which of them will be the significator or promittor in directions? 
I reply that the place of the conjunction must be directed as the significator for any planetary conjunction, 
having regard to the determination and celestial state to which state that conjunction belongs; observing, 
however, with which significator the promittor will better agree for the effect or the subject represented by 
208 But Sixtus ab Hemminga would not have been satisfied, since he wanted the calculated times of events to match ex- 
perience fairly closely, and these do not. The average deviation from Morin's figures is 31' or six months; and the average 
deviation of the recalculated figures is 39' or 7% months. 
162019' 162015' 
\\Z05\' 
43035' 43024' 
120 

===== PAGE 129 =====

•the significator. And it must be understood that either the promittor is singular, such as one planet or one as- 
pect, or it is multiple, such as two planets partilely conjoined or sextiles or squares of the abovesaid planets. 
For it will always be necessary to see which of the conjoined promittors agrees more with the given 
significator. Therefore, if the significator is singular or solitary, such as the Midheaven or the Sun, and the 
promittor is multiple, such as 2,3,4, or all of the planets partilely conjoined, or also many aspects, it is plain 
that the one that is more appropriate will be the promittor—namely, the one that agrees better with the 
significator for the subject that it represents. 
I object thirdly: The termini of the directions are only mere points observed in the caelum. For in the di- 
rection of the Ascendant as significator, not any part of the caelum is directed, but only the point that is on 
the Ascendant. Similarly, in the direction of the Sun as significator, not any part of the caelum is directed, 
but only that point which with respect to us corresponds to the center of the Sun. But there is no force in the 
point. Therefore there is also no force in the directions of such significators. 
I reply. The point that is the Ascendant is not seen as a point formally, but as the beginning of the part of 
the caelum that is in the first house and is determined to life. Moreover, the virtue of that whole part [of the 
caelum\ is in it—more, indeed, when it is closer to the Ascendant, and consequently greatest in the Ascen- 
dant itself, according to the common axiom on account of that, every single one is such, and that one is 
more. But as for the Sun, the point corresponding to its center is not always directed as a point formally, but 
as the middle of that part of the caelum that the Sun hides for us with its own visible diameter and determines 
for us; in which whole part, in fact, the force is solar, but it is greatest in the center. Whence, of the planets 
conjoined to the sun, those that are nearer the Sun share the conjunction's force more efficaciously; and for 
this reason, partile conjunctions are valued above the rest. But most efficaciously of all—the one that is cen- 
trally conjoined to the Sun is said to be "in the heart of the Sun,"209 and it is thought by the old astrologers to 
be another Sun as it were, because then it assumes the nature of the Sun, the greatest of all. Moreover, that 
which is said here about significators, should also be deemed to have been said about promittors, whether 
they are planets or aspects, in which also the whole diameter of the aspecting planet and its center must be 
understood. 
I object fourthly: Very many directions, and notable ones too, occur with absolutely no effects proper to 
them—at least in the year in which they fall. Therefore, the doctrine of directions is either fickle or at least 
very lame—that doctrine in which all astrologers place particularly great trust and about which they boast. 
I reply that directions alone do nothing without the agreement of annual revolutions, or at least monthly 
revolutions with transits in agreement on account of the causes that will be explained in the next book.2'0 
Therefore, since a direction and a revolution in agreement do not always occur together, it is no wonder that 
a direction may sometimes be frustrated in its effect, or may be retarded for one or two years, or may be ad- 
vanced by the same number of years, when a revolution in agreement occurs. But this confirms the doctrine 
of directions rather than refutes it. Besides, if no direction were to be frustrated in the effect proper to itself, 
fatal necessity would be instituted by the stars; but with the force of human prudence and freedom [of will] 
many things may be done and avoided that are contrary to the celestial influences, which makes this science 
only conjectural. And let these things suffice that we have said thus far about directions for the praise and 
glory of the Omnipotent God, Who created and wisely arranged the caelum, the stars, and the earth. 
End of Book 22. 
209 Jhecazimi of the Arab astrologers. 
2,0 Book 23. The Revolutions of Nativities. 
121 

===== PAGE 130 =====

Appendix 1 
1. ]erome Cardan on the Latitude of Aspects. 
Seven Segments of Astronomical Aphorisms 
Segment I 
29. And it is convenient for you to have an instrument similar to a planisphere, big enough to be divided 
into 3,600 [parts], with which you will make directions without effort, both direct and converse. And in the 
same manner for genitures you will put in a big table all the fixed [stars] of the zodiac and the rest of the big 
ones outside [the zodiac] in their own exact places, and in the outer margin [there should be space] for enter- 
ing the degrees and minutes of latitude. 
30. It is also very likely that any planet may be directed by the line in which it moves, such as the Sun in 
the ecliptic and all the rest in their circles of latitude. And thus we may know the fixed [stars] to which they 
move bodily, for the direction of the place is always by the degrees of the ecliptic, 
31. When, therefore, it is done thus, it is also appropriate for all the rays to be taken in the same way in 
that circle; and thereby only the oppositions agree with the method of Bianchini; therefore, the maximum 
latitudes of the planets ought to be known and the places where the circle of latitude cuts the ecliptic at that 
time—from which to find the radiations and directions by tables of the primum mobile or with an instru- 
ment. 
32. Moreover, the maximum latitude should not be taken simply,1 but [rather] that [latitude] which is 
then the maximum when the planet moves in that circle. 
Maximum Latitudes of the Planets 
Saturn Jupiter Mars Venus Mercury Moon 
South 3o05' 2o08' 7o07' Til' 4013' 5o00' 
North 3o02' 2o04' 402r 7023' 4o05' 5o00' 
33. It is, therefore, manifest that astrology depends upon a comprehensive knowledge of the [celestial] 
motions and upon natural philosophy; and since the majority have neither, and prior to this no one [had] 
both, it is no wonder that our predecessors added infamy to the art. 
34. It is for this reason that just as astrology is very beautiful, so it is also very laborious and difficult. 
Ihe Judgments of Genitures 
Chapter 7. How Aspects and Conjunctions ought to be Taken. 
The opposition aspect is [made] to the opposite sign under the same degree of longitude and in the same 
number of degrees of latitude but in the opposite part [of the sphere], just as in the 19th Geniture2 the opposi- 
tion of the Moon is in 11042' Virgo with latitude 4N20, and the opposition ray of Venus is in 23o03' Aries 
with latitude 0S52. 
1 That is, the maximum values given in the table should not be used in every case, but rather the value discovered from 
the motion at a particular time. 
2 Cardan's own horoscope (C 468B): No. 19 in his Examples of One Hundred Genitures. 
123 

===== PAGE 131 =====

First Table of Ari Tau Gem Can Leo Vir 
Oppositions Lib Sco Sag Cap Aqu Pis 
And the square aspect is 90° of the ecliptic before and behind, and in the ecliptic itself without latitude, 
just as the square aspect of the Moon in the same geniture is in 11042' Sagittarius without latitude, and it is 
called dexter because it precedes, and the other square is in 11042' without latitude, and it is called sinister 
because it follows the order of the signs; and both of them lack latitude. 
Second Table of Signs in Square Aspect 
Ari Tau Gem Can Leo Vir 
Cap Can Aqu Leo Pis Vir Ari Lib Tau Sco Gem Sag 
Lib Sco Sag Cap Aqu Pis 
Can Cap Leo Aqu Vir Psc Lib Ari Sco Tau Sag Gem 
And the trine is [obtained] by adding 120°, with the exception of a few minutes, which we will describe 
in the table below; the dexter [trine] is the preceding one, and the sinister [trine] the one following the order 
of the signs; and in each one the latitude is half of the planet's latitude but in the opposite part [of the sphere]. 
For example, the Moon's trine: the dexter trine is in 11037' Scorpio with latitude 2N20, and the sinister trine 
is in 11037' Cancer with latitude 2N20, which is half of the Moon's latitude in the opposite part [of the 
sphere]. 
Third Table of Signs Ari Tau Gem Can 
in Trine Aspect Leo Vir Lib Sco 
Sag Cap Aqu Pis 
By these tables and those that follow, without any computation, you can obtain the place of the aspect in 
its sign, subtracting for the trine the minutes in the last table for the latitude of the planet; and putting with 
the opposition aspect, as was said, all the degrees [and minutes] of latitude, but in the opposite part [of the 
sphere]; and for the square, without latitude; and for the trine, half of the latitude, but in the opposite part [of 
the sphere], as was said. 
But for the sextile you will take the corresponding degree in the sinister sextile sign according to the or- 
der of the signs or in the dexter sextile sign preceding, adding the minutes contained in the table following; 
and for the degrees [and minutes] of latitude of the star, you will take half of the star's latitude—in the north- 
em part [of the sphere] if it is north or in the southern if it is south. 
Fourth Table of Signs in Sextile Aspect 
Ari Tau Gem Can Leo Vir 
Aqu Gem Pis Can Ari Leo Tau Vir Gem Lib Can Sco 
Lib Sco Sag Cap Aqu Pis 
Leo Sag Vir Cap Lib Aqu Sco Pis Sag Ari Cap Tau 
You will do the same without the table, having added or subtracted 60° from the ecliptic [longitude] and 
also the minutes from the table according to the degrees [and minutes] of the latitude. 
Example: the sinister sextile of the Moon falls in 11047/ Taurus, having added 5' from the preceding ta- 
ble, which corresponds to the Moon's latitude of4o30', and the latitude of the aspect will be 2N20, i.e., half 
124 

===== PAGE 132 =====

of the Moon's latitude in the same part [of the sphere], but the dexter sextile of the Moon will be in 11047' 
Capricorn with latitude 2N20. 
And you should know that the forces of aspects are just like the work of bending [the arm of] a catapult, 
for the conjunction or the aspect of 2° is ten times that which is made from a distance of 10°; and that which 
is made from the same degree is ten times that which is made from a distance of 2°; and that which is made 
from 6' is ten times that which is made from a distance of around 10, from which the greatest events [result]. 
Fifth Table of Addition for the Sextile and Subtraction for the Trine 
Latitude of Distance to be 
the Planet 
00o30' 
01o00' 
01o30' 
02o00' 
02o30' 
03o00' 
03o30' 
04o00' 
04o30' 
05o00' 
05o30' 
06o00' 
06o30' 
OTW 
07o30' 
0Bo00' 
Distance to he 
subtr. or added 
Translator's Comment 
In the example, if the Moon's latitude is 4S20, then the latitude of its sextiles should be 2S 10 and the lati- 
tude of its trines 2N10; and in the next to last paragraph the Moon's latitude is mistakenly given as 4o30'. 
Aside from this, this method is straightforward. It assumes that the position of a planet in longitude and 
latitude defines the point of maximum deviation of the aspect circle from the ecliptic. Obviously then the as- 
pect circle has an inclination to the ecliptic equal to the planet's latitude, and it intersects the ecliptic at the 
two points that are 90° from the planet. These are the squares. They coincide with the nodes of the aspect cir- 
cle upon the ecliptic; consequently, the two squares have zero latitude. The opposition, of course, marks the 
point of maximum deviation from the ecliptic, but in the opposite direction; so that, if the planet has south 
latitude, its opposition has north latitude, and vice versa. In the case of the sextiles and the trines, they are all 
30° from the squares, which mark the nodes; consequently, they have latitude equal to exactly half that of 
the planet—in the same direction in the case of the sextiles, but in the opposite direction in the case of the 
trines. 
Mathematically, the latitude of any point on the aspect circle is represented by the formula 
125 

===== PAGE 133 =====

sin b = sin i cos A 
where b is the latitude of the aspect, i is the inclination of the aspect circle, and A is the aspect angle. 
For the sextile, the angle is 60°; and the cosine of these angles is 0.5 or Vi. For the square, the angle is 90°; 
and the cosine of these angles is zero. For the trine, the angle is 120 0; and the cosine of these angles is -0.5 or 
-Vi. The semisextile and the quincunx would be represented by 30° and 150° angles respectively; their co- 
sines have the approximate value 0.866—positive for the semisextiles and negative for the quincunxes. 
Table 5, which gives the correction to the longitude of the aspect, can be calculated approximately from 
the formula 
D = 3438'(abs[tan2(/72) sin 2A]) 
and3, since it is only intended for sextiles and trines, the angle 2A = 120° for the sextile and 240° for the 
trine. The sines of these angles have the values +0.866 and -0.866 respectively. Consequently, the numbers 
in the table can be calculated from the approximate formula 
Z) = 2977'(tan2 (i/2)) 
But Cardan's rule for applying them is only correct for sinister aspects. For dexter aspects, it must be re- 
versed: subtract the correction for a sextile and add it for a trine. He apparently forgot that his correction is 
properly applicable to the ecliptic arc from the planet to the aspect. Applying it directly to the uncorrected or 
nominal position of the aspect itself is permissible, but it must be done in such a way that the corrected as- 
pects are equidistant from the planet. Thus, if 5' is added to the sinister sextile (as he has done in his exam- 
ple), it should be subtracted from the dexter sextile. And if 5' is subtracted from the sinister trine (as he has 
done), it should be added to the dexter trine. 
Having corrected this blunder, we can compare Cardan's method of aspect correction with Morin's. 
Cardan's method is simple and logical. It begins with two assumptions: 1) that the point in precise opposi- 
tion to a planet must be 180° greater in longitude and must also have the same latitude but in the opposite di- 
rection; and 2) that the planet is located at a point of maximum latitude in the aspect circle. If these premises 
are accepted, then the rest follows naturally. 
Morin's method accepts the first premise but not the second. Instead, he teaches us how to select either a 
previous or a subsequent maximum latitude and directs us to take that for the inclination of the aspect circle. 
The planet's original position can be anywhere on that circle (unlike Cardan's concept, which assumes the 
planet to be at the point of maximum latitude). Thus, except for the opposition, the two methods will almost 
always produce different results. 
Which of these two methods is preferable, or whether either of them has any merit, is unknown. It would 
have to be decided by experimentation. And the question is further complicated by the uncertainty about the 
proper method of house division and the proper method of calculating primary directions. 
3 The number of minutes in a radian is 3438. Multiplying this value by the cosine of 30° gives 2977'. 
126 

===== PAGE 134 =====

Appendix 2 
I. B. Morin on the Mundane Position of Aspects. 
Astrologia Gallica 
Book 16, Section 1 
Chapter 9. \n what Great Circle the Real Aspects of the Planets 
should be Conceived according to the Truth of the Matter. 
Nature herself and the true principles of astrology must be consulted about this matter. In fact they will 
furnish another method to follow, which I have found after lengthy mental exertions. 
It is conceded by all that the true places of the planets are to be looked at in the primum mobile, and it is 
certain that their bodies influence us from their own true places with respect to us, or as they appear to us in 
the caelum itself, and not from any other [place]. Therefore, from those same places they will determine the 
caelum with respect to the Earth or the native himself, both by reason of their own bodily position, and by 
reason of the aspects through which they also act. Moreover, these [aspects] must be counted from the true 
place of a planet, as Regiomontanus and Bianchini1 have done. Not to be sure in various fictitious circles, 
such as Regiomontanus proposed, nor in the same and also fictitious one that Bianchini proposed, but in the 
same real [circle], or at least in the real path of the planet as it appears to us as it moves in the primum 
caelum-, the discovery of which exercised my mental abilities acutely for many years because I could see 
that the matter itself was one of the greatest importance to astrology—and the astrologers acknowledge 
this—and yet it was unknown to Kepler, Regiomontanus, and Ptolemy himself, all of whom discussed the 
correction of aspects, although they were distinguished astrologers, and Ptolemy was the chief prince of as- 
trology. 
Moreover, after numerous and time-consuming speculations on this matter, at last 1 considered the path 
of each planet to be twofold, that is, a true or absolute path, and the one that is apparent to us. The true path is 
that which the planet describes absolutely in space about its own bodily center which is represented as being 
joined to the primum mobile, and it is called the orbit or excentric of the planet. Moreover, this apparent 
[path] is in the primun mobile, under which the planet itself is observed to move with respect to the Earth or 
to us. Moreover, on the Sun the true orbit continued to the primum mobile coincides with its appearance to 
us, because the true orbit of the Sun is arranged around the Earth,2 and the Sun and the Earth are always in 
the same plane of the ecliptic. And therefore the circle of the ecliptic is the same one in which the Sun al- 
ways moves with respect to us, and consequently it influences us both through its own body and also 
through its aspects, exactly defined in it, as experience testifies. 
But according to Copernicus and Tycho, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury have true orbits that 
are not arranged about the Earth, and consequently they appear from our point of view to move on the 
caelum in lines that are not circular, as will be plain to anyone if he traces their paths in longitude and lati- 
tude through the whole 2odiac on a celestial globe. Yet, because the orbits of Saturn, Jupiter and Mars en- 
1 Giovanni Bianchini (fl, 1450-1500) was a professor of astronomy at the University of Ferrara and the author of astro- 
nomical tables. He was well known in his own time and also in the 16th century (he is cited by Gaurico, Cardan, Naibod, and 
Junctinus), Thomdike, HMES V, 565, cites a passage from Cardan's book On the Subtility of Things, XVI (1663 ed.: vol. Ill, 
607), in which Cardan says that Regiomontanus's tables of directions were based on those of Bianchini. Thomdike also 
notes (HMES VI, 120) that Naibod discusses Bianchini's aspect theory in his Description of the Elements of Astrology. 
2 Morin, following Tycho Brahe, refused to accept the entire Copemican theory. 
127 

===== PAGE 135 =====

close that of the Earth, these depart less from a circular line; and these same planets in their own revolution 
become north or south of the ecliptic only once [in a year]; but Venus and Mercury, beyond the true orbits of 
which the Earth is placed, will describe for us apparently in the caelum lines that are more irregular and tor- 
tuous around the ecliptic, and especially Mercury, which, in traversing the zodiac [in the course of a year] 
becomes five or six times north and then south in latitude.3 Moreover, all the astrologers, educated by expe- 
rience, agree that aspects should be taken in the actual celestial circle in which the true place of the planet is, 
in which its aspects are defined by proper quantities. And they fiirther agree that a planet acts with respect to 
us not only by reason of its own true location but also by reason of all its aspects defined in the same great 
circle, although the orbits of Venus and Mercury do not go around that of the Earth, in fact because the true 
place of a planet in the caelum will determine eleven others in the same great circle for the places of its own 
aspects, as we said in Chapter 4. And the whole difficulty consists of designating that circle which at least 
goes along with the real path of the planet as it appears to us in the primum caelum. 
And in the first place it is certain that that circle is not the ecliptic, for, in the case of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, 
Venus, and Mercury, the latitude of the body of the planet, if it has any, must be observed in directions, and 
[also the latitude of] its opposition, as Ptolemy enjoins and as experience compels. But no valid reason can 
be put forward why the body of the planet and its opposition are beyond the ecliptic but the rest of the as- 
pects are in the ecliptic, as Ptolemy himself held; for thus not all the aspects would be in the ecliptic, and ei- 
ther the circle of aspects would not be an exact circle or two circles would have to be admitted—one for the 
body [of the planet] and its opposition, and the other, namely the ecliptic, for the rest of the aspects of the 
same planet, which is absurd. 
And in the second place it is also certain that that circle is not the true orbit of the planet, [as seen] from 
the Sun, projected onto the primum caelum. Because that orbit, although it is a circle inclined to the ecliptic, 
is however inclined at a constant angle, which is 2032' for Saturn, lo20' for Jupiter, lo50' for Mars, 3022' 
for Venus, and 6°54' for Mercury,4 But the true latitudes of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury fre- 
quently exceed these inclinations,5 and Mars can have up to 7 degrees of latitude; for the [geocentric lati- 
tudes] can be taken between the ecliptic and the true orbit. Therefore, it is necessary that the inclination of 
the circle that we seek be either the latitude of the planet at the moment for which the aspects are required or 
the maximum latitude nearest following or preceding that moment, in which the planet itself is descending 
from the ascending; or else, on the contrary, the maximum and final latitude which the planet can attain 
while it is situated in the northern or southern part [of the caelum], for every other method departs more 
from the true path of the planet in the caelum, as will be evident from the following objections. 
But now the first method is that of Bianchini, who makes the instantaneous latitude of the planet to be the 
measure of the inclination of the circle of aspects to the ecliptic. For example, let the ecliptic be ABEC, the 
planet Mars D, which had no latitude in point A on the ecliptic, and let Mars then be made [to have] north 
[latitude] and its path to be indicated by the points ADF. And in addition, from the circle of latitude of Mars 
Figure 1. through its place D, let the circle DEG be drawn6 for the circle of aspects, and in this way in fact the 
square of Mars will fell at point E on the ecliptic; but it is evident to the eye that Mars does not in any way 
move along this circle; otherwise, from D to E it would necessarily move to the ecliptic, when, on the con- 
3 Morin is calling attention to the fact that the superior planets generally stay on one side of the ecliptic for a substantial 
length of time before crossing to the other side. But the inferior planets, particularly Mercury, switch back and forth much 
oftener, 
4 These inclinations are a tribute to Kepler's reduction of Tycho Brahe's careful observations. For the epoch 1600.0, the 
modem mean elements are 2o30' for Saturn, lo20' for Jupiter, 105T for Mars, 3023' for Venus, and 7o00' for Mercury. 
5 Because the minimum distance between the Earth and a planet is less than the mean distance of a planet from the sun, 
6 The text has DFG by mistake. 
128 

===== PAGE 136 =====

trary, it necessarily moves away from it on its own apparent path ADF on the celestial sphere. Therefore, 
Bianchini's circle must be rejected as being foreign to nature. 
The second mode coincides with the third for Mars, Venus, and Mercury, for these planets never become 
descending after having been ascending, or vice versa,7 except when they have attained the maximum lati- 
tude that they can have when they are north or south in latitude, but necessarily they increase in latitude up to 
that maximum as is also evident in the ephemerides. Moreover, Saturn and Jupiter, although they do not 
necessarily increase in latitude up to the maximum, but are often seen (especially Saturn) to retrograde in 
latitude, nevertheless, when returning, do proceed to the maximum latitude north or south which they can 
attain in their own revolution. And consequently, if, for the circle of aspects, that circle is put, whose incli- 
nation to the ecliptic is the maximum north or south latitude (as the planet is in the north or south part [of the 
caelum\} which the planet itself can attain, then that circle before [all] the rest, coinciding as it does with the 
apparent path of the planet in the caelum, which is not circular, must be considered to be the true and most 
natural of all the circles of aspects. 
Besides, both of the orbits of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury that are seen in the caelum, i.e., 
the apparent [path as seen] from the Earth and the true [orbit as seen] from the Sun, projected [upon the 
caelum], are such that, whenever a planet in its 
own true orbit, also projected upon the caelum, 
is free from latitude according to Kepler's opin- 
ion, and it is in its own node in that orbit, then \ 
that same planet is also free from latitude in its S ^ 
own apparent orbit and in the circle of aspects / f \ \ 
assumed by us, and it is in the nodes of the latter. ^ Av. / \ \ \ 
But these [two sets of] nodes are in different \ \ ^ 
places, that also differ by many degrees; just as I \ | 
the excentric place of the planet and its apparent I I y 
place in the caelum differ in the ecliptic. For ex- j I y 
ample, on 23 April 1647 at Paris noon Venus is \ j , 
found in The Rudolphine Tables to be in 19049' \ B 
Taurus in true (or apparent) motion, without any \. S s 
latitude; therefore, it is in the intersection of the X. i-J 
apparent orbit and the ecliptic, and it is [moving a 
to the] north. Moreover, at that same time the 
north node of Venus in its own true orbit with Figure I 
mean motion is 13037' Gemini; and conse- 
quently the difference between the two is 23048'. Besides, the motion of the nodes in each orbit differs 
greatly. For in the true orbit the nodes move uniformly and very slowly, but in the apparent orbit they move 
irregularly and much more rapidly. Finally, the inclination of the true orbit to the ecliptic is invariable as was 
said above, but the inclination of the apparent orbit is variable. For its maximum north latitude is not the 
same in each revolution of the planet, nor the maximum south latitude, nor the north as compared to the 
south, but these latitudes are different as often as the planet crosses from the northern part [of the caelum] to 
the southern part. And the transfer of these planets from the Sun and the parallax of the orbit causes all this 
with respect to the Earth. 
With this behind us, it would now be appropriate to show how this circle can be drawn in theprimum mo- 
bile for Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, and how their aspects can be defined in it. 
7 The terms ascending and descending refer to the planet's motion in latitude—ascending when it is moving from south 
to north and descending when it is moving from north to south. Morin means that they never retrograde in latitude. 
Figure I 
129 

===== PAGE 137 =====

First then, the maximum latitude that the planet can attain in the northern part or the southern part [of the 
caelum] in which it is situated, is taken for the inclination to the ecliptic of the circle of aspects at the given 
time. 
Second, from that inclination and from the true latitude of that same planet at that same time, the place 
[of the planet] between the intersections of that same circle and the ecliptic at the same time is found by the 
following method. 
In the year 1647, at the month, day, and hour mentioned above, Venus was in 19049' Taurus without any 
latitude, consequently in its apparent node. Thereafter, it is noted [in the ephemeris] that it attained a maxi- 
mum north latitude of 1047'.9 This latitude then is taken for the inclination of the circle of aspects to the 
ecliptic, which is [the arc] AEC in the figure below, and the circle of aspects coinciding with the apparent 
path of Venus is ADB, and their intersection or the north node is A, from which Venus is conceived to be 
moved, necessarily with its latitude increasing, 
until it reaches B with a maximum north latitude n 
of 1047'. Moreover, let Venus be at point D of " 
that circle, with north latitude DE of lo10', 
which it attains on 22 May at Paris noon in 
25015' Gemini. Now, from the given BC and 
DE may be found first the arc of the ecliptic AE ^ 
by saying as the tangent of BC is to the tangent 
of DE, so is the total sine AC to the sine of AE; 
and AE is found to be 40o52/.10 Which, sub- 
tracted from the place of Venus in the ecliptic, 2 
signs 25015', leaves 1 sign i.e., 14024' 
Taurus for the place of the north node A, in 
which the intersection of the circle of aspects 
[with the ecliptic] occurs at that time. This place 
must be noted, and also its opposite 14024' 
Scorpio for the south node. 
8 
After this, AD is found by saying as the sine 
of BC is to the sine of DE, so the radius or the 
sine of AB is to the sine of AD, 40o52'. which is 
the arc of the circle of aspects corresponding to 
the arc of the eclipse AE, marking the place of 
Venus in that circle and its distance from the node A.11 
8 Morin refers to the transfer from heliocentric to geocentric coordinates, which transforms the simple latitudinal motion 
of Mercury and Venus into a complex one with rapid variations in (apparent) orbital inclination and position of the nodes. 
9 Towards the end of June 1647. 
10 This procedure yields a value (actually 40o51') for the arc AE that is only formally correct. That is, it assumes that the 
values of the two latitudes that are used to determine it are absolutely exact. For example, let us repeat the calculation with 
DE = 1011' instead of 1010'. We get AE = 41034' instead of 40o51'. Thus a change of 1' of arc in the intermediate latitude 
causes a change of 43' in the arc AE. Unfortunately, if the latitudes are only given to the nearest minute of arc, the calculated 
arc from the planet to its apparent node will be subject to considerable error. 
1' Note that the arc AD to the circle of aspects has the same value to this example as the arc AE to the ecliptic. This is be- 
cause the inclination (1047') is small. The difference can amount in extreme cases to 17' of arc. Also, note that in the next 
numerical example Morin forgets that he found AD = AE when the arc in question was 40o52' and derives an erroneous dif- 
ference for an arc of 70°52', although the maximum difference must occur at 45°. 
M 
Figure 2 
130 

===== PAGE 138 =====

Now from this same point D, the place of Venus in the circle of aspects or the apparent orbit, which is 
40o52' from the node A, are to be counted all its exact aspects in that same circle, namely by giving 30° to 
the dodectile, 60° to the sextile, 90° to the square, etc. And let the sinister dodectile be at H, for which the 
longitude and latitude is required. So, having added AD, 40°52', to DH, 30°, it makes TO^' for AH. And 
therefore let it be done: as the whole sine AB is to the sine of AH, 70° 52' so the sine of BC. 1047', is to the 
sine of GH, 1041which will be the north ascending latitude of that dodectile terminating at the point G in 
the echpac; and since that point is known, or the arc of the ecliptic AG, let it be that as the tangent of BC is to 
the tangent of GH, so the total sine AC is to the sine of AG, 70o44', or 2 signs 10o44'. And if to this is added 
the place of the node A, 1 sign 14024', it will make 3 signs 25o08' or 25o0B' Cancer for the true place of that 
dodectile in the ecliptic.12 
For finding the sinister square of Venus, 90° are added to the same [value of] D, i.e., 40o52', and it will 
make 130o52' for the arc ADI, which, subtracted from the semi-circle ABF, leaves 49o08' for FI; and so let 
it be made as the total sine of FB is to the sine of FI, so the sine of BC is to the sine of IK; and it will make 
l02r for IK, the north descending latitude of the square itself, which terminates in the ecliptic at the point 
K; and since that point is known, or the arc of the ecliptic FK, let it be that as the tangent of BC is to the tan- 
gent of IK, so the total sine PC is to the sine of FK; and it will make 49° 12' for FK, or 1 sign 19° 12', which, 
subtracted from the place of the south node F, 7 signs 14024', will leave 5 signs 25o09', i.e. 25o09' Scorpio 
for the true place of that square in the ecliptic. 
The sinister quincunx will be found [thus]: if 60° is added to the place of the square I, it will terminate 
at the point N; and so if from the 60° are taken away 49o08' for [the arc] FI, 10o55' will be left for [the arc] 
FN. And therefore let it be made: as the total sine of FL is to the sine of FN, so is the sine of ML or BC to 
the sine of N; and it will make 0o20' for NP, the south descending latitude of the quincunx itself, which 
terminates in the ecliptic at the point P; and since arc FP is known, let it be that as the tangent of LM is to 
the tangent of NP, so the total sine FM is to the sine of FP, 10o46', which, if it is added to the place of the 
node F at 12024' Scorpio, it will make 25° 10' Scorpio for the place of that quincunx. And so with all the 
others for Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and Mercury. Moreover, having found the sinister aspects as above, the 
dexter aspects are diametrically opposed to them, with equal latitudes but of the opposite denomination, 
viz. the sinister dodectile is opposed to the dexter quincunx, the sinister sextile to the dexter trine, the sin- 
ister square to the dexter square, the sinister trine to the dexter sextile, and the sinister quincunx to the 
dexter dodectile; and consequently it is only necessary to find the sinister [aspects] or the dexter. More- 
over, we shall give an excellent table in Book 22, with the aid of which these aspects and their own longi- 
tudes and latitudes can very easily be found, for the present method is only suitable for learned persons 
and those fond of theory. 
But since for finding the true place of any aspect in the eclipdc, the arc of the ecliptic first found mustbe 
added to or subtracted from the true place of the node that is nearest to the true place of the planet in the 
ecliptic, it may be known whether this node is the ascending node or the descending node of the planet as 
follows. When the true latitude of the planet is north and subsequently increases, the planet is departing 
from its own true north node and is going toward the northern limit; if it decreases, the planet is departing 
12 This method of calculation, while formally correct, is impractical because the aspect arc is made to depend on the ra- 
tios of the sines and tangents of two small angles. And unless these angles are calculated to seconds of arc, the aspect arcs 
cannot be depended on to the nearest minute of arc. For example, Morin calculates the ratio of the tangents of 1041' and 
1047' and gets for the arcsine of that ratio 70o44'. If we change IMT to 1042' and repeat the calculation, we get 72025'. 
Thus, a change of T of arc to the latitude produces a change of 104r in the longitude of the aspect. This procedure is obvi- 
ously unsatisfactory. It seems odd that Morin, who was the Regius Mathematician of France, did not notice this. (Actually, 
the difference between the arcs AO and AH is only about 31" of arc, which should have been apparent from the fact that he 
found above that AE = AD when AE is 40o52'.) 
13! 

===== PAGE 139 =====

from the northern limit and is going toward the descending node. And when the true latitude of the planet is 
south and increases thereafter, the planet is departing from its descending node and is going toward its 
southern limit; if it decreases, it is departing from the limit and going toward the ascending node. And this is 
always true for Mars, Venus, Mercury, and the Moon, but not for Saturn and Jupiter. And so in general if a 
planet in the northern part [of the caelum] has not yet attained its maximum north latitude, it precedes the as- 
cending node; if it has already passed [its maximum north latitude], it follows the descending node.13 And 
think the same about a planet in the southern part [of the caelum]. Moreover, when it precedes the ascending 
node or the descending node, take away the arc first found (which is the distance of the planet from the node 
in the ecliptic) from the planet itself, and the remainder will be the place of the node in the ecliptic. But if it 
follows the ascending node or the descending node, add that same distance to the place of the planet to get 
the node. 
But some things can be objected to in this doctrine, from the resolution of which it may be established 
more firmly. And first, that the planet does not move in the assumed circle of aspects, as the Sun in the eclip- 
tic circle for the aspects of the Sun; therefore, this circle is also fictitious, as are the circles of Bianchini and 
Regiomontanus. 
I reply: There is no other circle that coincides more closely with the apparent path of the planet, espe- 
cially for Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, from whose paths the circles of Bianchini and Regiomontanus abso- 
lutely diverge; and consequently the circle assumed by us ought to be chosen in preference to the rest as 
being more natural and real, seeing that the apparent path of the planet in the caelum is not circular, but the 
aspects arc put in an exact circle by the astrologers, forced by experience. 
It may be objected in the second place that through this method the true node of the planet in the caelum 
appears not only to run through more degrees in a year but even more signs, although the mean motion of 
that same node, at least for Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, is not even 2' in any year. Therefore, 
that apparent motion is fictitious. 
But I reply. It is not fabricated, but it also really happens. For example, on 23 April 1647 Venus lacking 
any latitude is in 19°49' Taurus, and its own true north node according to The Rudolphine Tables', and on 13 
August it is in 3o05' Libra, in its own true south node; and consequently its true north node at that time ought 
to be in 3o05' Aries; and so, from the day 23 April to 13 August it had moved backward 1 sign 16044'. More- 
over, on 4 December of that same year this same Venus is again lacking in latitude in 8o02' Sagittarius, in its 
own north node, although that same node had previously been in Taurus; and so from 23 April to 4 
December it had moved backward 5 signs 11^?'. And in short, in the figure above, Venus's motion in lon- 
gitude from its own true ascending node A up to C, where its latitude is a maximum, is less than a quadrant 
or 90° just as much as the true node A itself has gone back apparently in the preceding direction because of 
the transfer [of the coordinates] of these planets from the Sun and the phase of the Earth. Nor is that only true 
of this quadrant AC, but also of the arcs AE and AG, when the true motion of Venus in longitude is less than 
the quantity of these same arcs. 
It may be objected in the third place that the inclination of the apparent planetary path in the sky is never 
the same, but is continually varied, otherwise it would be a perfect circle; therefore, the maximum apparent 
latitude cannot be taken for the constant inclination to the ecliptic of the circle of aspects while the planet is 
moving from its own node to that maximum latitude, or from the latter to the former. 
But I reply that since the abovesaid circle of aspects and the apparent path of the planet in the caelum 
have this in common: that through each line the planet proceeds from its own true node to the abovesaid 
13 To precede in the zodiac is to be further advanced in the counterclockwise direction. For example, Taurus precedes 
Aries. To follow is the reverse. 
132 

===== PAGE 140 =====

maximum latitude, or recedes therefrom, the difference in longitude and latitude of the aspects arising from 
this variation is for the most part insensible, at least in the same northern or southern semicircle through 
which the planet runs, and which alone is considered, because the other [line] from its determination is con- 
tinuous with it, namely they make one single perfect circle. 
It may be objected in the fourth place that this method cannot always be used for Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, 
Venus, and Mercury. For when the planet is lacking in latitude, being in its own true node, what will its cir- 
cle of aspects be then? Perhaps the ecliptic? But the planet does not move in the ecliptic. Perhaps another 
circle? But what will its inclination to the ecliptic be? And will it be the maximum north latitude, or will it be 
the maximum south latitude, differing between themselves by several degrees? 
I reply that although the planet is truly in its own node, lacking any latitude, yet it is certain that it truly 
moves with respect to us in its own apparent orbit, inclined to the ecliptic. And consequently, that will al- 
ways be the circle of aspects which goes according to that apparent path. Moreover, its inclination will be 
the maximum latitude from which the planet has departed, and it has decreased up to that very node in which 
the planet's latitude has ceased [altogether], and not the maximum latitude [next] following, to which it is 
going, because it has not yet entered upon that. And this objection can be made for any other circle of as- 
pects going with the apparent path of the planet in the caelum, whatever inclination is taken for it from the 
north part [of the caelum] or the south. 
It may be objected in the fifth place that it seems more probable that the circle of aspects ought to be 
traced through the true place of the planet and the nodes of its own true orbit, reduced to the ecliptic of the 
primum caelum through the phase of the Earth. For thus, from the given true place of the planet with its lon- 
gitude and latitude and also from the true place of its node, an inclination of the circle of aspects will be 
given that is appropriate and conformable to whatever time was assumed. That indeed seems to be more 
conformable to reason than to take the maximum apparent latitude of the planet for the constant inclination 
of the circle of aspects as long as the planet moves from its own node to that maximum latitude, or from the 
latter to the former. 
I reply that it does indeed seem more probable at first glance, and I myself was deluded by this method 
until I discovered that the inclination to the ecliptic of the circle of aspects of Mars could amount to as much 
as 12°, which deviates too much from the maximum latitude of Mars, which never exceeds 8°. And the true 
places of Venus and Mercury in the ecliptic sometimes (that is, when they are traversing the inferior parts of 
their own true orbits) coincide with the true places of their nodes, and yet [placed] thus Venus and Mercury 
possess a latitude of several degrees even, which cannot happen, or their latitudes are made equal to their 
distances from their true nodes, which would call for a 90° inclination to the ecliptic of the circle of aspects, 
and this deviates much more from the true latitude of Venus and Mercury. Therefore, if the circles differ too 
much from the motion in the apparent paths of the planets in the caelum, consequently then the only thing 
left for us is to take the circle we have explained, which follows that motion more than the others and never 
exceeds the maximum latitude of the planet, although for Saturn and Jupiter either method can be employed 
indiscriminately without any great error. 
But as for the Moon in its orbit around the earth, it also admits a double orbit, that is a true orbit that it de- 
scribes truly with the center of its own body around the earth, which orbit is called the mean excentric orbit1 A 
by Kepler, inclined to the ecliptic at a constant angle of 5°, then the apparent orbit, in which it is seen from 
our point of view to move projected upon the primum mobile, and it undergoes monthly anomalies by means 
14 In Latin excentricus solutus. That is, the excentric orbit "freed [from minor variations]" that yields the "unperturbed" 
or elliptical position of the Moon. Morin does not actually use the Latin word medius 'mean', but by (modern) definition a 
mean orbit is one "freed from perturbations." 
133 

===== PAGE 141 =====

of which its longitude and latitude are varied.15 And this apparent orbit is called the monthly excentric [or- 
bit], librating about the mean [orbit] and inclined to it by a variable angle because of the libration, but not ex- 
ceeding 19' according to Tycho and Kepler. Moreover, the true place of the Moon in longitude and latitude 
with respect to the center of the earth is always taken in this orbit, also the true place of its north node, and 
these are put into the ephemerides. 
But since the inclination of the apparent orbit or of the lunar path in the caelum is continually varied by 
this libration, it results that the path itself is not a perfect circle, as happens in the case of Saturn, Jupiter, 
Mars, Venus, and Mercury, but somewhat different from a circle, although [the difference is] nearly imper- 
ceptible. And consequently the maximum latitude that the Moon can attain in the northern part [of the 
caelum\ or the southern, through which it moves, can be taken much more accurately for the inclination of 
the circle of aspects, which is nearly the same as the librational orbit. And the places of the aspects can be 
projected from the true place of the Moon, as is done for Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury. And so, 
for all these planets there will be one and the same method, which recommends it still more, and whose ver- 
ity will begin to shine forth particularly in the Moon's aspects, because their circle and the Moon's apparent 
orbit nearly coincide. 
Indeed, since the place of the north node is given in the ephemerides of the Moon for every single day, it 
will be a shorter method for the Moon if from the places of the Moon and the nearest node, calculated for the 
same moment, the preceding is taken away from the following, and the distance of the Moon from its node 
will remain. Then let it be: as the sine of that distance is to the total sine, so is the tangent of the true latitude 
of the Moon to the tangent of the maximum latitude, or the inclination to the ecliptic of the apparent lunar or- 
bit at that time, which inclination will be the measure of the angle A in the figure above, a quantity that is 
variable in individual revolutions of the Moon because of the libration, but without any sensible error for the 
aspects; and finally (with the Moon placed at point D) let it be as the sine of BC is to the sine of DE, so the to- 
tal sine is to the sine of AD, and the place of the Moon in the apparent orbit will be had at point D, or [its 
place] in the circle of aspects, from which the aspects will be projected, as is done for Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, 
Venus, and Mercury. And this method differs hardly at all from the one given above for the correction of the 
Moon's aspects. 
With everything we have said above thus established by reason and approved by experience, at length by 
chance I fell upon Cardan's Aphorisms 30, 31, and 32 of the first section,16 which I had previously read 
many times but could not understand on account of his brevity of speech and the ambiguity of the words in 
this rather difficult matter. I began to suspect that Cardan had scented the circle of aspects that I had set 
forth, although he says some things that are foreign to this circle. But in the rest he explains his own inten- 
tion so badly, that what he really had in mind is unknown. Moreover, whether he really scented [my method] 
and disclosed it, the reader, experienced from what has already been said, may judge. 
And so, in Aphor. 30 he says: "It is also very likely that any planet may be directed by the line in 
which it moves, such as the Sun in the ecliptic and all the rest in their circles of latitude. And thus we 
15 Morin refers here to the variation of the Moon's inclination. Tycho Brahe introduced terms into the lunar tables that 
had the effect of causing the inclination of the Moon's orbit to oscillate back and forth by as much as 9'30" on either side of 
its mean value of 5o08'. This also caused the Moon's nodes to oscillate back and forth by as much as 1046' on either side of 
their mean position. The variation of the nodes is something like the so-called "true node" given in some modem astrologi- 
cal ephemerides. The combination of the variation of the inclination and the nodes gives rise to variations in the Moon's lati- 
tude. In addition to these motions, the Moon's longitude in the ephemerides of Morin's time contained three variations or 
"anomalies" that caused it to vary by as much as 7° from its mean elliptic position. But Morin is mainly concerned here with 
the variation of the latitude, the inclination, and the nodes. 
16 Seven Segments of Astronomical Aphorisms, Seg. I, Aphs. 30-32 (1563 ed., p. 31). See App. I. 
134 

===== PAGE 142 =====

may know17 fixed [stars] to which they move bodily. For the direction of the place is always by the degrees 
of the ecliptic." 
Here, when he says "It is very likely" it is plain that he does not assert this, but he is in doubt about it. 
When he says "that any planet may be directed by the line in which it moves" that line can be understood as 
well by the true orbit as by that which we have called the apparent orbit, and he did not make any distinction. 
Besides, the circle that we have assumed is neither of these lines, and the apparent orbit is not the circle. 
When he says "and all the rest in their circles of latitude" he has confused [both] himself and the reader's un- 
derstanding. For if any particular planet ought to be directed by the line in which it moves, how should all 
the rest of the planets? And then he says "these are to be directed in their circles of latitude." It is established 
in astronomy that the circle of latitude of a planet is that which descends from the pole of the ecliptic through 
the center of the planet at right angles to the ecliptic. And this is not the circle we have set forth above. 
Finally, when he says "And thus we may know the fixed [stars] to which they move bodily. For the direction 
of the place is always by the degrees of the ecliptic" he gave a nod to the twofold direction of a planet; one 
bodily in the line in which it moves, or (as he says) in its circle of latitude, and the other through its place in 
the ecliptic, which he wants to be directed by the degrees of the ecliptic. But this direction is contrary to the • • • « » • • IR • intention of Ptolemy, who wishes the latitude of a planet to be used in the method of directions; and, direct- 
ing by the horary times, he directs by the degrees of the equator; and this is also contrary to reason, for a 
planet ought not to be directed from a place in which it is certainly not present; and certainly it is not in the 
ecliptic, but is only reduced to the ecliptic if it has latitude. Moreover, in the other direction there is nothing 
different from the methods of Bianchini and Regiomontanus for directions to the fixed [stars], for every 
fixed [star] of the same declination with the planet being directed can come to it according to these methods. 
Aphorism 31 says "When, therefore, it is done thus, it is also appropriate for all the rays to be taken in the 
same way in that circle." And this is certainly true, if it means that all the rays are taken in the circle we have 
set forth as they are taken for the Sun in the ecliptic. And when he goes on to say "and thereby those opposed 
to the Sun agree with the method of Bianchini" he has again confused [both] himself and the reader's under- 
standing. For what else can be understood by those opposed to the Sun than Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, which 
are seen by us [at times] to be opposed to the Sun, but not Venus and Mercury? Now in our method for as- 
pects neither Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, nor Venus and Mercury agree with Bianchini's method, in which the 
aspects always fall in the ecliptic, as is also the case in Regiomontanus's method.19 But [on the other hand] if 
it is only to be understood as "about the opposite aspect of these planets" then he has added "to the Sun" in 
vain, for in both Ptolemy's and Regiomontanus's methods the opposite aspect falls in the same point of the 
caelum as with Bianchini's and our own methods. 
And when he says subsequently "the maximum latitudes of the planets ought to be known" it means 
which they can have simply from the northern part [of the caelum] or the southern and which Cardan him- 
self gives, although not exactly. Namely, 3o05' for Saturn. 2o08/ for Jupiter, 7o07' for Mars, 7022' for Ve- 
nus, and 4o05 " for Mercury.20 And when he continues "And to know the places where the circle of latitude 
17 The Latin text has invenicmus 'we may find' by mistake for Cardan's sciemus 'we may know', but Morin cites it cor- 
rectly below. 
18 This is false. Ptolemy says nothing about using the latitude of the planets in directions. His instructions and examples 
are for what we would call zodiacal primaries by the Placidus method. 
19 Morin has been led astray by the typesetter's error in capitalizing the Latin word soli 'only', so that it reads Soli 'to the 
Sun'. The translation should read .. only the oppositions agree with Bianchini'. See this Aphorism in Appendix 1. 
20 Cardan, op. cit., gives the maximum northern and southern latitude for each planet in two successive rows of figures. 
Morin has taken the top row (south latitude) for all the planets except Mercury, for which he has unaccountably given the 
northern maximum. (The southern maximum given by Cardan is 4013'.) Cardan's figures are of course based upon the 
135 

===== PAGE 143 =====

cuts the ecliptic at that time" this certainly ought to mean the circle set forth by me, but this is not a circle of 
latitude, as is said above. And when he proceeds "from which to find the radiations" it is doubtful whether 
the radiations or aspects are to be taken in the ecliptic from the point where it is cut by the circle of the planet 
proprie dicto or whether they are to be taken in the circle set forth by us, and counting from the point in 
which the circle itself cuts the ecliptic, but neither of which is to be done in our method. But they are to be 
counted in the circle set forth by us beginning from the body of the planet, although from the point where the 
ecliptic is cut or we may use the node recognized by us for finding or determining the longitudes of the sev- 
eral aspects in the ecliptic, as was made plain above. 
Finally, Aphorism 32 says "Moreover, the maximum latitude should not be taken simply, but [rather] 
that [latitude] which is then the maximum when the planet moves in that circle." Now Cardan seems to favor 
our [position] entirely. For, for the inclination to the ecliptic of the circle of aspects, I take the maximum lati- 
tude that the planet can have or has had in the northern or southern semicircle through which it moves, either 
in the northern or southern part [of the caelum] in which it is situated. 
If anyone then wants to deny that Cardan in these three aphorisms understood the method given by me, that 
may be permitted him on account of that which was said above in the explanation of these aphorisms. But if any- 
one asserts the opposite, at least our method will be confirmed from the fact that [by means] of it I myself have 
explained the intricate and confused intention of Cardan, which neither I nor anyone else had done hitherto. 
But nevertheless it is certain that Cardan himself did not explain how to reduce this method to practice, 
perhaps intimidated by the difficulty of the matter, nor did he ever make use of it, but instead [he used] the 
method of Bianchini which he recommends and openly teaches in his Book on the Judgment of Genitures, 
Chapter 7.21 And no astrologer from Cardan's time down to ours has taught or employed our [method]; how- 
ever, Origanus, Argol, and other more recent [astrologers] who have discussed the correction of aspects 
have read and reread the aphorisms cited above, just as I too did; and before [I arrived at] my own concep- 
tion, I understood nothing in them, nor did I think about them, nor did I venture to affirm until now what 
Cardan had in mind in them. Whatever then, with everything considered, we were able [to do] in a matter of 
such moment and one so difficult, one thing only seemed to be left to be desired in our astrology; this the 
kindly reader may receive with a grateful spirit, or, with me also applauding, he may propound something 
better. But we warn [the reader] that this thing must be used with the very best ephemerides, in which the 
true longitudes and especially the latitudes of the planets are given correctly, if the astronomy fundamen- 
tally restored by us at last, once it has supplied such ephemerides, in which at the beginning of each year, at 
least for Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, are put their maximum latitudes in the northern or southern semicircle 
through which they move, and at what time it has gone ahead or it is going to come after, lest searching for 
these things be too tedious, especially in the case of Saturn, which in the same semicircle is ascending in lat- 
itude around twelve times and descending as many in the space of about 15 years. Moreover, how much it 
matters to have ephemerides or exact tables for this procedure, he will sufficiently infer who notices that the 
latitudes of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury in the Prutenic Tables, the Lansbergian Tables, and 
the Rudolphine Tables frequently differ among themselves by I0.22 
ephemerides of his day that were less accurate than those available to Morin. 
21 This chapter is on p. 444 of the 1563 ed. Cardan does not mention Bianchini (or anyone else), but explains that the 
oppositions and squares fall in the same degree and minute as the planet itself, but the sextiles and times must be corrected by 
a table that he gives in Col. 1. The table proceeds at intervals of 30' from 0o30' to 8o00', and the correction ranges from 0' to 
15Cardan says to add the correction to sextiles and subtract it from trines. For the latitudes of the aspects, he says the oppo- 
sition has the same latitude but the direction is reversed, the squares have zero latitude, the sextiles have half the planet's lati- 
tude, and the trines have half the planet's latitude with the direction reversed. See Appendix 1 for a translation of the entire 
chapter. 
22 The Prutenic Tables (1551) were prepared by Erasmus Reinhold (1511-1553), the Lansbergian Tables (1632) by 
136 

===== PAGE 144 =====

Translator's Comment 
Morin's method of finding the appropriate maximum latitude for a planet in a particular instance seems 
to be this: 
1. If the planet is decreasing in latitude, find the previous maximum. 
2. If the planet is increasing in latitude, find the subsequent maximum. 
3. In the case of the slower planets, take the maximum obtained from Rule 1 or Rule 2 even though the 
maximum so obtained is only a "yearly maximum." 
4. For the Moon, use the nodes given in the ephemeris, and determine the inclination from the Moon's 
latitude and its distance from the nearest node, as explained above. 
5. Having determined the appropriate inclination to use and the distance of the planet from the nearest 
node, add multiples of 30° to the planet's "excentric arc" to obtain the excentric location of the aspects. 
6. Convert the excentric positions of the aspects into ecliptic longitude and latitude by following the rules 
given above or by using Morin's tables. 
This method is somewhat similar in concept to Cardan's, in that it postulates an "aspect circle" whose in- 
clination and nodes must be determined for each particular case. But Cardan always locates the planet at ei- 
ther the northern or southern limit (the point of maximum latitude), while Morin's method permits the 
planet to be anywhere in the circle. Consequently, the derived corrections to the aspect longitudes (other 
than that of the opposition) and the determined latitudes of the aspects will nearly always be different. 
Both methods seem to be developments of the earlier idea (Bianchini's?) of assigning the planet's lati- 
tude (with reversed direction) to its opposition. And behind the whole thing is the doctrine of the projection 
ofrays, much discussed by the Arabs, which contains the basic idea that the arcs of aspects must be adjusted 
for latitude under certain circumstances. 
In view of the fact that the maximum errors in the Moon's longitude given by the best tables of Morin's 
time are equal to or greater than the maximum aspect longitude correction given by his theory, it seems 
doubtful that Morin's "experience" with his method is entitled to as much weight as he gives it.23 And since 
the errors in both the lunar and planetary longitudes were much larger in Cardan's time, it is virtually certain 
that he could not have proved the validity of his method. (And in fact he does not claim to have done so.) 
Thus, we are left with an interesting subject for modem research. 
Philip van Lansberge (1561-1632), and the Rudolphine Tables (1627) by Johann Kepler (1571-1630). Of these, Kepler's ta- 
bles were the most accurate. Morin also issued his own version of the Rudolphine Tables in 1650, and it is probably these to 
which he refers under that title. The solar and planetary positions given by these tables are usually accurate to within a few 
minutes of arc, although the solar positions have a sinusoidal error with a maximum of 7 or 8 minutes of arc, which, in the 
worst case can be multiplied several times in the position of Mercury or Venus. The Moon positions can be off by 15' or 
more, since only the three largest perturbations of its true longitude had been determined (empirically) by Kepler and his 
predecessors, and twenty or more are required to ensure a maximum error of no more than 1This sizable error in the Moon 
positions would tend to vitiate Morin's efforts to apply his aspect correction. 
23 The change of mundane position caused by the assignment of latitude to an aspect will ordinarily be greater than that 
caused by the shift in longitude, especially in higher latitudes, but the maximum ephemeris error can still cause a shift of half 
a degree in the mundane position, with a consequent error in timing of 6 months. Also, like virtually all astrologers before 
and since, Morin ignores the effect of parallax upon the Moon's position. 
137 

===== PAGE 145 =====

Appendix 3 
The Solar Eclipse of 8 April 1652 
The solar eclipse mentioned in Section 2, Chapter 3, was only partial in France. According to my calcula- 
tions the path of totality passed through the Irish Sea, cut across southern Scotland, and ran nearly parallel to 
the coast of Norway, perhaps touching land here and there, as in the Lofoten Islands. This is somewhat fur- 
ther south and east than the path indicated on Oppolzer's chart 136.1 
In England, Nicholas Culpeper and William Lilly both published mundane predictions based upon this 
eclipse.2 And Morin refers to it in the Preface of the Astrologia Gallica, where he mentions "...the great 
eclipse of the Sun in this year 1652 in the 19th degree of Aries, with Saturn, ruler of the eighth house, rising 
at Paris in the 22nd degree of Cancer, which the Moon rules; which eclipse, aside from the political changes 
[it signified], was followed by so great a mortality in France, that in Paris the dead and those sick with ma- 
lignant fevers are believed to number more than 100,000, without an epidemic..."3 
This eclipse was observed by Agarrat and Morin, with an unnamed assistant, at the Orleans Palace in 
Paris. It was also observed in Paris by Ismael Boulliau (1605-1694) and at Digne by Pierre Gassendi 
(1592-1655).4 Gassendi's record of his observations was published in volume 4 of his Opera5 and reprinted 
by Simon Newcomb in his Researches on the Motion of the Moon, Part I (Washington, 1878), pp. 86-87.6 
The observation records of Agarrat and Morin and of Boulliau seem to have perished, so Morin's ac- 
count in the Astrologia Gallica and Gassendi's report are all that remain. Gassendi's report of his results and 
those of the other observers are as follows: 
Gassendi Boulliau Agarrat & Morin 
Beginning 9:43 9:12:47 9:30 
Middle 10:51 10:25:19 10:45 
End 11:58 11:42:14 12:12 
Magnitude (digits) 9;24 10;20 10;20 
Gassendi's report of Boulliau's and Agarrat and Morin's times does not agree very well with Morin's 
own account, which says the eclipse "began at precisely 9:30 AM, and left off at precisely noon" and 
1 Theodor, Ritter von Oppober, Canon of Eclipses (New Yoik,1962) [repr. of the Canon der Finsternisse (Vienna, 
1887), with a translation of the Introduction by Owen Gingerich]. 
2 Nicholas Culpeper, Catastrophe Magnatum (London, 1652) and William Lilly, Annus Tenebrosus (London, 1651). 
Some of their predictions must either have missed the mark or else seemed unlikely of early fulfillment, as they provoked an 
anonymous rejoinder entitled Black Monday turn'd White, or the Astrologers Knavety Epitomized ... (London, 1652), a 
4-page diatribe against Culpeper and Lilly, which was published a few days after the eclipse (which fell on a Monday). 
3 This passage was noted by Lynn Thomdike, HMES 7, p. 487, n. 58. 
4 Gassendi also reports the observation made by an unidentified aristocrat at Avignon. He recorded the beginning of the 
eclipse at 9:33 (vs. calc. 9:34), the middle at 10:50 (vs. calc. max. 10:44), and the end at 11:53 (vs. calc. 11:58). 
5 Pierre Gassendi, Opera omnia (Lyons, 1658) 6 vols. folio. 
6 Newcomb also reprints {op. cit., pp. 92-94) the observation records of Johann Hevel (1611-1687) of Dantzig (now 
Gdansk), who used a sundial and a clock in addition to taking solar altitudes. His results were the best of all: for the begin- 
ning he reports 11:00 AM (vs. calc. 11:01) and for the end 1:19 PM (vs. calc. 1:20). 
139 

===== PAGE 146 =====

"[Boulliau] put the end of the eclipse at 11:50." I don't know what to make of Boulliau's times as reported 
by Gassendi. They are 10 or 15 minutes too early if they are referred to the meridian of Paris and Gassendi 
says nothing to the contrary. 
I have calculated the local circumstances of the eclipse at Paris and Digne for comparison with the ob- 
served times. 
Paris 48N50 2E20 (Local Apparent Time) 
Calculated Morin (AG) Boulliau 
Beginning 9:29 9:30 9:12:47 
Maximum 10:40 10:45* 10:25:19 
End 11:53 12:00 11:42:14 
Magnitude (digits) 10;24 10;20 10;20 
*as reported by Gassendi (not given in the AG) 
Digne 44N07 6E16 (Local Apparent Time) 
Calculated Gassendi 
Beginning 9:42 9:43 
Maximum 10:52 10:51 
End 12:05 11:58 
Magnitude 8;51 9;24 
It is a pity that Boulliau's times are affected by some unknown constant difference from Local Apparent 
Time on the Paris meridian, since they appear to have been made with a clock. Also, Gassendi's and 
Morin's reports of Boulliau's time for the end of the eclipse disagree for some reason. 
Considering only Agarrat and Morin's and Gassendi's times, we note that their observations of the be- 
ginning of the eclipse are within one minute of the calculated time; but Agarrat and Morin observed the end 
of the eclipse 7 minutes late, while Gassendi observed it 7 minutes early. Their errors in the ending time are 
almost certainly due to their having determined the time from altitudes of the Sun. Since the calculated end 
of the eclipse was near noon, it was impossible to determine the time with any accuracy by observing the so- 
lar altitude. 
Gassendi also employed a sundial, for he says "Since the times exhibited here were deduced from alti- 
tudes of the Sun, I should not fail to mention that a sundial showed the beginning about two minutes earlier 
and the end two or three minutes later." And he would have been better off if he had used the times from the 
sundial, since he would still have been only a minute off at the beginning, but his error in timing the ending 
would have been reduced from 7 minutes to 4 or 5. 
In the case of the magnitude of the eclipse, Agarrat and Morin and Boulliau were very close to the calcu- 
lated figure, while Gassendi differed by 4 or 5 percent. 
Finally, a biographical note: Gassendi's report contains the phrase . . . observationes duas Parisiis... 
alteram a nostro Bullialdo, alteram a meo quondam Agarrato, ac Marino... 'two observations at Paris... 
one by our friend Boulliau, another by my former friend Agarrat, and Morin'. It is known that Gassendi and 
Morin were constantly sparring with each other, but we might wonder whether Gassendi had some other 
reason for relegating his friendship with Agarrat to the past or whether he merely resented his having joined 
with Morin in this instance. 
140 

===== PAGE 147 =====

Appendix 4 
Some Horoscopes Mentioned in the Text 
Morin's horoscope is from the Astrologia Gallica, p. 397. Cardan's chart is from his Book of Twelve 
Genitures {Opera omnia V, p. 517). The other charts are originally from Junctinus's Mirror of Astrology. 
However, not having access to a copy of that book at this writing, I have cited them from Alan Leo's Nota- 
ble Nativities. Like all charts drawn prior to the availability of Kepler's Rudolphine Tables, the planetary 
positions are often in error. The errors are smallest for the Sun (usually no more than 1 degree), somewhat 
larger for the Moon, Jupiter, and Saturn (usually within 2 or 3 degrees), variable for Venus and Mars (usu- 
ally within 1 or 2 degrees, but occasionally 3 or 4 degrees), and very variable for Mercury (sometimes fairly 
close, butsometimes in error by 10 degrees or more). There are also occasional errors in the house cusps. 
1 have not recalculated the charts because Morin cited them as he found them in the Mirror of Astrology. 
However, I have noted a few discrepancies. In the case of the birth places, dates, and times, I have furnished 
most of the information myself, since it is not always given in Notable Nativities. In particular, I have estab- 
lished the birth times from the cusps of the charts in Notable Nativities, so they may differ by a few minutes 
from the times given in the Mirror of Astrology. The times are of course local apparent time. 
Junctinus copied some or perhaps most of these charts from his predecessors, Jerome Cardan and Luca 
Gaurico, whose published collections antedated his by a generation. Most of them are probably approxi- 
mately correct, but, since their ultimate origins have not been investigated, they should not be taken as being 
absolutely certain. 
141 

===== PAGE 148 =====

13V317 
Aquila JLucida 
Lyrae 
' k ,*<8 '> 
'V;p r^'^oS J— >-"■'      - rvl * Fomalhaut 
^l^Uc. Ci^.T 
I32p 17 
Jean Baptiste Morin, M.D. 
Villefmnche, Rhone 46N00 4E43 
23 Feb 1583 8:33 AM 
6Nov 1656 
Paris 
Note: Morin thought the latitude of Villefranche was 45N25, and the house cusps shown above 
are calculatedfor that latitude. 
142 

===== PAGE 149 =====

\%V315 
~ *3826 
■o An«36 
\^/ 
%?# 
?8S15 
Jerome Cardan, M.D. 
Pavia 45N12 9E11 
24 Sep 1501 6:40 PM 
21 Sep 1576 
Rome 
Note: Cardan's chart has Milan for the birthplace but he was actually born at Pavia (20 miles south of Milan). 
The printed chart has several typographical errors, which I have corrected. Calculation yields the following more 
precise longitudes: Moon !0o40' Pisces, Mercury 26°27' Libra, Jupiter 2°40' Taurus, and Saturn J9o20' Gemini. 
The other planets are fairly close. The chart has Alchabitius cusps, which Cardan favored in this one instance. (He 
thought the Regiomontanan house positions did not suit his life.) 
143 

===== PAGE 150 =====

Pietro 11 de Medici 
Governor of Florence 
Florence 
16 Feb 1471-2 3:35 AM 
28 Dec 1503 drowned 
Garigliano River 
[NN468] 

===== PAGE 151 =====

Giuliano 11 de' Medici 
Duke of Nemours 
Florence 
13 Mar 1478-9 0:06AM 
17 Mar 1516 sickness 
Fiesole 
[NN 481] 

===== PAGE 152 =====

Lorenzo 11 de Medici 
Duke of Urbino 
Florence 
I Sep 1492 1:36 PM 
4 May 1519 sickness 
Florence 
[NN499] 

===== PAGE 153 =====

19V? 
y ■ 
fO w 
» 02 «■>!  
$ 8 
 lu 
"J> <1 
Catherine de' Medici 
Queen of France 
Florence 
13 Apr 1519 5:22 AM 
5 Jan 1589 
Blois 
[NN 538] 
Note: This is Junctinus's chart. However, Luca Gaurico, who was court astrologer to Catherine, 
gives her birth time as 4:38 AM in his Tractatus astrologicus (Venice, 1552). His chart is NN 537; 
it has 17 Aries rising instead of 5 Taurus. 
147 

===== PAGE 154 =====

o^o 
Henry II 
King of France 
St. Germain-en-Laye 
31 Mar 1518-95:04 AM 
10 Jul 1559 eye injury 
Paris 
[NN535] 
Note: Another source says he was born at 7 PM, butJunctinus probably took this chart from 
Luca Gaurico, op. cit., who gives 5 AM for the birth time. Gaurico should have known the correct birth time. 
148 

===== PAGE 155 =====

Oitavio Famese 
Duke of Parma & Piacenza 
Rome 
9 Oct 1524 4:23 PM 
18 Sep 1586 
Parma (?) 
[NN546] 

===== PAGE 156 =====

Francis I de Medici 
Grand Duke of Tuscany 
Florence 
25 Mar 1541 5:39 AM 
19 Oct 1587 sickness 
Florence 
[NN558] 

===== PAGE 157 =====

Appendix 5 
Regiomontanus Primary Direction Formulae 
Primary directions in the Regiomontanus system amount to bringing Point 2 to the same Circle of Posi- 
tion as Point 1 by adding an appropriate arc (the Arc of Direction) to the RAMC. This arc can be calculated 
as follows: 
1. Calculate the elevation of the pole above the Circle of Position of Point 1 in the latitude of the place. 
2. Calculate the Oblique Ascension of Pi under the Pole of PI. 
3. Calculate the Oblique Ascension of Point 2 under the Pole of PI. 
4. Then the Arc of Direction =OA2-OAl. 
If the latitude of the planets is taken into account, the directions are called mundane ot in mundo\ but if 
the latitude is neglected, the directions are called zodiacal or in zodiaco. Morin favored mundane directions, 
while some of his predecessors favored zodiacal directions. 
Most of the 16th and 17th century astrologers used Regiomontanus's tables (or a similar set by a later au- 
thor) to make their calculations, but with the current availability of electronic calculators and computers, the 
following trigonometrical formulae may be found convenient. 
Notation: RA = Right Ascension 
D = Declination 
L = Zodiacal Longitude (from 0 Aries) 
B = Zodiacal Latitude 
F = Latitude of the Place 
RAMC = Right Ascension of the Midheaven 
MD = Meridian Distance (in RA) 
(+ on the left and - on the right) 
CP = Circle of Position 
A = an auxiliary angle 
G = another auxiliary angle 
H - another auxiliary angle 
P - Pole (polar elevation) 
AD = Ascensional Difference 
OA = Oblique Ascension 
OD - Oblique Descension 
Arc = Arc of Direction (in RA) 
If a numerical suffix is added to any of these quantities, it refers to Point 1 or Point 2. Thus, MD I = Me- 
ridian Distance of Point 1. 
151 

===== PAGE 158 =====

For each pair of points, calculate the following: 
MD - RA-RAMC 
G = arctan(tan Dl/cos MD1) 
H = F-G 
A = arctan(cos H/(tan MD1 cosG)) 
P = arcsin(sin F cos A) 
CP = arctan(cos F/tan A) 
AD1 = arcsin(tan Dl tan P) 
AD2 = arcsin(tan D2 tan P) 
Then, when Point 1 is in the eastern (left) half of the chart: 
OA1 = RA1-AD1 
OA2 = RA2-AD2 
Arc - OA2 - OA1 
else, when Point 1 is in the western (right) half of the chart: 
OD1 = RA1 + AD1 
OD2 = RA2 + AD2 
Arc = OA2 - OA1 
The calculation can be verified by adding the Arc to the RAMC, recalculating MD2, and calculating CP2 
for the Latitude of the Place. The calculated value of CP2 should be equal to the value of CP1. That is, with 
the RAMC increased by the Arc of Direction, the Circle of Position of Point 2 should be exactly equal to the 
original Circle of Position of Point 1. 
An alternative to calculating directions in the right half of the chart is to calculate the directions of the op- 
posite points in the left half of the chart. This method was often used by the 16th and 17th century astrolo- 
gers. If this is done, it is important to find the RA and D of the oppositions by taking the Longitude + 180° of 
each point and reversing the direction of the Zodiacal Latitude. For example, if Saturn should be in the right 
half of the chart at 8021' Libra and 2N36, then its opposition in the left half of the chart should be taken to be 
802r Aries and 2S36. 
If Point 1 is the MC, then the Arc of Direction is simply equal to the difference in RA of Point 2 and the 
MC: Arc = RA2 - RAMC. This follows naturally from the definition of a Regiomontanan direction:, Point 1 
in this case is the RAMC; if we bring Point 2 to the (progtessed) RAMC, then RA2 - RAMC must equal the 
Arc of Direction. Or, by the formulae above, the Pole of Point 1 is 0°; hence, the OA's of Points 1 and 2 are 
the same as their RA's, so OA2 - OA1 = RA2 - RA1 = RA2 - RAMC. 
If Point 1 is the Ascendant; then the Arc of Direction is equal to the difference in OA of Point 2 and the 
ASC: Arc = OA2 - OA1 = OA2 - RAMC - 90°, where the OA's are taken for the Latitude of the Place. This 
follows from the definition and the formulae, for when Point 1 is the Ascendant, it is on the horizon, and its 
Circle of Position is 90° from the RAMC; consequently, its Pole is the same as the Latitude of the Place. 
If Point 1 is an intermediate cusp, then its Longitude is the zodiacal longitude of the cusp with zero Zodi- 
acal Latitude. Its Circle of Position will of course be a multiple of 30°. 
152 

===== PAGE 159 =====

Example 
As an example, we may calculate the direction of Mars to the conjunction of Jupiter in mundo in the chart 
of Sixtus ab Hemminga in Book 22, Section V, Chapter 4. With the longitudes and latitudes of the planets 
given by Morin, we have; 
RAMC 165°24' Latitude 53N00 Obliquity 23o30/ 
Planet RA Decl. MD 
Jupiter 263014' -22053' +97o50' 
Mars 288037' -23o09' 
with Jupiter as Point 1 and Mars as Point 2, we calculate: 
G = 72o06' 
H = -19o06' 
A = -22056' 
P = 47021' 
CP = 125o07' 
AD1 = -27016' 
AD2 = -27039' 
and from these quantities 
OA2 = 316016' 
OA1 = 290o30, 
Arc = 25046' 
This arc agrees with that previously calculated by computer for verification of Morin1 s figures. Morin, 
however, derived the value 26045', which may be explained as a combination of errors. First, he seems to 
have rounded off the calculated value of the Pole from 47021' to 47o00'. This would alter the values of OA2 
and OA1 to 315054' and 290o09' without affecting their difference by much. His published values are 
316052' and 290o06'. Thus we can infer that he actually derived 315052' and 290o06' with a difference of 
25046'. This is virtually the same as the difference 25045' from our own calculation (with the rounded value 
of the Pole). But he inadvertently wrote down the degrees of the first angle as 316 instead of 315, thereby in- 
creasing the difference to 26045'. 
153 

===== PAGE 160 =====

Addenda 
Astrologia Gallica 
Book Two 
Chapter 3. How Many Years Passed between the Creation of the World and the 
Incarnation of Christ; and from then to this Year 1648 according to the Method of 
Numeration used by the Church. 
Although it was sufficiently demonstrated in Book 1 that this world could not have [existed] eternally, 
the same thing can also be demonstrated in another way. Since the Sun is in individual points of the ecliptic 
at a particular time, let it be supposed that it was at the beginning of Aries from eternity. Therefore, it was 
not in a degree of Aries from eternity. Second; and since when one day had passed it came to the 2nd degree 
of Aries, then it was very true to assert that the world had existed for only one day; therefore it is false to say 
that it had existed from eternity, which is contrary to the hypothesis. Moreover, if anyone says that the world 
was possible from eternity and that with the possible having been made actual, nothing absurd follows; and 
the world therefore could have existed from eternity, this reasoning is convicted of manifest falsity by the 
fact that the thousandth circulation of the primum mobile was possible from eternity; and yet it could not 
have been an actuality from eternity because the thousandth circulation could not have been an actuality un- 
less 999 [circulations] had gone before; in addition to which, the world would have been simultaneously an 
actuality and a potentiality, which cannot be the case. 
Furthermore, with regard to the number of years that have passed since the creation of the world, there 
are great controversies among both the old and the modem chronologists and theologians which it is not our 
purpose to discuss here. For us, therefore, it suffices to set forth compendiously that according to the Orien- 
tal Greek churches 5508 years ought to be reckoned from the foundation of the world to the Birth of Christ. 
According to the Western Latin Churches 5199. Among the Jews and Rabbis 3761. But according to histori- 
cal truth and the more outstanding chronologists, Origanus in the first part oihis Introduction? Chapter 1, 
will reckon neither more nor less than 3949 years. And Gallisard2 in his brief Chronograph}' puts 3964 
years among the Hebrews and [The Venerable] Bede from the creation of the world to the Nativity of 
Christ. But Longomontanus, Book 1, Theor. Chapter 3, puts 3966. And Kepler, in his The Rudolphine Ta- 
bles > Chapter 33, counts 3993 years, although from the motion of the solar apogee assumed by him they 
ought to be reckoned as 3968, as it will appear below. Thus to be sure these astronomers differing little 
among themselves deduce their own numbers from the motion of the solar apogee, which according to the 
reformation of astronomy made by Tycho Brahe moves about one minute and two seconds a year in the 
ecliptic. For the astronomers think it very agreeable to reason, and I think it most concordant with Divine 
Wisdom on account of the causes that will be given at the end of Chapter 4 that the solar apogee was 
placed by God at the beginning of the world at the intersection of the equatorial and ecliptical circles, i.e., 
in the Midheaven, whose extremes are the poles of the ecliptic and the equator, for this intersection is re- 
ferred to both poles. From which supposition it follows that this apogee was in the beginning of Aries; 
otherwise, if it had been in the beginning of Libra, 14420 years would have been reckoned according to 
the motion of the solar apogee from the creation of the world to the Birth of Christ. For from The 
1 David Origanus (1558-1628), Astrologia naturalis sive tractatus de effectibus astrorum... (Marseilles, 1645). 
2 Pierre Gallisart (fl. 1577), a Dominican of the convent of Aries, was a schoolmaster and writer on religious subjects. 
155 

===== PAGE 161 =====

Rudolphine Tables1 the apogee was at the Birth of Christ in 8o20'44" Gemini, i.e., the 246044" that the 
apogee had moved from the founding of the World to the Birth of Christ divided by the 62" of the annual 
motion of that apogee from Tycho's observations will make 3968 years from the creation of the world to the 
Birthday of Christ, i.e., about 4000 years up to the Passion of Christ and the preaching of the Gospel. Which 
calculation, since it agrees very well with historical truth and the Sacred Scriptures, makes it certain that the 
rest ought to be rejected and that we should depend upon this consensus of astronomy, history, and the Sa- 
cred Scriptures, although there is some doubt about the true year. 
Moreover, there is a still greater and more acrimonious controversy among chronologers about how the 
years from the Birth of Christ ought to be numbered, as one can see in Kepler's Book on the Natal Year of 
Christ and in his Chronical Eclogues, and the matter is very involved, requiring much reading, learning, and 
prudence in conjecture, in order to arrive at anything that should be held for certain about it. Wherefore, re- 
linquishing to others this task, which has already tormented many men learned in this matter, we shall only 
take note here of two things. First,... 
If, therefore, from the founding of the world to Christ 3968 Julian years elapsed; and from Christ down to 
this year 1648 years, there will be 5616 years from the founding of the world down to the present. 
3 Johann Kepler, Tabulae Rudolphinae (Ulm, 1627). 
156 

===== PAGE 162 =====

Book Thirteen 
Table of the Universal Rulerships of the Planets 
The Seven Planets are the Primary and Universal Causes of Physical Generation in the Family of Nature 
as a Whole. They are allotted an affinity with those things of a particular nature placed below, either from 
their own essence or because of analogy, and on this account they are said to rule them. 
Parts of Heaven 
Saturn: Capricorn, Aquarius. 
Jupiter: Sagittarius, Pisces. 
Mars: Aries, Scorpio. 
The Sun: Leo. 
Venus: Taurus, Libra. 
Mercury: Gemini, Virgo. 
The Moon: Cancer. 
Elements 
Saturn: earth. 
Jupiter: air, fire. 
Mans: fire. 
The Sun: aether, fire. 
Venus: air. 
Mercury: earth. 
The Moon: water. 
Elemental Qualities 
Saturn: Intense cold, dryness, density, opacity, heaviness. 
Jupiter: Moderation, with an excess of lightness, heat, and dryness. 
Mars: Heat and dryness in intensity. 
The Sun: Vital heat, rarity, lightness. 
Venus: Moderation, with a little moistness. 
Mercury: Cold and dryness in some degree. 
The Moon: Cold, wetness, liquidity, density, and heaviness. 
Colors1 
Saturn: Black, dark, earth-colored, swarthy. 
Jupiter Blue, 
Mars: Red. 
The Sun: Yellow. 
Venus: Green. 
Mercury: Variegated. 
The Moon: White, pale. 
1 The printed text mistakenly has Odores 'Odors'. 
157 

===== PAGE 163 =====

Odors 
Saturn: Foul, narcotic. 
Jupiter: Sweet. 
Mars: Sharp. 
The Sun: Fragrant, aromatic. 
Venus: Delightfully sweet 
Mercury: Mixed. 
The Moon: Dull, imperceptible. 
Flavors 
Saturn: Sour, astringent. 
Jupiter: Sweet. 
Mars: Bitter. 
The Sun; Salted just right. 
Venus: Rich. 
Mercury: Add. 
The Moon: Flat, watery. 
Parts of the Year 
Saturn: Fall. 
Jupiter: Spring. 
Mars: Summer. 
The Sun: Summer. 
Venus: Spring. 
Mercury: Fall. 
The Moon: Winter. 
Weather Conditions and Effects in the Air 
Saturn: Intense and frightful cold, and sometimes pestilence. Heavy, black clouds, dark rainstorms, 
snows, frosts, destructive winds, violent winds. 
Jupiter: Mildness, healthy condition, moderate winds, fair weather, clouds turning from white to red. 
Mars: Intemperate, hot, dry, very hot, pestiferous, wasting, fair weather, or red clouds, tawny, green, 
thunder, flashing, cloud-to-cloud lightning, thunderbolts, hail. Comets with tails, glowing impressions,2 
tornadoes, tempestuous, harmful, destructive winds. 
The Sun: Heat, dryness, fair weather and sometimes very hot, tawny clouds or turning tawny from red, 
moderate winds, dry and healthy. 
Venus: Mildness, health, fair weather, dew, fog, mist, clouds completely white, light and healthy rain, 
moderate and somewhat humid winds. 
Mercury: Dryness, sudden winds, strong, gusty, shifting; violent, damaging winds; variegated clouds, 
thunder, flashing, thunderbolts. 
The Moon: Humidity and cold from itself. 
2 Probably the glowing trains of meteors. 
158 

===== PAGE 164 =====

In Waters and in the Sea 
Saturn: Overflowings, floods, corruption, destruction or scarcity of fish, violent winds and raging 
storms, difficult voyages, shipwreck. 
Jupiter; Moderate and useful increases in waters, abundance of fish, tranquillity, or moderate winds, fa- 
vourable and profitable passages of ships. 
Mars: Drying up of waters, corruption, destruction of fish, violent winds, sudden shipwrecks, invasions 
of pirates. 
The Sun: Droughts and decreases. 
Venus: Useful increases and overflows, good health, great abundance of fish, easy, secure, and fortunate 
voyages. 
Mercury: Violent winds and sudden storms, increases when it is matutine, decreases when vespertine, 
plots of pirates. 
The Moon: Increases, ebbing and flowing. 
On the £arth 
Saturn: Sterility of fruits and corruption of useful plants by malign air, cold, frost, rain storms, hail, 
floods, caterpillars, locusts; destruction of useful animals, appearance of harmful ones; earthquake, collapse 
of buildings and cities. 
Jupiter: Abundance and health of plants, fruits, and useful animals, and the suppression of injurious ones, 
or those spawned from rotten material.3 
Mars: Scarcity and unhealthiness of plants, fruits, and animals useful to man from intemperate heat and 
dryness or from the poisonous quality of the air; generation of venomous creatures, fires, earthquakes. 
The Sun: Four parts of the year, but especially the summer per se; droughts, forest fires; the rest accord- 
ing to the characteristics of the ruler and the aspects. 
Venus: The same as Jupiter, but with more fertility. 
Mercury: Great earthquakes, but a diversity of other events, instability, and often, with Saturn or Mars, 
destruction of plants and animals. 
The Moon: Putrefaction, but in accordance with its relation to the Sun and the other planets, whose con- 
figurations with the Moon ought to be carefully noticed, since the Moon is closest to the earth. 
Minerals 
Saturn: lead, black stones, dark-colored, field-stones. 
Jupiter. Tin, sapphire, amethyst. 
Mars: Iron, lodestone, jasper, bloodstone, reddish [stones].4 
The Sun: Gold, carbuncle, hyacinth,5 chrysolite. 
Venus; Copper, emerald, turquoise, coral, pearl. 
Mercury: Quicksilver, chalcedony, camelian, alecterius.6 
The Moon: Silver, crystal, beryl, diamond, pearl. 
3 Maggots, etc. 
4 The Latin has rubinus 'reddish', but perhaps 'ruby' is meant. 
5 A hyacinth-colored precious or semiprecious stone, either a variety of amethyst or sapphire. Cf. Pliny,Natural History, 
xxxvii. 40 (Sect. 122). 
61 cannot identify this mineral or stone, unless the reference is to the alectoria or "cock's stone" mentioned by Pliny, 
N.H., xxxvii. 54 (Sect. 144). 
159 

===== PAGE 165 =====

Plants 
Saturn: The oak, medlar, quince,7 me, hellebore, narcotic [plants], and the rest of the thick substances, 
and those growing slowly. 
Jupiter: The laurel, sandalwood, cinnamon, sugar, balsam, frankincense. 
Mars: Pepper, ginger, mustard, radish, scammony, colocynth,8 garlic, everything bitter, and hot poison- 
ous [plants]. 
The Sun: The palm, rosemary, heliotrope, crocus, grain, and spices. 
Venus: The date palm, olive, pine, lily, rose, pea. 
Mercury: The hazel, yarrow. 
The Moon: Gourds, cucumbers, pumpkins, lettuce. 
Animals 
Saturn: The camel, bear, goat, ass, cat, owl, bat, tortoise, mouse, beetle, and others that walk slowly, and 
those that roam about at night, toad. 
Jupiter: The elephant, deer, bull, stag, peacock, falcon. 
Mars: The horse, wolf, boar, dog, ostrich, kite, hawk, venemous serpents, scorpion, spider. 
The Sun: The lion, eagle, falcon, cock. 
Venus: The nanny goat, sheep, pheasant, partridge, dove, turtledove, sparrow. 
Mercury: The fox, ape; serpent, parrot, spider, bee, ant. 
The Moon: The hare, swan, nightingale, frogs, fish, juicy snails, shellfish, crabs, slugs. 
The Humours 
Saturn: Melancholy, black bile. 
Jupiter: Moisture, blood, semen. 
Mars: Yellow, vitelline, aeruginous, [or] porraceous bile.9 
The Sun: Vital spirit, bilious blood. 
Venus: Phlegmatic blood, semen. 
Mercury: Animal spirit. 
The Moon: Phlegm, semm. 
Parts of the Body 
Saturn: The bones, teeth, cartilage, right ear, spleen, bladder. 
Jupiter: The liver, veins, lungs, diaphragm, sides, muscles. 
Mars: The gall bladder, left ear, pudenda, kidneys. 
The Sun: The heart, arteries, right eye, and the right side in men, but the left one in women. 
Venus: The throat, breasts, belly, buttocks, womb, kidneys, genitalia. 
Mercury: The legs and feet, arms, hands, fingers, tongue, nerves, ligaments. 
The Moon: The brain, left eye, the left side in men, but the right one in women. Intestines, stomach, 
vulva, membranes. 
7 Reading cydonius 'quince' instead of citonius [unidentified]. 
8 The Cucumis colocynthis of Linnaeus, a wild cucumber used as a purgative. See Pliny, N.H., xx. 8 (Sect. 14). 
9 Vitelline means yellowish, aeruginous bluish-green, and porraceous greenish. 
160 

===== PAGE 166 =====

The Faculties 
Saturn: The retentive. 
Jupiter: The digestive10 and vegetal. 
Mars: The expulsive. 
The Sun: The vital, attractive, 
Venus: The generative. 
Mercury: The mental, rational. 
The Moon: The expulsive, vegetal, mental. 
The Senses 
Saturn: Hearing on the right. 
Jupiter: Touch, smell. 
Mars: Hearing on the left. 
The Sun: Sight on the right in a man, especially by day; on the left in a woman. 
Venus: Taste, smell, touch, the pleasures [arising] from these senses. 
Mercury: Taste, hearing. 
The Moon: Sight on the right in women; on the left in men. 
Parts of the Mind 
Saturn: Memory. 
Jupiter: Judgment, the concupiscible appetite. 
Mars: The irascible appetite. 
The Sun: The universal appetite for good. 
Venus: The concupiscible appetite. 
Mercury: Common sense, imagination, ingenuity, reason, or the rational appetite. 
The Moon: Apprehension, the universal appetite. 
The Natural Laws of Men and their Relations amongst themselves by Analogy 
Saturn: Great-grandfather, grandfather and father, then also a servant, a hidden enemy. 
Jupiter; The master, children. 
Mars: The husband in women's charts, elder brothers, open enemies. 
The Sun: The father and the husband in women's charts. 
Venus: The wife and the mother by day, sisters, daughters, lovers, concubines. 
Mercury: Younger brothers, servants. 
The Moon: The mother and the wife especially by night, widows, pregnant women.11 
Corporature 
About which there can be no universal determination. For even though in general and everywhere on 
earth Martial types are drier and more slender. Jovial and Venus types, moister, juicier, fairer-skinned, and 
more beautiftil, Satumians uglier and darker, etc., still the particular conformations of parts and colors do 
not always correspond equally to the natures of the planets, but there is a [particular] character of body na- 
10 Literally, coctrix 'cooking'. 
11 Or, less likely, 'pregnant widows'. 
161 

===== PAGE 167 =====

tive to each place on earth, as is obvious from the Ethiopians, the Tartars, and the Peruvians, who differ 
greatly among themselves in body, hair, and shape of face, but the Ethiopian in France begets an Ethiopian. 
Therefore, consider the region and the parents; and understand that the things given here [are mainly appli- 
cable] to the white men of Asia, Europe, etc. 
Saturn Oriental: Cold, moist, moderate flesh, moderate in stature, a long face, large dark eyes, occasion- 
ally spotted, uneven teeth, an ugly and grim appearance, face and body rather dark in color, tawny,12 
honey-colored,13 pallid, dark hair, thickset, rugged, crooked feet. 
Satum Occidental: Cold, dry, thin, short in stature, dark eyes, dark plain hair, scanty on the head and in 
the beard, the rest of the body hairless. 
Jupiter Oriental: Moderately hot and moist, fleshy, round cheeks, moderate and elegant and majestic in 
stature, white in color, inclining to yellow or rose, eyes rather large [and] dark, handsome, with a mark in the 
right foot. 
Jupiter Occidental: Somewhat moister in temperament, moderate in stature, bald, with a mark in the left 
foot, which rarely fails. 
Mars Oriental: Hot, dry, less fleshy, decently tall and well proportioned, in color from white to red, with 
bluish eyes, much hair between curly and straight, with hairiness of body. 
Mars Occidental: Drier, moderate in stature, with a big head, a round and freckled face, or with a mark on 
his forehead, small eyes, large nostrils, long teeth; red in color, red-haired, rigid, with a hairless body, and a 
long and military stride. 
The Sun: Hot and not so dry, moderate in stature, a large head; a round, white, and shining face, eyes 
large and splendid and yellow in color, long hair but growing bald, a somewhat harsh voice. 
Venus: Hot and moist, moderate in stature, plump, and the face especially full and delicate, white with a 
blush of red, beautiful, lovable, hair somewhat curly, tawny, or rather dark, tawny-colored eyes, handsome, 
happy, glancing charmingly, thin eyebrows and lips, narrow chest, full legs. And these features are more ap- 
parent when Venus is oriental. 
Mercury Oriental: Somewhat hotter, moderate in stature and well proportioned, with good color, or 
honey-colored, small eyes, moderate, yellowish hair. 
Mercury Occidental: Somewhat dry, thin, slim, with small teeth and fingers, scanty beard, a thin voice, 
small, quick steps, a very sharp mentality. 
The Moon: Moist, tall stature, a beautiful face, white in color, gray eyes, fine hair, a becoming beard. 
Note 
Judge cautiously and carefully on the form of the body, for this part of judgment often fails, since it is not 
yet well understood. But through experience it can be perfected, namely by having looked at the planets in 
the first house and their lords and the lord of the Ascendant, along with the forms of the natives. 
Character and Talents 
Satum well-placed.14 Very talented, investigators of secret things, prudent, outstanding in counsel, se- 
cretive, rather solitary, suspicious and jealous, dissembling, hardworking, long-suffering, persevering, 
overcoming, violent, thrifty, eager for wealth, great accumulators, striving for dominion, fit for governor- 
ships, useful and dear to princes. 
12 Readfulvus 'tawny' rather than fulcus [no such word]. 
13 Latin mellinus. 
14 The Latin reads bene affecto 'well affected', which means "well placed by sign and house and well aspected." "Badly 
placed" is of course the reverse. 
162 

===== PAGE 168 =====

But badly disposed. Sad, melancholy, abject, repulsive, austere, shameless, sluggish, timid, nervous, en- 
vious, outstanding ineptitude in crime, wretched, complaining, or taciturn, those who hate association and 
light, very solitary, paupers, or trading in evil arts, very suspicious and jealous, liars, spiteful, fraudulent, 
plotters, traitors, and those who frequently suffer judicial punishment for their crimes. 
Jupiter well-placed. Straightforward, upright, religious, just, faithful, courteous, merciful, clean, mod- 
est, cheerful, obliging, easy to talk to, moderately serious, frank, dutiful, prudent, sensible, strong in coun- 
sel, obliging, generous, illustrious, great, in giving justice, in making laws, fit for magistracy, for first place, 
and for kingdom, fond of and partial to his own and his own things, truthful. 
Badly disposed. Character in one way or another like the previous, but artificial and inclining to faults, as 
superstition in place of piety and religion,15 silliness instead of courtesy, timidity instead of modesty, pre- 
tense instead of fidelity, prodigality instead of generosity, pride and arrogance instead of greatness, of 
course in accordance with the way of the planet by which it is afflicted by connection16 or by rulership. 
Mars well-placed. Brave, strong, spirited, noble, bold, arrogant, boastful, despising the praise of another, 
and full of contempt for other men, irascible, prone to strike and wound, eager for revenge, obeying no one, 
unable to endure servitude and injuries, eager for dominance, craving battles and conflicts, arrogant tyrants, 
reckless and scornful of danger, active, ready, in a hurry, self-confident, spuming wealth, generous, lucky, 
well-suited for commanding soldiers, ill-suited for ruling citizens, scornful of God or not concerned. 
Badly placed. Unscmpulous, unjust, pitiless, arrogant, quarrelsome, seditious, loud-mouthed, reckless, 
mad, truculent, aggressive in challenging, cmel, assassins, murderers, tyrants, drunkards, destroying their 
own property and that of others, incendiaries, robbers, thieves, pirates, neglecting their own people. 
The Sun well-placed. Upright, just, honest, faithful, clean, sensible, in one way or another irascible, 
great, very eager for honours and much honoured, illustrious, grand, distinguished, famous, cultivators of 
friendships, but not overly fond of wife and children. 
Badly placed. Silly, spiteful, less observant of honour, artificial, and degenerate from the things said 
above in accordance with the nature of the planet making it unfortunate by rulership or unfavourable con- 
nection. 
Venus well-placed. Endowed with good character, charming, upright, and worshiping God religiously, 
merciful, peace-making, cheerful, sociable, fond of cleanliness and decoration, devoted to dancing, singing, 
music, and dining, elegant and charming in their actions, playful, and inclined towards all delights and plea- 
sures, fortunate and cautious in love affairs and friendships, kind especially towards his own [people], un- 
able to endure hard work, quarrels, anger, and misfortune, and easily reconciled. 
Badly placed. Timid, idle, suitors, and bothersome in love affairs or friendships, imprudently and unfor- 
tunately jealous, womanizers, addicted to indecent desires, disreputable, and with many expenditures on ac- 
count of women, mischances, bothersome to the wretched and bad; unless Venus herself rules most of (he 
principal places of the geniture and is in an important angle. 
Mercury well-placed. Endowed with outstanding character, excelling in shrewdness of intellect, easily 
capable [of learning] the sciences and arts of all kinds, but especially mathematics, readily conjecturing and 
reasoning; learning many things without a teacher, and finding unknown things first, finely differing and 
discussing, quick, wary, prudent, composed in behavior, readily adapting himself to any person, situation, 
or time, and therefore sociable and fit for getting things done. 
Badly placed. Unstable, foolish, forgetful, addicted to mental wanderings, talkative, boastful, 
dull-witted, insolent, liars, stubborn, flatterers,17 dissemblers, crafty, deceivers, treacherous, spiteful, per- 
15 Reading pro pietate instead of proprietate. 
16 That is, by aspect. 
17 And "yes-men." 
163 

===== PAGE 169 =====

jurers, plotters, slanderers, given to falsifications of writing, testimony, or money, disreputable, pimps, 
rudely embroiling themselves in matters of every sort, giving dangerous advice, and boldly undertaking 
crimes. 
The Moon well-placed. Fine mental ability, famous, honoured, well composed in behavior, honest, 
frank, honourable. 
Badly placed. Dull in mental ability, timid, common, untruthful, vagabonds, artificial, and of no name, 
or servants, or fools. 
Professions, or Characters Speaking to Them 
Saturn well-placed. Great theologians, philosophers, treasurers, mine superintendents. < o 
Moderately placed. Fanners, excavators, miners, potters, builders, leather-workers, monks, hermits. 
Badly placed. Practitioners of magic, fortunetellers, sorcerers, those who clean out cesspools and sew- 
ers, beggars, [and] executioners. 
Jupiter well-placed. Advisers, senators, judges, presidents, executive secretaries,19 high priests, generals 
of sacred orders, or provincials,20 abbots, bishops, cardinals, popes, governors of provinces or cities. 
Badly placed. Schoolmasters and athletic directors. 
Mars well-placed. Knights, commanders-in-chief of armies, generals, and colonels,21 hunters, lawyers, • • • 22 physicians, blacksmiths, founders, [and] cooks. 
Badly placed. Butchers, leather-workers, pirates, bandits, cattle-rustlers,23 [and] executioners. 
The Sun well-placed. The Pope, emperors, kings, princes, governors, magnates, and all administrators 
with royal honours or dignities. 
Venus well-placed. Spice-merchants, perfumers, druggists, painters, jewelers, musicians, tavern keep- 
ers, soothsayers, members of sacred orders. 
Badly placed. Whores, seductresses, enchantresses, painted ladies,24 beggar-women. 
Mercury well-placed. Mathematicians, geometers, astronomers, astrologers, philosophers, orators, 
copyists, secretaries, poets, painters, merchants. All ingenious craftsmen, and inventors of new arts. 
Badly placed. Pimps, thieves, counterfeiters, forgers, and sellers of fake goods. 
The Moon well-placed. Queens, widows, couriers, sailors, fishermen, hunters, commoners. 
18 The Latin word coriarii 'tanners' or 'curriers' designates those who work with raw hides rather than artisans who turn 
finished leather into consumer products. 
19 Not copyists and routine office workers, who are under Mercury (see below). 
20 Generals and provincials are the superiors and division superintendents of Catholic religious orders such as the 
Benedictines. The leader of the Salvation Army also holds the title General. 
21 The Latin has Capitanei exercituum, Duces atque Praefecti. The ranks mentioned in the translation are arbitrary. Cer- 
tainly, military officials of higher rank than captain are meant. (Cf. the Spanish capitdn general.) 
22 That is, those who make castings in a foundry. 
23 The Latin text has T/croms where I have translated 'cattle-rustlers'. Lictors were official attendants who walked be- 
fore the high magistrates of Rome carrying an axe. This word is certainly wrong here. The Latin version of Ptolemy's 
Tetrabiblos, iv. 4, printed by Cardan has the following (Textus XVI, p. 324, col. 2)... camifices . .. raptores, latrones, 
abactores... 'executioners ... robbers, bandits, cattle-rustlers...' I think what Morin wrote was abactores 'cattle-rustlers'. 
My second choice would be luctatores 'wrestlers', which appears a few lines up in the same text. 
24 The Latin word fucatrices is not in my lexicon. If it is not simply a misprint, it would seem to be derived from Jucatus 
'counterfeit' or 'artificial'. I suppose it refers to women who wear heavy makeup, but if the derived sense offucatus is 
taken, it could be translated as 'deceivers'. And iffucatrices is a misprint, perhaps Morin wrote fututrices, a coarse word 
that could be translated as 'sluts'. 
164 

===== PAGE 170 =====

Accidents of Fate 
Saturn well-placed. High positions, governorships, authority, discovery of treasures, great wealth. 
Badly placed. Fall from honour and high position, low status, poverty, servitude, bad luck with projects 
and actions, secret enemies, disgrace, imprisonment, exile, punishment, a sorrowful end. 
Jupiter well-placed. Independence, riches, honours, high position, friends, servants, fortunate marriages, 
or high positions in the Church, fame, glory, an abundance of children, and from them happiness, profits. 
And, to sum it up, Jupiter well-placed bestows good luck in undertakings and in all things, and happy out- 
comes. 
Badly placed. It denies these things, or lessens them, or gives merely the appearance of them, or makes 
them unfortunate. 
Mars well-placed. Friendships with and cultivation of military men, fortunate in duels, positions of com- 
mand in war, victories in battles when storming cities or attacking fleets of ships, spoils, [and] triumphs. 
Badly placed. Enmities, lawsuits, fights, duels, battles and military assaults unluckily undertaken, losses 
of personal property and high position, robberies, squandering, destruction, plots, attacks, thefts, homi- 
cides, illicit intercourse, imprisonment, and frequently a violent death. 
The Sun well-placed. Glory, fame, splendid status, honoured appointments, public offices, high royal or 
ecclesiastical positions, in both cases, i.e., secular and ecclesiastical, with honour and outstanding respect, 
powerful friends, a name famous from death.25 
Badly placed. It gives powerful enemies, and it renders unfortunate the things mentioned above, or else it 
denies them [altogether], and it portends misfortune in all things undertaken for himself. 
Venus well-placed. Good will from everyone, profits, happy successes in love affairs, happy marriages, 
fortunate and numerous offspring; high positions and exceptional good fortune in undertakings and actions. 
Badly placed. It lessens, renders unfortunate, or even denies the things mentioned above. 
Mercury well-placed. Successful business activities, profitable missions, fortunate contracts, outstand- 
ing and successful inventions, high positions, professions, and honour and profit from these, many and use- 
ful friends. 
Badly placed. It corresponds to the opposite [of the preceding], then [it indicates] useless occupation in 
curious, arcane [activities], expenses and misfortunes, deceptions, falsifications, inconstant position in 
life26 due to various unexpected events, and liable [to experience] an uncertain demise. 
The Moon well-placed. A renowned name, wealth, happiness, honourable and lucrative missions, pos- 
sessions of watery lands, many offspring, happy marriages, high positions and also royal positions, highly 
placed friends in both spheres. 
Badly placed. It lessens, renders unfortunate, or even denies [altogether] the things mentioned above, 
and it gives a life of change, hardship, and liable [to experience] various unexpected events. 
Ages 
Saturn: Decrepitude extending to the end of life. 
Jupiter: Old age to the 68th year. 
Mars; Virility to the 56th year. 
The Sun; Youth to the 42nd year. 
Venus: Adolescence to the 21st year. 
25 This could mean 'from the manner of death' or 'from [the time of] death', i.e., 'after death'. 
The text seems to be falsely punctuated here. I have read falsificationes, vitae status inconstans as above, instead of 
falsificationes vitae, status inconstans 'falsicications of life, inconstant position'. 
165 

===== PAGE 171 =====

Mercury; Boyhood to the 14th year. 
The Moon: Infancy to the 4th year. 
Sicknesses27 
Saturn: Of the parts of the body which Saturn itself rules. Then quartan ague,28 scabies,29 leprosy,30 wast- 
ing diseases, melancholy,31 paralysis, the black jaundice,32 dropsy, arthritis, cancer, cough, asthma, tubercu- 
losis, and other serious catarrhs, deafness, toothache, lethargy,3 apoplexy, hernia. 
Jupiter: Of the parts over which it presides. Then chronic fever, variola, exanthema, angina, back pains,34 
inflammation of the liver, pleurisy, inflammation of the lungs,35 spasms; then sicknesses [arising] from 
winds, stench and inflammation, phlegm.36 
Mars; Of the parts over which it presides. Then acute, burning fevers, plague,37 yellow jaundice, convul- 
sions, hemorrhage, dysentery, carbuncles, anthrax, erysipelas, gangrene,38 wounds, especially in the face, 
tertian fever.39 
The Sun: Of the parts over which it presides. Then ephemeral fevers, spasm, fainting, catarrhs, sick- 
nesses of the eyes. 
Venus: Of the parts over which it presides. Then venereal disease, gonorrhea, sicknesses of the womb 
and the genitals, priapism, weaknesses of the belly arising from cold or moisture, and from that, diarrhea, in- 
flammation. 
27 Morin was a medical doctor, so his list of the diseases peculiar to each planet should be reasonably reliable. However, 
medical terminology has changed considerably in the three centuries since he wrote. Consequently, it is not always possible 
to equate the names of the diseases and conditions he mentions with their present day names. And of course the reader must 
bear in mind that the real cause of most diseases or conditions was unknown to Morin and his contemporaries. The medicine 
of his time classified diseases according to their symptoms, thereby confounding different ailments that displayed similar 
symptoms but arose from different causes, 
28 Probably the malariae form of malaria. (Most of the medical notes that follow are from the introduction to W.H.S. 
Jones's translation of Books XX-XXIII of Pliny's Natural History [Loeb Classical Library, Pliny, N.H., vol. 6]). 
29 In Latin, scabies, but this term is now narrowed to mean an itchy skin eruption caused by the itch insect. The older us- 
age was broader and referred to any ruddy hardening of the skin accompanied by itch. 
30 Not necessarily true leprosy, but any scaly condition of the skin resembling leprosy and accompanied by itch. 
31 Melancholy refers to a state of mental lassitude, which can have either a physical or psychological cause, it is one of 
the manifestations of chronic malaria in certain patients. 
32 Probably the name used for a long-standing case of yellow jaundice, in which the skin has taken on a dark green or dark 
brown hue. 
33 Probably coma is meant, rather than sluggishness, although, from an astrological point of view, Saturn would rule 
both. 
34 Disregarding the comma inpassiones, spinae dorsi. 
35 Latin peripneumonia, probably the disease we call pneumonia. 
36 In Morin's time, two hundred years before the adoption of the germ theory of disease, it was believed that various dis- 
eases were caused by winds or bad smells (from swamps, sewers and cesspools, or rotting garbage). Malaria (from the Ital- 
ian mala aria 'bad air'), a disease caused by a protozoal parasite, is a case in point, 
37 Probably the bubonic plague or "black death." But the term would have also have been applied to outbreaks of typhus 
or malignant malaria. 
38 In the Latin, ulcera phagedenica & serpentia. These are eruptions on the akin that are round and putrefying or 
streaked. 
39 An attack of chills and fever that recurs every other day, as in vivax malaria. 
166 

===== PAGE 172 =====

Mercury; Of the parts over which it presides. Then intermittent and recurrent fevers, madness, frenzy, 
delirium, insanity, epilepsy, convulsion, stammering, catarrhs, cough, abundance of spittle. 
The Moon: Of the parts over which it presides. Then quottidian fevers,40 epilepsy, apoplexy, silliness, 
catarrhs, colic, vomiting, fluxes from the belly, excessive menstruation, dropsy, stroke, phlegm. 
Death 
Saturn well-placed. A natural death from the sicknesses over which Saturn itself presides. 
Badly placed. Sudden or violent death from the collapse [of buildings], from a fall, a precipitous fall, 
drowning, shipwreck, suffocation, incarceration, hanging, lead shot; or with infamy, as by an executioner. 
Jupiter well-placed. A natural death from the sicknesses over which it presides. 
Badly placed. A violent death from drowning, from war, a duel, or by order of a prince. 
Mars well-placed. A natural death from the sicknesses over which it presides. 
Badly placed. A violent death from wounds [made] by iron, from fire, or catapults; from decapitation, 
mutilation of [bodily] members, being torn to pieces, strangulation, hanging, bites of animals, especially 
venemous ones, mangling or letting of blood by unskilled surgeons and physicians, [or] by being burnt up. 
The Sun well-placed. A natural death from the milder sicknesses over which it presides, such as fevers. 
Badly placed. Sudden death from plague, [or] stroke; or a violent [death] from a public order of a prince, 
or in battle, or by being burnt up. 
Venus well-placed. A natural death from the sicknesses over which it presides. 
Badly placed. A violent or premature death from poison, medicine, intoxication, an excess of intercourse 
or of women, or because of lust. 
Mercury well-placed. Death from those sicknesses over which it presides, and a natural one. 
Badly placed. An unexpected and very violent death, by murder, poison, magic, or on account of coun- 
terfeiting, perjury, forgery, or misapplication of the law. 
The Moon well-placed. A natural death from those sicknesses over which it presides. 
Badly placed. A violent death from the excessive [administration of] laxatives, from drowning, or mur- 
der, generally public or judicial. 
Particular Places on the Earth 
Saturn; Subterranean [places], pits, sewers, latrines, prisons, cemeteries, lonely [places], hermitages, de- 
serted [places]. 
Jupiter; High [places], and lofty churches, palaces, [places] especially intended for judicial purposes.41 
Mars; Foundries and machine shops, fortified places. 
The Sun: Courts of kings and princes, auditoriums, churches, places of cities.42 
Venus: Parks, greens, groves, gardens, banquet-houses, theatres, whorehouses. 
Mercury: Markets, academies, colleges. 
The Moon: Forests, seas, rivers, pools, and places dedicated to public gatherings. 
Days of the Week 
Saturn: The Sabbath. 
Jupiter: Thursday. 
40 Daily attacks of chills and fever. 
41 Or, less likely, 'High and lofty palaces of the Church, especially intended for judicial purposes.' 
42 That is, a large open area in a city—place in French, piazza in Italian, plaza in Spanish, sometimes square in English. 
167 

===== PAGE 173 =====

Mars: Tuesday. 
The Sun; The Lord's Day. 
Venus: Friday, 
Mercury: Wednesday. 
The Moon: Monday. 
168 

===== PAGE 174 =====

Book Fifteen 
Chapter 6. The Triplicities of the Planets, or the Trigons and the 
Trigon Rulers According to the Opinions of the Old {Astrologers]. 
Nothing in universal astrology has so disturbed my thinking as the fact that the majority of the old astrol- 
ogers, and especially the Arabs, the Greeks, and the Latins have judged all sublunar effects chiefly from the 
trigons and their rulers and not from the exaltations or their rulers, despite the fact that the Arabs, the 
Greeks, and the Latins disagree very much among themselves about the rulers of the trigons and thereby 
they have furnished those who hate astrology with no small opportunity to impugn and deride [it]. 
But, so that this doctrine may be more clearly set forth, assume from Book 14, Section 1, Chapter 5, that 
there arc four triplicities of signs in the zodiac, namely the fiery [triplicity] of Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius; 
the earthy of Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn; the airy of Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius; and the watery of Can- 
cer, Scorpio, and Pisces. And about this all astrologers agree; and the signs of the same trigon have among 
themselves the same nature and temperament, against Cardan's commentary on the Quadripartite, Book 1, 
Chapter 16, as we have shown in Book 14, Section 1, Chapter 5. 
But as for the rulers of the trigons, Ptolemy, Quadripartite, Book 1, Chapter 16, puts the Sun in charge of 
the fiery trigon by day and Jupiter by night; Mars in charge of the watery trigon both by day and night, with 
which, however, he associates the Moon by day and Venus by night; Saturn in charge of the airy trigon by 
day and Mercury by night; and finally Venus in charge of the earthy trigon by day and the Moon by night. 
Moreover Cardan holds in his commentary that Ptolemy took account of the sex and condition1 of the signs 
and planets in this distribution. 
But this [distribution] suffers from many defects. First, because it puts three rulers in charge of the wa- 
tery trigon, but only two in charge of the rest. Second, because in the watery trigon he excludes the Moon 
from the principal rulership although it is suitable by sex and condition, and in that same trigon it is the most 
powerful by domicile because it is the ruler of a cardinal sign; but it admits Mars, which is in its fall in Can- 
cer and contrary by sex according to Ptolemy himself, then too by condition, because the reason why Ptol- 
emy made it nocturnal by condition is evidently absurd [as we have shown] in Book 13, Section [2], Chapter 
2. 
Third, because in the fiery trigon it rejects Mars, which is more powerful in it than the others by domicile 
(since it is the one in charge of an equinoctial sign) and similar by sex and condition, then too it is more fiery 
than the others; and yet it would have this trigon to be mixed of Africus [the southwest wind], according to 
the domicile of Mars who stirs up the African winds, and western [winds], whereby it is self-contradictory. 
Fourth, because it would have the same Trigon be northerly on account of the southern sign Sagittarius 
which Jupiter rules, although Jupiter's rulership in this trigon is less than the rulership of the Sun or of Mars; 
for the Sun is allotted a domicile and an exaltation in this trigon, and Mars a domicile in a cardinal and pri- 
mary sign. Therefore it is established from what has been said above that this distribution is not consistent 
and is not natural but is only based upon a false foundation of condition and sex as is demonstrated by [its 
treatment of Mars. 
Moreover, the Arabs along with Julius Firmicus, John of Seville, and others of that same faction appoint 
three rulers in each trigon.2 Namely, in the fiery trigon the Sun by day and Jupiter by night with Saturn as a 
1 The term condition refers to the sect, i.e., nocturnal or diurnal. 
2 This is in fact, although unknown to Morin, the standard scheme of Greek astrology going back at least to Dorotheus of 
Sidon (first century). 
169 

===== PAGE 175 =====

partner both by day and by night, which is of course utterly absurd, since Saturn by nature is contrary to this 
trigon and is rendered very unfortunate in it. In the watery trigon Venus by day, Mars by night, and the 
Moon continuously, for the foundation of the Arabs is also similarity of sex and condition as above; and 
consequently in the case of Mars they follow Ptolemy's error, or he follows theirs. In the airy trigon Saturn 
by day, Mercury by night, and Jupiter continuously, which again is most absurd, since Jupiter in this trigon 
is allotted neither a domicile nor an exaltation, but on the contrary an exile. Finally, in the earthy trigon Ve- 
nus by day, the Moon by night, and Mars continuously on account of a false opinion of its condition, with 
Mercury excluded because of its sex and common condition (as they maintain), which is the strongest of all 
in this trigon. And Cardan, most absurdly of all puts five rulers in charge in his Book of the Judgments of 
Genitures, Chapter 27, namely Venus and Mercury by day, the Moon and Mars by night, and Saturn both by 
day and by night. But the celebrated astrologer Schoner dissents from the Arabs in the trigons somewhat 
only in the fiery [trigon] and the earthy, for in the fiery [trigon] he puts Mars in charge by day and by night, 
or continuously; and in the earthy [trigon] he puts the Moon in charge by day, Venus by night, and Saturn 
continuously. 
Besides which Ptolemy makes those planets diurnal rulers of the trigons which rule the fixed signs of the 
trigons because according to Cardan's commentary those signs are pure, sincere, and strongest. Schoner 
chose those which are exalted in the trigons. But the Arabs observe no order here, from which it is plain how 
much confusion there has been up to now among astrologers with regard to these trigon rulers, which I shall 
put below with their authors for the sake of easier reference. 
Ptolemy Arabs Schoner 
Day Night Day Night Partner Day Night Partner 
Ari Leo Sag Sun Jupiter Sun Jupiter Saturn Sun Jupiter Mars 
Can Sco Psc Moon Venus Mars Venus Mars Moon Venus Mars Moon 
Lib Aqu Gem Saturn Mercury Saturn Mercury Jupiter Saturn Mercury Jupiter 
Cap Tau Vir Venus Moon Venus Moon Mars Moon Venus Saturn 
Chapter 7. Trigons and Trigonocrators According to Our Opinion. 
First we may state something about this matter by means of which the errors introduced with regard to 
these rulers of the trigons may be averted: it seems to be necessary to suppose here from the practice or ob- 
servation of astrologers that if a great conjunction or eclipse of the Sun should happen in any sign of the zo- 
diac, a judgment would be made in either case principally from the nature and state of the planet which rules 
the place of the eclipse or the conjunction. And similarly if at any birth Aries is in the Ascendant or the 
Midheaven, judgment will be made about the accidents pertaining to the Ascendant or the Midheaven from 
the nature and state of Mars which is the ruler of Aries, but not primarily and per se from the nature and state 
of a planet which lacks rulership in these places, and much less from the nature and state of a planet which 
happens to be in exile in these same places. And the reason for this practice is because, as is more fully set 
forth elsewhere, the signs and their rulers are determined to the subjects of the houses in which they are and 
which they rule; and the effects of the signs are changed in accordance with the diverse state of their own 
rulers, which, consequently, it is necessary to take special notice of for judgment and not indiscriminately 
[to notice] just any planet—for example, Saturn for the effects of Aries, Leo, or Sagittarius as the Arabs do. 
Otherwise astrology would have no certain foundation, and consequently no certainty, which is inconsistent 
with the reality of its practice. 
Nevertheless, since not only do the signs of the same trigon agree with each other in nature, as we said 
170 

===== PAGE 176 =====

above against Cardan, but also the planets that are rulers of those signs agree with each other, either in im- 
portant things or in predominant nature, which indeed is present in them both elementally and influentially, 
or in less important things which are present only influentially; consequently, on account of this consensus 
whatever happens in any or through any sign pertains to some extent to the whole trigon of that sign and to 
the planets that are rulers of those signs; whence it occurs that both the rulers and the signs are moved to act 
or to exert an influence together. Nor indeed should anyone be surprised since in fact it seems more marvel- 
ous that on the same guitar or even on different musical instruments when one string is touched, another 
string untouched but in unison should also move by its own motion, but one not in unison should not move; 
of which effect the reason must be ascribed solely to the identity of the nature of the sound, as the Reverend 
Father Marin Mersenne proves in Book 4, Prop. 27 of his book on Harmonics? 
Moreover, that the planets that rule the signs of the same trigon harmonize among themselves by their 
important or less important nature is shown thus individually. For Mars, the Sun, and Jupiter rule the fiery 
signs Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius; of these, the Sun is totally of the nature of fire, but Mars and Jupiter are 
principally of the same nature, as was shown in Chapter 3 above; and consequently they harmonize in a fiery 
nature. The Moon, Mars, and Jupiter preside over the watery signs Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces; of these, the 
Moon is totally of the nature of water, but Mars and Jupiter are less principally of the same nature from the 
third chapter. Venus, Saturn, and Mercury rule the airy signs Libra, Aquarius, and Gemini; all of which 
[planets] are of an airy nature—Venus indeed principally, but Saturn and Mercury less principally. Finally, 
Saturn, Venus, and Mercury preside over the earthy signs Capricorn, Taurus, and Virgo, [these planets be- 
ing] of the same earthy nature among themselves; Saturn indeed and Mercury principally, and Venus less 
principally from the same third chapter, so that consequently in the signs of the zodiac constituting the tri- 
gons and in their rulers the greatest consensus is perceived, nor is it fictitious, but entirely natural, so that the 
matter itself neither should nor can be conceived otherwise without introducing confusion and falsehood 
throughout. 
And here it should be noted incidentally that Jupiter and Mars are so formally determined to a fiery na- 
ture and a watery one that they cannot be determined to an airy or earthy one by any formal or intrinsic rea- 
son; whence it is plain which planets are more powerful and should be carefully observed in the individual 
trigons and how absurdly Saturn was given command over the fiery trigon by the Arabs, and Venus over the 
watery, Jupiter over the airy, and the Moon over the earthy one. 
But, with these things already brought up and understood, now I say that three rulers ortrigonocrators are 
in charge of each trigon, namely those planets which preside by rulership over the individual signs of the 
trigon; and consequently the rulers ortrigonocrators of the fiery trigon are Mars, Sun, and Jupiter; of the wa- 
tery trigon, the Moon, Mars, and Jupiter, of the airy trigon, Venus, Saturn, and Mercury; and of the earthy 
trigon, Saturn, Venus, and Mercury, And the reasons are plain from what is said above, [so that] they need 
not be repeated here superfluously, since they have [already] been sufficiently explained by us. Therefore 
the whole difficulty consists of determining which of the planets in which trigon, other things being equal, 
should be preferred to the others for the rulership; or which will be the first ruler, which the second, and 
which the third, with which the Arabs are so much occupied; or which will be first by day, which by night, 
and which at both times but less principally according to Ptolemy and the others. 
Moreover this prerogative of rulership can be defined in three self-consistent ways. First, that the planet 
that is ruler of the cardinal sign as the principal sign of the whole trigon be first by day principally or primar- 
ily, the ruler of the fixed sign principally by night, and the ruler of the common sign by day and by night less 
3 Marin Mersenne (1588-1648) conducted a voluminous correspondence with the scientists of his day and studied the 
frequencies and velocity of sound. Apparently the reference is to his Preludes de I 'harmonie universelle (1634) or perhaps 
to his earlier work Traite de I 'harmonie universelle (1627). 
171 

===== PAGE 177 =====

principally or secondarily. And yet this order is plainly repugnant to the nature, sex, and condition of the lu- 
minaries, for the Sun's whole nature is fiery, masculine, and diurnal; consequently it would be absurd for it 
to be principally dominant at night and not by day in the fiery trigon, which is also masculine and diurnal. 
And the Moon by its whole nature is watery, feminine, and nocturnal; and consequently it would be absurd 
for it to be principally dominant by day and not by night. Therefore, this order, which would be attended by 
these absurdities, must be rejected. 
Second, that the planet that is ruler of the fixed sign should be first by day, the ruler of the movable or car- 
dinal sign by night, and the ruler of the common sign at both times, which method by reason of the diurnal 
mlership agrees with Ptolemy. But it seems to go wrong in that Jupiter and Mercury never rule principally 
but always and only less principally according to this order; still, it is more rational than all the preceding 
methods. 
Third, that a planet which is more powerful than the others in a trigon, namely by domicile and exaltation 
and is without debility may be put first by day primarily; and this one must be especially noticed in judging 
by triplicities; but the one which is ruler of the cardinal sign should be first by night and primarily; and fi- 
nally, the one that is left, by day and by night secondarily, as they are here appointed by us. Take special note 
that the diurnal trigonocrators are mutually contrary in their domiciles: namely, the Sun and Saturn mutu- 
ally, and Jupiter and Mercury mutually; it is the same with the nocturnal trigonocrators, namely Mars and 
Venus mutually, and the Moon and Saturn mutually. And the same with the partners, namely Jupiter and 
Mercury mutually, likewise Mars and Venus mutually, and in the same order.4 
Day Night Partner 
Eastern Ari Leo Sag Sun Mars Jupiter 
Northern Can Sco Pis Jupiter Moon Mars 
Western Lib Aqu Gem Saturn Venus Mercury 
Southern Cap Tau Vir Mercury Saturn Venus 
In which the Sun and the Moon especially are disposed in the best way, and the Moon much more reason- 
ably than by Ptolemy, the Arabs, or Schoner. 
in addition, moreover, the [planet] that is more powerful in the trigon always precedes the weaker, as is 
plain in the fiery trigon with Jupiter, which is only ruler of the common sign, and consequently it is put last 
as a partner of the diurnal and nocturnal rulers. Similarly in the watery trigon: even though Mars is ruler of 
the fixed sign, yet because it is in its fall in Cancer, it is put in the last place. In the airy trigon Mercury fol- 
lows the abovesaid rationale of Jupiter; and in the earthy trigon Venus follows the rationale of Mars; and 
there is no planet that does not ever rule principally either by day or by night. On which account this order, 
besides the fact that it is particularly conformable to nature and reason, also agrees particularly well with it- 
self; and to sum it up it is the most perfect of all [the schemes] that have been thought up, wherein in addition 
it is perceived that each trigonocrator is at least allotted a domicile in its own trigon, but not among the 
Arabs who most absurdly put Saturn in the fiery trigon by day and by night when it is in its exile and its fall 
in it. And consequently in the case of a planet staying in any sign in whose trigon it does not have a domicile, 
it may rightly be said to be peregrine, namely because it is peregrine in a trigon alien to its own nature and in 
which it lacks any dignity, except that it is exalted in the sign that it occupies, for there it cannot be said to be 
peregrine, for the rulers of the trigons are established by reason of domicile rather than exaltation; that is, the 
trigonocrators must agree with the trigons by nature, moreover they agree per se by reason of domicile as is 
4 That is, the Sun's domicile, Leo, is opposed to Satum'sdomicile, Aquarius; Jupiter's domiciles, Sagittarius and Pisces, 
are opposed to Mercury's domiciles, Gemini and Virgo, etc. 
172 

===== PAGE 178 =====

plain but not by reason of exaltation, otherwise Mars exalted in Capricorn would be of an earthy nature, 
which however is not inherent in it either principally or less principally; therefore in every case the 
trigonocrators are established optimally. 
Chapter 8. To Which Regions of the World the Trigons Pertain; and Consequently 
Which Regions of the World the Trigonocrators Principally Rule. 
Ptolemy and the Arabs differ about this matter too, for the former, in Quadripartite i. 16, attributes the fi- 
ery trigon especially to the North, on account of Jupiter, which rules the Austral sign Sagittarius, so that all 
the same it may take on a mixture of the West and the Aphric5 on account of Mars, which he nevertheless ex- 
pels from rulership of the trigon; from which it is sufficiently plain how poorly these things hang together. 
For he says that Jupiter stirs up the Boreal winds and Mars the west winds; from which it does not follow 
that the fiery trigon, in which it has less power, is northern. For this might perchance happen on account of 
another trigon in which it would be more powerful, such as the watery [trigon]. But consequently he attrib- 
utes the watery trigon to the West with a mixture of the South; the earthy [trigon] to Auster or the South, 
with a mixture of the East or Subsolanus; and the airy [trigon] to the East with a mixture of the Boreal. But in 
the case of the planets he puts Jupiter in charge of the North, Mars the West, Venus the South, and Saturn the 
East—on account of (he says) its familiarity with the Sun. But the Arabs want the fiery trigon to be Eastern, 
which they put Jupiter in charge of; the watery trigon they attribute to the North, which they put Mars in 
charge of; the airy trigon to the West, which they want Saturn to be in charge of; and the earthy trigon to the 
South, which they put Venus in charge of. But here again no logic can be discovered in the rulers of the tri- 
gons, nor is there any any consistent order. And in fact in the fiery triplicity, Jupiter is the ruler of the com- 
mon sign without any infortune;6 in the watery [trigon], Mars is the ruler of the fixed sign, with dejection or 
depression;7 in the airy [trigon], Saturn is the ruler of the fixed sign, with exaltation;8 and in the earthy 
[trigon], Venus is ruler of the fixed sign, with fall or depression.9 Nor can it be said that in this matter the 
Arabs have looked at the sex and condition of the trigons and planets, since Mars from its sex and condition 
disagrees with the watery trigon, as has already been said above. Therefore, since those things which are ar- 
ranged by nature are self-consistent and conformable to reason, it seems that it must be acknowledged that 
here too Ptolemy and the Arabs have wandered away from the truth; and those things that they have pre- 
dicted from the trigons and their rulers have happened either by chance or from other causes. Wherefore, in 
order that this difficulty may be resolved, nature itself must again be consulted. And it will indicate to us that 
the four cardinal signs, Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn, the primary [signs] of the trigons, are distrib- 
uted to the four regions or comers of the world by their own position: and in the case of Cancer in the North 
and Capricorn in the South there is no difficulty; but only in the case of Aries and Libra, which of them will 
claim the East for itself, since both of them begin at the equator or middle of the world. But the [direction of] 
rising, that is the nobler cardinal point is [rightly] due to Aries. [This] may be proved first because heat, the 
active quality, predominates in Aries; but in Libra humidity, the passive quality; and the active is nobler 
than the passive. Second, because Aries is subject to the rulership of a masculine planet [and] Libra to a fem- 
inine. Third, because Aries is in a nobler and commanding part of the world, namely the North, as has been 
5 The name of the southwest wind. 
6 He means that Jupiter is not debilitated in any sign of the triplicity. 
7 In Cancer, where it is in its fall. 
8 In Libra. 
9 In Virgo. 
173 

===== PAGE 179 =====

shown previously, while Libra is in an ignoble and obedient part. Fourth, because the rising is dry, as is 
Aries, and the setting is moist, as is Libra. From these causes, therefore, Aries belongs to the rising and Libra 
to the setting. Therefore, the fiery trigon will be Oriental, the watery Northern, the airy Occidental, and the 
earthy Southern; and this is in complete agreement with our division of the zodiac in Book 14, Sect. 5, 
Chapt. 5, where we have said that the active qualities, heat and cold, are dominant in the Boreal part of the 
world through Aries and Cancer, namely in the rising and the North, and the passive qualities in the Austral 
part through Libra and Capricorn in the setting and the South. And consequently the trigonocrators we have 
put above will preside over those same regions of the world in which their trigons fall. And hence the reason 
is now apparent why Jupiter excites the Boreal winds, namely because it is the principal and most powerful 
mler of the Boreal trigon, [just as] the Sun is of the Oriental, Mercury of the Southern, and Saturn of the Oc- 
cidental. 
You will object. The same part of the earth is simultaneously oriental and occidental, and there is no 
place on the terrestrial sphere that may be particularly assigned to the east or to the west. Therefore, the fiery 
trigon does not preside over the east or the airy trigon over the west. 
I reply that of course there is no part that is simply and absolutely eastern or western, but only when com- 
pared to another: as Germany is east of France, but west of Hungary; and it can also be said that Germany is 
north of Italy and south of Denmark. And therefore the divisions of the zodiac into two parts, north and 
south, then into 4 trigons for the 4 comers of the world, insofar as they are referred to the earth, are in fact 
universal, so that nothing can be concluded from them for particular places on the earth; for example, if 
there is an eclipse in the northern half of the zodiac, then it will primarily pertain to the peoples of the north, 
but to which particular [nation] cannot be specified from this alone. Similarly, if there is an eclipse in the fi- 
ery trigon, its effect will be allotted to those lands of the earth which will be eastern with respect to others; 
and it may perhaps signify eastern lands actively and western ones passively; as when the king of Spain sub- 
jugated America to the west of himself. But it cannot be specified from this alone which are the eastern 
places and which are the western ones. And since the East contains the space of the caelum or the earth from 
the rising of the Sun in the beginning of Cancer to the rising of the Sun in the beginning of Capricorn, if an 
eclipse should occur in Aries or Leo, it may in fact be said that the eastern part of the earth that is signified is 
in the north part, but this signification is still more general than to be able to designate the very location in 
particular. But the celestial figure erected for any particular location at [the time of] mid-eclipse, if it has the 
degree of the eclipse in the eastern part of the figure, will show by its eastern place that it signifies a part of 
the earth that is between its place in the figure and the ninetieth degree to the east; and the distance of the 
place of the eclipse from the meridian will more particularly designate the very place according to terrestrial 
longitude, but not according to latitude. And for this reason it will be necessary in addition to take into ac- 
count other things that are discussed in Book 20, Section 1, Chapters 4 and 5. And a more precise conjecture 
will have to be be elicited from them. But if the eclipse occurs in Sagittarius, an eastern place on earth will 
be signified in the southern part [of the earth]. And if the mler of the eclipse is in the fiery trigon, the signifi- 
cation of an eastern place will be more certain; [but] if in another trigon, the signification of the place will be 
a mixture of the two trigons, or [it will be] of several places, as, if the eclipse is in the fiery [trigon] and its 
ruler is in the watery [trigon], a place between the rising and the North will be signified; but if the ruler is in 
the airy trigon, which presides over the setting, since the same place cannot be both oriental and occidental 
with respect to the same [point], then of necessity at least two places will be signified, of which one will be 
to the east of the other. 
Furthermore, what was said above is understood for the disposition of the air, such as winds, as well as 
for mutations of kingdoms. Moreover, in individual genethliacal figures, if a fire sign is in the ninth house, it 
will signify a journey to the East; if an earth sign [is there, one] to the South; if another [element], to another 
region. But if the rulers of the signs are both in a water sign, then on the contrary the journey will mainly be 
174 

===== PAGE 180 =====

made to the North. And the reasoning is the same with the rest. And these things appear plainly in my 
geniture, where Sagittarius and Capricorn are in the ninth. And their rulers are conjoined in Pisces and the 
twelfth house. And of my own accord 1 have traveled in Provence to the South, Paris to the North, and in 
Hungary to the East with respect to Villeffanche, the place of my nativity; and this by my own decision, im- 
pelled by the stars. 
Chapter 9. Some Things about these Trigons that should be Especially Noted. 
Since we have defined the rulers and regions of the trigons above, now we may mention some things 
about them that are particularly worthy of note. 
First. The Sun is the most powerful of all in the fiery trigon, namely by house and exaltation. In the wa- 
tery [trigon], Jupiter [is the most powerful] for the same reason; in the airy [trigon], Saturn; and in the earthy 
[trigon]. Mercury. Also, since these planets experience no debility in these particular triplicities, for this rea- 
son special account must be taken of them in judging by triplicities. And these 4 planets are opposed when 
they are in their own houses, namely the Sun and Saturn to each other, and Jupiter and Mercury to each 
other; whence it is plain that these are most appropriate to great changes of sublunary things, but especially 
to changes in the air. Moreover, because Mars rules Aries and Scorpio, fire and water signs, and is exalted in 
the earth sign Capricorn, it has a strong propensity towards rains, chain lightning, thunder, thunderbolts, and 
thunderclaps, for fire, water, and earth concur in these things; in addition to the fact that Mars itself is princi- 
pally of a fiery nature and less principally of a watery one. 
Second. The northern equinoctial sign, namely Aries, belongs to the Sun and Mars, and this is especially 
fitting for the northern [peoples], who in empire, glory, and arms are superior to the southern [peoples]. The 
southern equinoctial belongs to Venus and Saturn, which agrees with the southern [peoples], who are lust- 
ful, ugly, indolent, and servile. The northern solstice belongs to the Moon and Jupiter, which precisely suits 
the northern peoples on account of their fame, religion, justice, and mutability, for which they are remark- 
able. But the southern [solstice belongs] to Saturn and Mars; from which [arise] impiety and moral deprav- 
ity, common among the southern peoples. And further, the northern peoples are principally affected and 
governed by the luminaries and then by Jupiter and Mars; but the southern peoples principally by Mercury 
and Saturn, and by Mars; which is to be understood as a generality and one particularly worthy of note. 
Third. The particular rulership of the trigonocrators ought to be defined in accordance with the following 
rules: 
1. The one that is in the trigon should be preferred to the one that is absent. 
2. The one that is above the earth should be preferred to the one that is under the earth. 
3. The diurnal one should be preferred by day if it is above the earth, and the nocturnal one by night. 
4. The diurnal one can be secondary or less principally [preferred] by night, and the nocturnal one by day, 
if they are above the earth. 
5. When two planets are conjoined in the same sign of their own trigon, the ruler of that sign should be 
preferred for the trigon rulership of that sign. 
6. In the case of an eclipse, or of any significator, the ruler of the sign of the eclipse or of the significator 
should be preferred, especially if it is above the earth and in its own trigon, and if it aspects its own place. 
7. The partner in the rulership, or the one which rules both by day and by night, will dominate primarily 
175 

===== PAGE 181 =====

when it is above the earth and the one which attains the domination only by day or by night is under the 
earth.10 
But of these rules, this one is unique and fundamental: that the stronger is always to be preferred to the 
weaker. Furthermore, whatever may be understood from the instruction of the Arabs about these 
trigonocrators, with regard to universal constitutions, and also with regard to the genethliacal nativities of 
men, for making judgments in a special way here and there, we shall explain in its own place.11 Here it may 
suffice to warn [the reader] in passing that it was entirely erroneous. 
Chapter 10. The Faces or Persons or Almugea of the Planets. 
This dignity of the planets is wrongly reckoned by Ptolemy, Quadripartite i. 20, and his commentators, 
among the essential [dignities], as will appear below. And it only concerns the five lesser planets, or those 
which are secondary with respect to the Sun and the Moon. 
A planet is said to have its own face or to play its part with respect to the Sun or the Moon when it is as far 
distant from the Sun, when vespertine or occidental to it, or from the Moon, when matutine [or oriental] to it, 
as the domicile of the planet following Leo (the domicile of the Sun) is distant from the beginning of Leo, or 
as the domicile of the planet preceding Cancer (the domicile of the Moon) is distant from the beginning of 
Cancer. For example, if Venus is occidental to the Sun and is distant from it by 60 degrees, which is the 
amount by which the beginnings of Leo and Libra are distant from each other, Venus is said to have its own 
face with respect to the Sun, or by the Arabs to be m Almugea12 with the Sun. But, if oriental and matutine to 
the Moon,13 it is distant from it by 60 degrees, which is the amount by which the beginnings of Taurus and 
Cancer are distant from each other, it is said to be in Ahnugea with the Moon. And the reasoning is the same 
with the rest. 
Having stated this, I say first; This is not an essential dignity. For the essential dignities of the planets are 
immutable, and they do not pass from one part of the zodiac to another, as was set forth above about the do- 
miciles, exaltations, and trigons. But this [particular] dignity can happen to a planet in different signs of the 
zodiac, as can simple orientality or occidentality with respect to the Sun and the Moon. Therefore it is not an 
essential [dignity]. 
I say second: By postulating this dignity I have destroyed the simple orientality of a planet with respect to 
the Sun, and yet Ptolemy himself and all the astrologers correctly attribute great powers to planets that are 
oriental to the Sun. For in the case of Mars in Almugea with the Sun, i.e., occidental to the Sun, and that 
same Mars oriental to the Sun, let Ptolemy say which prevails and which is inferior. Besides, why don't 
Ptolemy and the others make the Almugea of the Sun oriental and that of the Moon occidental? For this 
10 That is, if the day ruler is under the earth by day, but the "partner" is above the earth, then the "partner" predominates 
over the day ruler, and similarly for the night ruler. 
" Apparently a reference to Book 21, Section 2, Chapter 7, where he discusses the technique of using triplicity rulers 
given in Albohali's book, The Judgments of Nativities. Morin was of course unaware that this was a standard technique of 
classical Greek astrology. Despite Albohali's references to Dorotheus, the fact that the technique does not appear in the 
Tetrabiblos made it appear to Morin to be an Arabian invention. He would most likely have dismissed it anyway, but believ- 
ing that it was of Arabian origin made it easier for him to do so. 
12 The text has Almugara in error. The v/or&almugea is a Latin corruption of the Arabic al-muwajaha 'facing', a transla- 
tion of the Greek astrological term idioprosopia 'being in its proper face'. 
13 Reading Lunae 'to the Moon' rather than Luna 'the Moon'. 
176 

===== PAGE 182 =====

would have seemed more reasonable too from Ptolemy's teaching, which holds that planets oriental to the 
Sun and occidental to the Moon are fortified.14 
Finally, no mention or observation is made among astrologers of the strengths or effects of this dignity, 
and it is always with some aspect of a lesser planet with a luminary, with which aspect its own force really 
coincides, as is said in its own place; wherefore, I suspect that it has been taken from some figments of the 
Arabs.15 And therefore we here put an end to the essential dignities of the planets. 
Chapter 11. The Thrones, Seats, or Chariots of the Planets, 
This dignity is not simple, but mixed or composed of several essential dignities, for Ptolemy, in the place 
cited above, along with the rest of the astrologers, holds that a planet may be said to be in its own seat when it 
is in a sign in which it is allotted several essential dignities; and they think this correctly. For the [planet] that 
is strong in any sign from several essential dignities will obtain the highest authority; whence not unreason- 
ably when occupying that sign it is said to be situated in its own seat as it were. Moreover, since we admit 
only three essential dignities, viz. domicile, exaltation, and trigon, it is obvious when and where a planet 
may be said to be in its own chariot. And it may have such dignities in any place in the figure, such as the As- 
cendant, the Midheaven, the Sun's position, etc. For if the Ascendant is in Aries, the Sun in the Ascendant 
will be strong by exaltation and trigon at the same time. And so with the rest. 
Therefore, if the Sun is in Sagittarius, it will only be in its trigon; but if it is in Aries or Leo, it will be in its 
seat; because, besides the trigon, it has its domicile in Leo and its exaltation in Aries. If Mars is in Scorpio or 
Aries, it will be in its throne, and the reasoning is the same with the rest. But from this it is plain that any 
planet, when it is in its own domicile, is in its own throne, for it can be in its own trigon and not in its own do- 
micile or exaltation, as is the case with Saturn in Gemini, but, when it comes to its own domicile in Aquar- 
ius, it is certain that it ascends one degree in dignity, and it rides in its own chariot, namely because aside 
from its own domicile it [also] has the authority of rulership in the whole triplicity. Moreover, the pit [of a 
planet] is opposed to its throne, and it is a great debility for a planet, consisting [as it does] of several others. 
As if Mercury were in Pisces, where it experiences both its exile and its fall. 
Chapter 12. The Joys of the Planets. 
The joy of a planet is not an essential dignity of its own; it is neither simple nor mixed, and it only applies 
to Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, each of which is allotted two domiciles in the zodiac; of 
which that one of its domiciles is called its joy which corresponds more closely to its ruler, either by reason 
of its principal nature, or by reason of its sex, or by reason of its more tempered effect or influx. 
And in fact from the first mode Saturn's joy will be Capricorn; for this is a cold sign and one that corre- 
sponds to Saturn's principal nature, which is cold and dry (which [qualities] are inherent in it both elemen- 
tally and influentially, as has been shown elsewhere), [more] than Aquarius, a hot and humid sign; and so 
with the rest. By the second mode, the joy of Mars will be Aries and not Scorpio, as the astrologers falsely 
14 The reason is that the solar signs of the planets are those occidental to the Sun, while the lunar signs are oriental. The 
best that can be said for Almugea is that it provides a dignity for a planet whose position of orientality or occidentality to the 
Moon or Sun would otherwise not provide one. 
15 Not so, because as Morin has just said, it is mentioned by Ptolemy (Tetrabiblos, i. 23). And, unknown to Morin, it is 
also mentioned by Vettius Valens {Anthology, ii. 5, 10, 12, and 14; vii. 2), so it is of Greek origin. 
177 

===== PAGE 183 =====

suppose, for Mars is of the masculine sex, but Scorpio is feminine. Finally, by the third mode, Aquarius will 
be the joy of Saturn and Scorpio the joy of Mars, if to be sure the cold and dry influx of Saturn may be tem- 
pered more than in Capricorn; and the hot and dry influx of Mars may be tempered more in Scorpio than in 
Aries, But because the third mode is only something we have invented, it is not natural to the planets them- 
selves, which, like other physical causes, rejoice mostly in that place where they encounter the greatest si- 
militude of nature, in accordance with the principle that everything rejoices in something like itself. 
Therefore, the joy of a planet will be properly defined in accordance with the first two modes: where they 
agree in the same sign, that will be the greatest joy of its own ruler; elsewhere, nature will be preferred to 
sex. For these reasons, therefore, the joy of Saturn will be in Capricorn, that of Jupiter in Sagittarius, that of 
Mars in Aries, that of Venus in Libra, and that of Mercury in Virgo. 
Chapter 13, The Terms, Novems, Decans, Dodecatemories, etc. of the 
Planets in the Several Signs of the Zodiac. Then, the light, Smoky, Pitted, 
and Empty Degrees of the Signs, their Monomoiriai, etc. 
So far, whole signs of the zodiac have been distributed to the planets in accordance with their commonly 
received essential dignities; and there is then a division of the zodiac into 12 equal parts; then, superimposed 
upon these is a natural distribution, or at least one depending upon a natural foundation, as is seen in Books 
14 and 17. But for the terms, the novenas, the decans, etc., individual signs are subdivided into various parts, 
which are again distributed to individual planets for smaller superimposed dignities, which those who intro- 
duced them also hold to be essential [dignities]. But this is my opinion about these [subdivisions]. 
The Devil, the worst enemy of mankind, with the blindness of mind introduced into the human race by 
sin, little by little called those men away from the true recognition and worship of God and at length cast the 
greater part [of them] into the abyss of idolatry, so that they granted the honours due to God alone not only to 
the Sun, the Moon, and the rest of the celestial bodies, but also to the commonest animals, then to the dead 
works of their own hands, viz, to idols—indeed even to the demons themselves. And, lest man, by nature de- 
sirous of learning, might rise up again to the recognition of the true God by means of the sciences, either 
those accepted by tradition from Adam, or those cultivated by the vivacity and inclination of the intellect, 
and especially the celestial [sciences], which above all others provide confirmation of God and His infinite 
goodness, wisdom, and providence, the wicked demons, either by their own inspiration or by the depraved 
natural light of men subject to themselves, have polluted the celestial sciences among themselves with very 
many falsities, figments, and superstitions, so that the truth of these things, overwhelmed by falsehoods, is 
ineffective [in directing] them to the necessary knowledge of God; and among others, obscured by such 
false additions, it has fallen into contempt and derision by another most wicked design of the Devil. 
From such sources as this, then, there have come forth in astrology the terms, the novenas, the bright de- 
grees, the smoky degrees, the monomoiriai, etc., which are nothing other than mere symbols of the inepti- 
tude, stupidity, and insanity of men who were ignorant of the principles of this divine science, which 
[follies] the wiser astrologers have always disdained.16 Moreover, the haters of astrology have made [of 
them] a most useful tool for themselves [with which] to disparage, defame, and destroy the science. 
But what any of these dignities is, and by what reasoning the signs are subdivided for the individual plan- 
16 Perhaps a slap at Placidus, who says in Thesis 56 of his Primum Mobile "The dignity of the planets in the signs and 
their parts, which are called the bounds and terminations, have a real and natural foundation ... they are highly deserving of 
admiration." (John Cooper's translation) But in any case a distinct departure from most other astrological writers, including 
Ptolemy. 
178 

===== PAGE 184 =====

ets, it is not even pleasing to explain here; these madnesses are not worth our time; they may be left to the 
stupid and the ignorant. But I say this in general against their vanity: there is no sublunar accident concern- 
ing which from the abovesaid dignities there cannot be at the same time a true affirmation and negation: 
namely it can be true by the terms and false by the decans or the novenas, etc., on account of the various divi- 
sions of the signs and the distributions of the planets fighting against each other, as is seen in the authors. To 
this I add that these divisions of the signs and distributions of the planets repose on no natural foundation 
and are only fictitious. And this is plainly proved because the division of each sign into 30 degrees is not nat- 
ural but only assumed for convenience in calculation; and the dignities mentioned above are based upon the 
hypothesis of this division; therefore they are only fictitious. And this will be more clearly exposed by their 
tables of dignities. For among the Arabs Saturn has his terms in Taurus from the 21st degree to the 27th, his 
decan from the 20th to the 30th. his novena [from 0] to 6% degrees,17 and his dodecatemory from TA de- 
grees up to 10; and so with the other [planets]. 
Nevertheless, all the modem astrologers will still object that in fact the novenas, the decans, and all the 
rest ought to be thrown out of the true science of Astrology. But the terms are wrongly rejected by me, since 
they are approved of and retained by Ptolemy and all astrologers generally. 
But 1 reply that I not only marvel that the philosophers, especially the Christian philosophers, should em- 
ploy this nonsense of novenas, decans, monomoiriai,18 pitted degrees, etc., and have made them principles 
or bases of their judgments, thinking with Julius Firmicus Matemus that great powers are inherent in them 
and great mysteries not to be revealed to the common crowd,19 but also that they have so far retained the 
terms of the planets by unanimous consent, since their worthlessness can be proved very evidently from 
Ptolemy alone, even though he would not {Quadripartite, iii. 14) have the Anaereta kill when it comes to the 
Apheta in directions if it is posited in the term of a benefic planet; and thus he attributes no small force to 
these terms. 
For Ptolemy, Book 1, Chapters 18 and 19, explains three systems of terms or a threefold partition of the 
individual signs for these terms, i.e., an Egyptian, a Chaldean, and one from a certain old MS, the first two of 
which systems he rejected and followed [instead] the last, in which Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mer- 
cury are distributed among the individual signs divided into 5 parts. For example, in Aries Jupiter has ac- 
cording to the Egyptians the first 6 degrees of that sign, Venus the 6 following. Mercury the 8 following, 
Mars the 5 following, and Saturn the last 5. But in the Ptolemaic system Jupiter has the first 6, Venus the 8 
following, Mercury 7, Mars 5, and Saturn the last 4. And so with the [other] individual signs, having ex- 
cluded the Sun and the Moon. Moreover, Ptolemy offers some reasons for this diverse division and distribu- 
tion, both for the systems he discarded and for the one that he follows, but which in truth are mere figments 
as devoid of any natural basis as are the novenas, the decans, etc., which are similarly divided up and estab- 
lished, so that just as Cardan ingenuously confessed in his Commentary that he had found the greatest con- 
ftision in these various systems of terms, with which he was not content, he wanted too to think up a method 
of his own for himself in which each sign is distributed to the 7 planets, and he gave both his reasons for it 
and a table in his Book on the Judgments of Genitures.20 And I once, adding figments to figments, thought 
17 The ninths were assigned rulers by equating them to the signs of me zodiac beginning with Aries. Their planetary rul- 
ers are then the planets ruling the signs. The first two ninths of Taurus are equated to Capricorn and Aquarius; hence their 
ruler is Saturn. See the table in John of Seville, Epitome of AH Astrology (Nttmberg; Montanus and Neuber, 1548), between 
Chapts. 12 and 13. 
1 8 • Single degree rulers. See, for example, the table in Paul of Alexandria, Introduction to Astrology, Chapter 33. 
19 Mathesis, iv. 22 
20 Opera Omnia, vol. 5, pp. 455-456 (the table on p. 456). 
179 

===== PAGE 185 =====

up another system of terms, with reasons even more plausible than those of Ptolemy and Cardan; but what 
are these other than outstanding foolishness. And so both the terms and the rest of the things mentioned 
above may be cast out of our astrology. 
And this reason is brought forward by us as to why the terms were employed hitherto by Ptolemy and the 
rest of the astrologers. Of course Ptolemy, Quadripartite, Book 4, Chapter 11, wanted only 5 significators to 
be directed in a genethliacal figure for all the native's accidents, viz. the Ascendant for health and travel, the 
Part of Fortune for wealth, the Moon for the mind, habits, and association, the Sun for dignity and fame, and 
the Midheaven for the rest of the actions of life and the procreation of children. And since the bodies and the 
aspects of the planets coming to these significators would not satisfy all the accidents, either on account of 
the paucity of significators or the lack of promittors coming to them, they supposed that besides the bodies 
and the aspects there were still other promittors in the nature of things, and they could conceive of no others 
than these terms which they themselves had invented, and by the introduction of which they were rarely 
lacking promittors from the occourse of which in directions some reason might be had for the [observed] ef- 
fects or the accidents of the native. And it is very common in Junctinus and the rest of the astrologers for a 
man to die even a violent death from the direction of the Ascendant or the aphetic luminary to the term of 
Saturn or Mars or to attain a great dignity from the direction of the Sun to the terra of Jupiter or Venus, etc. 
And since it seems to me very absurd to ascribe such effects to such meager and controversial causes, which 
had in the same way been imputed to novenas, decans, and dodecatemories, only by a careful examination 
of the directions and by unceasing effort did I discover that those terms are fictitious causes; and not only the 
significators that are directed, but also their aspects must be multiplied from the nature of the thing, and thus 
the true causes of all the native's accidents are ascertained, but of these [I shall speak] more fully in their 
own place, namely when it is a question of directions.21 And what has been said hitherto about the essential 
dignities and debilities of the planets should suffice; and it may be noted that every planet that is posited out- 
side of its own domicile, exaltation, or triplicity is said by us to be peregrine, and peregrinity also is twofold: 
a simple kind without any essential debility, as the Sun in Capricorn; and another mixed with an essential 
debility, as the Sun in Aquarius, and this latter kind is worse. 
21 In Book 22. 
180 

===== PAGE 186 =====

Book Seventeen 
Section 1 
Chapter 3. The Special Division of the whole Caelum into Twelve 
Astrological Houses with respect to the Person being Bom. 
Truly, since some astrologer of the foremost wisdom, whoever he was, older than the rest that followed 
him, understood that the caelum was made and was movable for the sake of man rather than for the sake of 
other living or inanimate things, and that many things were made to suit man himself on account of his more 
divine nature—things that would hardly be suitable for more ignoble natures; therefore, for the sake of man 
himself he reasonably decreed that the whole circuit of the caelum should be divided into twelve parts, 
which he called houses, by great circles brought down from some point of the caelum and cutting another 
great circle of the caelum into that many equal parts, as will be explained in its own place. And, placing the 
first house in the east, he handed down to posterity that it rules the life of man and that from it conjectural 
knowledge can be had and judgment made about his life; and that the second house, which follows next ac- 
cording to the motion of the planets, rules over wealth; the third, brothers; the fourth, parents; and so on with 
the rest. And in the house diagram below these are arranged in order and named.1 
And this division of the caelum and this designation of the houses has endured uncorrupted from him 
down to us, although Ptolemy and the others who followed him may seem to differ from that old tradition 
and to pervert the division in many places, as when they make their principal judgment about children not 
from the 5th house but from the one opposite it, the 11th, and about servants and animals not from the 6th 
but from the one opposite it, the 12th—which apparent error we shall correct below, notwithstanding the di- 
vision of the caelum instituted variously by different astrologers. 
[The lower half of p. 385 of the Astrologia Gallica contains a large square chart. Rather than reproduce it 
in small type on this page, I shall describe its contents.] 
Outside the chart, Morin places two catchwords at each angle: (Ascendant) Birth, Life; (Midheaven) 
Vigor, Action; (Descendant) Decline, Marriage; and (Imum Caeli) Suffering, Burial. 
The house rulerships are as follows: 
1. Life, temperament, state of health, moral nature, mental qualities. 
2. Wealth, gold, goods of the acquired estate. 
3. Brothers, relations. 
4. Parents, successions. 
5. Children, bodily pleasures. 
6. Servants, subordinates, domestic animals. 
7. Marriage, open enemies, lawsuits. 
8. Death. 
9. Religion, journeys. 
10. Action, profession, dignity, fame. 
11. Friends. 
12. Sickness, imprisonment, exile, secret enemies, hardships. 
[The chapter continues with philosophical arguments and answers to critics.] 
11 have appended a table rather than the diagram mentioned. 
181 

===== PAGE 187 =====

Chapter 6. Things to be Particularly Noted about the Significations of the Houses. 
... For example, almost all astrologers, in company with Ptolemy, have supposed that sickness belongs 
to the 6th house per se, although it [actually] belongs to the 12th house per se, which is the essential house of 
bodily afflictions and especially of sickness in accordance with the division mentioned above, and the 6th 
house per se is that of servants and animals; but besides the essential signification of the houses, they have 
this property in addition: that each of them signifies the same thing, only weaker, as the one that it opposes, 
on account of that opposition and because both of them are included in the same half circles that result from 
the division. And so the 6th house, by accident or secondarily, signifies sickness, imprisonment, and secret 
enemies by reason of the opposition; and in turn the 12 th house carries the signification of servants and ani- 
mals. Similarly, the 7th will, by accident, be the significator of sickness and death because it is opposed to 
the 1 st, which is the significator of health and life per se; and in turn by accident it will signify marriage. And 
for the same reason astrologers judge from time to time about religion from the 3rd, about wealth from the 
8th, about the parents—and especially about the mother—from the 1 Oth, about children from the 11th, al- 
though they would not think these houses to be the genuine cause of the truth of their judgments, as one can 
infer from their books, and especially from Ptolemy; but they are of course deceived in this, because the es- 
sential signification of each house has not become known to them, since it can only become known through 
the higher Cabbala, although Hermes, convinced by experience, offers something similar in Aphorism 42,2 
when he says that the ruler of the 2nd will have the same force for impediting as the ruler of the 8th, and sim- 
ilarly that the ruler of the 6th will have the same force as the ruler of the 12th. But they err seriously who 
judge about things neither from their proper houses nor from the opposite houses, but rather from those that 
are completely alien to the signification, such as when someone wants to judge about wealth or brothers or 
the spouse or children from the 11th without any more valid reason than because Jupiter, Mercury, the 
Moon, or Venus is in the 11th. But here in addition one detects the error of Ptolemy and his following, who 
judge about individual matters almost entirely from the angles of the figure and the luminaries, and from the 
relationship of the other planets to the angles and the luminaries. For the angle of the 1 st house, for example, 
is the angle of life, but it is the native's life in three ways—in itself, in God, and in his own children, and yet 
they deny that judgment can be rendered about all of these from the angle of the 1 st house alone. And so with 
the rest of the angles. 
2 Hermes, Centiloquy, Aph. 42. The Lord of the second house has the same strength in hurting as the Lord of the eighth; 
the Lord of the sixth the same with the Lord of the twelfth.—Translated by Henry Coley in his Clavis Astrologiae Elimata 
(London; Tooke & Sawbridge, 1676. 2nd ed.), p. 333. 
182 

===== PAGE 188 =====

Book Eighteen 
Chapter 7. The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets arising from their 
Reception in the Signs of the Zodiac. 
Every planet outside of its own domicile is said to be received by another, namely by domicile, exalta- 
tion, or triplicity. As, if Jupiter is in Libra, it will be said to be received by domicile by Venus, by exaltation 
by Saturn, and by triplicity by Venus, Saturn, and Mercury. Moreover, there is reception with presence and 
with absence. With presence is when the receiving planet is in the same sign with the received planet, as if 
Venus is in Libra with Jupiter. With absence is when the receiving and the received planet are in different 
signs. In either case it is very important to notice whether the planet is received by a friend or by an enemy; 
then whether it is received in signs concordant with itself by exaltation or by triplicity, or whether it is re- 
ceived in contrary signs. For if the Moon in Cancer receives Jupiter, a friend to herself and exalted in Can- 
cer, it will be an excellent and most efficacious reception with presence. But if Mars in Scorpio receives 
Venus, the reception will be completely bad, and it will greatly distort the influence of Venus. 
Moreover, a reception with absence is either mutual or not mutual. A mutual reception is if Jupiter re- 
ceives Venus in any other dignities, and she receives him reciprocally, which can happen in two ways. First, 
if they receive each other mutually in the same dignities, as both by domicile or both by exaltation. Just as, if 
Jupiter is in Libra and Venus is in Sagittarius. And this reception is the strongest per se for doing good or do- 
ing evil. And indeed for doing good if neither planet is made unfortunate in the sign that it occupies by being 
in its exile or fall, but on the contrary the other one of the two is made fortunate by being in its domicile or 
exaltation; as, if Mars is in Leo, and the Sun in Aries where it is exalted; and consequently in such a recep- 
tion Mars is very powerful; or, if the Moon is in Pisces, and Jupiter is in Cancer where it is also exalted. But 
for doing evil, if either of the planets is made unfortunate in the sign that it occupies by being in its exile or 
fall, as, if the Sun is in Aquarius and Saturn in Leo, or the Sun in Libra and Saturn in Aries, or Mars in Can- 
cer and Jupiter in Capricorn. From which mutual [configurations] of extreme strength, others of medium 
strength easily become known. Namely, those in which either neither planet is made fortunate or unfortu- 
nate in the sign that it occupies, or else only one of the two. 
But a second kind of mutual reception occurs if the planets receive each other in dissimilar dignities, as, 
if Jupiter receives Venus by domicile, but she receives him by exaltation or triplicity. And this reception is 
much weaker than the first. And it will also be benefic or malefic accordingly as one of the received planets 
or the other of them is favourably or unfavourably posited by reason of domicile or exaltation or their oppo- 
sites. 
Finally, every reception with absence is either with a benefic or a malefic aspect of the receiving planets 
or with none. And with a benefic, it is benefic; with a malefic, it is malefic; with none, it is neither. On which 
account, with the Sun posited in Aries and Mars in Leo, or with the Moon in Pisces and Jupiter in Cancer, 
with a trine aspect [in each case] the reception will be excellent and benefic. But with the Sun posited in 
Aquarius and Saturn in Leo, or with Mars in Cancer and Jupiter in Capricorn, with an opposite aspect the re- 
ception will be unfortunate and very bad. 
It could be said that Saturn in Leo opposed to the Sun in Aquarius, combines its [influence] with the Sun 
by opposition with respect to us, and for this reason since it is in Leo the Sun's state is less unfortunate than 
if Saturn had been in Cancer and the Sun in Capricorn. And consequently, that opposition with mutual re- 
ception by domicile lessens the evil of the opposition; and the same reasoning applies to the opposition of 
the Sun in Libra and Saturn in Aries, and to the square of Mars in Cancer and the Moon in Aries. But it could 
183 

===== PAGE 189 =====

be said in rejoinder that Saturn does not act on the Sun but on us; and the influence on Saturn from Leo is the 
worst with regard to us, just as is the influence upon the Sun from Aquarius, when moreover to these is 
added the opposition of the Sun and Saturn, which is also evil with regard to us, the malignity of that influ- 
ence is more increased than decreased. Moreover, when Mercury is posited in Pisces and Jupiter in Gemini 
with a square aspect, that reception will be of medium strength and misfortune; but when Mars is posited in 
Taurus and the Moon in Capricorn with a trine aspect, the reception will be of medium strength and good 
fortune. From which examples it is now easy to render judgment on the rest, and to distinguish which of the 
receiving planets may be stronger for doing good or doing evil. And in fact a considerable part of the science 
of [astrological] judgments depends upon these [combinations]. 
Someone may say that these things are contrary to the doctrine of the old [astrologers], those namely who 
maintain that every mutual reception—at least by domicile or exaltation—is benefic; and he will contend 
that this is proved in various genitures, as in that of the most illustrious Franqois de Bonne, Constable of 
France,1 who had Mars in Taurus ruler of the Sun, and Venus in Aries ruler of the Part of Fortune. But he was 
always most fortunate in his wars, and step by step he achieved the highest honour in the army, which none 
of the common astrologers would fail to refer to the mutual reception of Venus and Mars by domicile, al- 
though both planets were in exile and without any aspect of the ruler. 
But nevertheless, the doctrine we have proposed is true, and the common opinion is false; nor does the 
proposed example stand in the way. For the good fortune of that man in the wars and his promotion to the 
highest dignity had causes other than the mutual reception of Venus and Mars. 
For in the first place. Mercury ruler of the Ascendant was in Taurus, besieged by Venus and Mars, which 
signified a fortunate propensity for arms, especially since Mars ruled the 7th by exaltation. The 7th house, 
which has 30 Sagittarius on the cusp, is empty and is largely occupied by the sign Capricorn, which is the 
exaltation of Mars. [Hence it indicated] both singular prudence in arms and also military honours because of 
Mars's mlership of the Sun. Second, the Sun was exalted in the 11th and conjunct Venus, which indicated 
kings as friends and benefactors. Third, the Moon ruler of the 1 st2 was in the 10th under the mlership of Jupi- 
ter, which was also the ruler of the cusp of the 7th, which is [the house] of wars, mutually and almost 
partilely applying to the trine of Saturn ruler of the 7th5 in the domicile of Mars, which signified that the na- 
tive would be raised to the highest military honours because of wars, and that there would be a fortunate out- 
come of wars undertaken because Jupiter was itself the ruler of the 7th and the 10th in the domicile of and in 
partile opposition to Venus, which rules the Midheaven by exaltation and is conjoined to the Sun exalted in 
the 11th. And these are the genuine, powerful, and numerous causes of the outstanding good fortune that 
this native attained. Moreover, that mutual reception of Venus and Mars rulers of the 5th and the 11 th in the 
11 th with Mercury ruler of the Ascendant and their oppositions to Saturn and Jupiter mlers of the 7th, which 
is also [the house] of the spouse, very powerfully signified a propensity to venereal pleasures and marriages 
to persons of lower rank because each planet is in its own exile, and Jupiter and Saturn are also in domiciles 
of Venus and Mars [respectively] in the 5th house; and these affairs were open and well-known on account 
of the Sun's being with Venus and in opposition to Jupiter. And so, such mutual receptions are unfavourable 
and must be distinguished from the causes of fortunate things, with which they may occasionally be found 
mixed together, lest there be attributed to them some fortunate occurrence which is not from them. 
And the truth of the doctrine we have proposed will be proved from very many genitures. For I know 
1 He was bora at Saint-Bonnet, Dauphine (now in the Dept. of Hautes-AIpes) I April 1543 with 30 Gemini rising and be- 
came the Duke of Lesdiguieres in 1611 and Constable of France in 1622. 
2 The I st house, which has 30 Gemini on the cusp, is empty and is largely occupied by the sign Cancer, hence, Morin as- 
signs the Moon as its principal ruler. 
3 Again, because the 7th house is largely occupied by the sign Capricorn. 
184 

===== PAGE 190 =====

three noble women; and in the geniture of the first of them the Sun and the Moon were rulers of the 1st, and 
the Moon was in Taurus with Mars in the 11th, and the Sun was in Scorpio with Venus in the 5th.4 It can 
scarcely be put into words how greatly she was inflamed with a desire for luxury from that mutual reception 
of Venus and Mars in signs where each planet is in exile, and in those houses of the figure, and with the lu- 
minaries dominant as rulers of the 1st. In the geniture of the second, Jupiter was in the 7th and in Gemini, 
and Mercury was in the 3rd and in Pisces.5 She was twice married unhappily and had lawsuits with relatives. 
In the geniture of the third, Venus was the ruler of the Ascendant in Aries and in the 12th, and Mars ruler of 
the 12th in Taurus and in the 1 st, which configuration occasioned many sicknesses to her. But who will now 
say that these [mutual] receptions were beneficial? 
Again, in the nativity of the very noble Joan. De Giam D. De Rispe,6 Venus ruler of the Midheaven was 
in Aries with the Sun ruler of the Ascendant, and Mars was in Taurus in sextile with the Moon and Jupiter 
and also in partile trine with Saturn ruler of the 7th, which is [the house] of wars, and therefore he should 
have been fortunate in martial endeavours and actions according to the common astrology; when, in fact, he 
was unfortunate in war and finally perished miserably in a duel, wounded in the head by a bullet, from 
which he died on the spot. For Mars was with Caput Algol7 partilely square the Ascendant, and Saturn ruler 
of the 7th was opposed to the Moon and square the Sun ruler of the Ascendant, nor did the things mentioned 
above help,8 nor even Jupiter in Pisces in the 8th. [And we may add] to these that in the nativity of Mr. Des 
Hayes9 Jupiter was in the 7th degree of Gemini in the 8th with Mars ruler of the Ascendant, and Mercury 
was in Pisces and the 4th, and the Moon was in the 7th with the Head of Medusa and the Pleiades10 square 
the Sun ruler of the 10th in exile in the 4th. And this man had his head struck off by order of the King; nor did 
the mutual reception of Mercury and Jupiter in the 8th help, because both of them were in exile and there 
was a mutual square between them. 
There is no need here for further examples. They occur elsewhere, being noted passim. Moreover, the 
logic of the doctrine we have proposed is [as follows]: since Venus in Aries is a bad influence, and Mars in 
Taurus is also bad, or Venus in Scorpio and Mars in Taurus also with an opposition aspect, therefore the to- 
tal influence that is combined from these cannot be favourable to the native receiving it. It could perhaps be 
said that this is the same as if Mars were in Aries or Scorpio and Venus in Taurus, but this is false. For, from 
the principles of astrology, which are fully supported by experience, Venus in Taurus effects one thing, and 
Venus in Aries or Scorpio effects another; and similarly Mars; and also the direction of the Midheaven to 
Venus in Taurus effects one thing, and to Venus in Scorpio another, for the latter direction will scarcely 
bring about anything good, but the former will bring about much good, as is consistent with experiences. 
Therefore, in the case of mutual receptions, what is said above must be carefully noted. 
4 An unidentified lady, perhaps bom on 16 November 1595. 
5 This lady was bom in one of the years 1586, 1598, 1610, or 1622. 
6 Unknown to the translator. But from the horoscope details given next his birth can be dated to 4 April 1607 at about 
1:30 PM. 
1 The star Algol or Beta Persei at about 20o42' Taurus. 
8 That is, the mutual reception of Venus and Mars. 
9 Louis des Hayes, who is mentioned again in Book 21, Section 2, Chapter 2, was executed in 1642 for plotting against 
Cardinal Richelieu. From the horoscope elements given, his birth can be dated to 12 February 1598 at about 11:30 PM. 
10 The Head of Medusa is another name for Algol, which was at 20o34' Taurus. Alcyone or Eta Tauri, the brightest star 
of the Pleiades, was at 24023' Taurus. 
185 

===== PAGE 191 =====

Book Twenty 
Section 3 
The Various Universal Modes by which the Celestial 
Bodies act on Sublunar Things 
Chapter 7, The Action of the Constellations and of the Fixed (Sfarsj on these Inferior 
Things; and the Dependence in Action of some of these on the Twelfths and the Planets. 
In the preceding chapter it was said that the firmament does not determine the caelum influentially per se 
or through its own substance, but only by that first and simple determination by which any physical thing 
that acts determines the first physical cause; nor does it also act influentially on sublunar things, but only 
with a simple virtue of its own that is formal to itself and unknown to us. But about the firmament, insofar as 
it is filled with constellations and fixed [stars], plainly the contrary will have to be asserted. 
As a matter of fact, through a constellation and a fixed [star] it influentially determines the particular part 
of the primum mobile with respect to which that constellation or fixed [star] is subjected to the earth. Not in- 
deed with a perpetual determination like that which was made by the Sun at the beginning of the world, but 
temporary and transitory, like that which is made by the transits of planets under the signs—i.e., it deter- 
mines transitorily its part [of the caelum] to acting in accordance with the force and influence of that constel- 
lation or fixed [star]; and it does not act on inferior things in accordance with the influence of these; and this 
is proved by the most evident and frequent experience, not only in universal charts or configurations of the 
caelum in annual revolutions of the world1 and lunations, but especially in particular figures of nativities, 
where it is very clear, so that to have any doubt about it would be to testify to one's own ignorant stupidity. 
For it is evident that the point of the caelum under which a fixed [star] was at the time of a geniture retains 
the force and nature of that fixed [star] with respect to the native as long as he lives, even if he should live a 
thousand years. And for that reason the old astrologers, also educated by experience, were quite right in 
their judgments of the principal fixed [stars], which they call royal [stars], observing the fixed [stars] in the 
Ascendant or posited in the 1 st house, or coascending with the ruler of the Ascendant at the place of the 
genethliacal figure, or being in the same circle of position with that ruler, for life, mental qualities, and the 
moral nature. And observing the fixed [stars] posited in the Midheaven or the 11 th house, or culminating 
with the ruler of the Midheaven, or allotted the same circle of position with that ruler, for actions and digni- 
ties; and thus with the other houses. And similarly in directions they observe the fixed [stars] located in the 
same circle of position with a significator, to which when the promittor comes by direction it also comes to 
the star, whence a greater effect follows than from the significator alone, then those that are borne with the 
promittor to the circle of position of the significator itself; and from which they properly judge. Indeed, they 
will perceive that the directions of significators to the principal fixed [stars] seen by themselves, then the 
transits of the former over these, yield notable effects. Others, too, inspect the principal fixed [stars] that 
have a strong position with respect to the Sun both in universal and particular configurations, in accordance 
with Ptolemy's nine modes, which we have reduced to three, viz. when the Sun and a star are on the circle of 
the horizon, or together on the meridian, or when one of these stars is on the horizon, and another is on the 
meridian, or on the contrary, provided that a star before sunrise or after its setting is visible in its rising, set- 
ting, or in the meridian circle, for if it is not seen thus because of hindrance from the solar rays, it will be of 
much less virtue. And these things must especially be understood about the fixed [stars] that are located in 
the zodiac, with which the planets can be conjoined corporally, then of those which are directly overhead in 
1 In modem terms, Aries Ingresses, 
187 

===== PAGE 192 =====

the region of the chart; those to be sure which are more efficacious than the rest, especially when those fixed 
[stars] occupy the angles of the chart, from which in directing any [such] angle as a significator it is greatly 
strengthened, i.e., it is allotted a greater effect, whether for good or evil, according as the star was benefic or 
malefic, as will be explained more fully in its own place and confirmed with examples. 
Furthermore, it must be noted that of the fixed stars in the firmament some are arranged in asterisms or 
figures, which are commonly called constellations, and some of these figures are very distinct, so that they 
naturally seem to be or to comprise one particular nature, which is perceived in contrast with the others: 
[such as] the head of starry Aries, the head of Taurus, the Pleiades, Gemini, Leo, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Ursa 
Major and Minor, Cassiopeia, Perseus, Corona Borealis, Lyra, Cygnus, Delphinus, Aquila, Orion, Canis 
Major, Corona Australis, Grus, Triangulum Australe, Crux, and others, which at the first glance arrest the 
eyes and the mind, and divide the firmament as it were into regions different in nature and more notable than 
the rest, in which it is undeniable that there is a special virtue. But the rest are more confused and only in- 
vented by the judgment of men in contrast with the others. They are: Cancer, Virgo, Capricorn, Aquarius, 
Pisces, Cepheus, Hercules, Coma Berenices, Balaena, Lupus, and others, in which perhaps many natural 
figures have been combined into one artificial figure. In addition to which, however, many stars are still 
scattered here and there in the sky, which have not been able to be collected conveniently into figures by the 
imagination of men, and for that reason they have called these stars unformed.2 
Besides, Astrology has suffered no small damage from the fact that the old astrologers confused the con- 
stellations of the zodiac with the twelfths of the zodiac,3 supposing that there is no distinction between them, 
on account of the to them unknown primum mobile, under which the fixed [stars] move, thus they ought to 
be [so] called only with respect to their own caelum; but with respect to the primum mobile [they ought to be 
called] erratic, just like the planets. And they have judged about astrological effects from these constella- 
tions, which they have put together from the fixed [stars] scattered along the zodiac, when the first star of 
Aries was situated in the point of the vernal equinox, which for that reason has been called down to the pres- 
ent time the Beginning of Aries. [And this occurred] about 400 years before the birth of Our Lord Jesus 
Christ, which Gallissard's Chronology? along with that of the Hebrews, Bede, Longomontanus, Kepler, 
and other astronomers suppose to have occurred around the year A.M. 3964,5 at which time lived 
Herodotus, Socrates, Anaxagoras, Melissus, Plato, Aristotle, and other men of great name, who brooded 
over the founding of the sciences and handing them down to posterity, and at which time also I think the sci- 
2 A term used by Hipparchus and his successors to designate stars that lay between the constellations and did not belong 
to any of them. Modem astronomers have eliminated this situation by expanding the constellations to fill all the available 
space, so that every star is in some constellation. 
3 That is, the signs or 30-degree sections of the tropical zodiac. Morin calls them dodecatemoria, but we cannot call 
them dodecatemories in English because that word is used for the twelfths of the signs. 
4 Pierre Gallissart (fl. 1577), a Dominican of the Convent of Aries, was a schoolmaster and writer on religious subjects. 
5 That is, these chronologists put the creation of the world 3964 years before the birth of Jesus, which Morin assigns to 
25 December 0 Astronomical (or 1 B.C. according to the usual historical reckoning). See Book 2, Chapters 3 (translated 
above) and 4, where Morin rehearses the opinions of the principal authorities known to his time. He himself estimates the 
creation of the world to have taken place 3968 years before the birth of Christ, since according to Tycho Brahe's determina- 
tion of the motion of the solar apogee (adopted by Kepler for The Rudolphine Tables) the apogee would have been at 0 Aries 
at that time, and Morin evidently felt that God would not have created the world and set the astronomical machine in motion 
with the apogee at some odd location. 
It is interesting to note that a century and a half later the Marquis de La Place (1749-1827) in his Mecanique Celeste 
Vl.x. Art. 31 (Bowditch's translation, vol. 3. p. 266) made a similar observation: the time when the longitude of the Sun's 
apogee, countedfrom the moveable equinox, was nothing, precedes, about sixty-nine years, the epoch usually assumedfor 
the creation of the world [the year 4004 B.C., in this case], (Laplace's value of the motion of the solar apogee was slightly 
smaller than Tycho's.) 
188 

===== PAGE 193 =====

ence of astrology that has come down to us was founded. Moreover, the proper natures of the twelfths have 
been attributed to these constellations by these astronomers, and so they have confused the powers of these 
[constellations] as well as of those [twelfths] in turn; and although a little after, Tymocharis, and following 
him, Hipparchus, who flourished around 300 years before Christ,6 and finally Ptolemy, strenuous observers 
of the fixed [stars], detected the abovesaid error, having discovered the motion of the fixed [stars] in the fol- 
lowing direction,7 from which they distinguished the starry signs feotn the twelfths,8 compelled neverthe- 
less by nature to concede 30 degrees of the zodiac to each individual twelfth, although the starry signs were 
very unequal in this respect,9 they teen established the twelfths associated by trine aspect to be of the same 
elementary nature,10 although this did not necessarily agree with the staay signs.11 
However, this was unknown to or ignored by those who came later, so that in their judgments they con- 
tinued the errors of the old [astrologers], namely attributing to the starry signs the force of the twelfths on ef- 
fects, or, on the contrary, attributing the force of the starry signs to the twelfths, saying that the twelfth of 
Aries signified sheep, that of Taurus cattle, that of Gemini humans, etc., because of the names Aries, 
Taurus, Gemini, etc., given to those constellations by the more ancient masters of astrology, who also from 
the conceded truth of an appellation proved by experience were unaware whether such a proper truth should 
belong to the constellation or to the twelfth,12 namely because they disregarded the twelfths, even though the 
elements of the triplicities of the signs similar to nature received by them through the Cabala,13 but not con- 
formable to the constellations, evidently makes known that the first astrologers (from whom emanated the 
Cabala, thereafter neglected or corrupted) had a true understanding of the primum mobile and the twelfths. 
But among the modems 1 cannot fail to marvel at Cardan, who has a great name as a philosopher, astrolo- 
ger, and physician, and who in his Commentary on the Quadripartite, Book 4, the chapter on Professions,14 
thinks that "The twelfths have acquired a certain force on account of the similarity of the place to the figures 
(i.e., the starry signs) which underlay them at the time of the great conjunction in the heads of Aries and Li- 
bra of the eighth and ninth spheres {He thought this was the primum mobile.) at the time of Christ. For aside 
from the fact that such a conjunction was fictitious, just like its origin, viz, the motion of trepidation of the 
eighth sphere,15 as we have explained elsewhere, a huge absurdity results: namely, that either before this 
conjunction the twelfths were lacking in virtue, although Cardan already acknowledges them to be power- 
ful, or that the starry signs by their own transit of the twelfths have formally conferred their own powers on 
them. But this would be absurd, as we have shown in Chapter 5 in the case of the planets' transit of the 
twelfths; thus, by the same reasons, it would [also] be absurd in the case of the starry signs' transit [of the 
twelfths]. 
6Timocharis flourished in the early third century and Hipparchus in the middle and latter part of the second century B.C. 
7 The precession of the equinoxes. 
8 That is, the constellation Aries from the mathematical Aries, etc. 
9 A fact deliberately ignored by Cyril Pagan and the other modem "siderealists." 
10 The triplicities. 
11 Aquarius, for example, was classified as an air sign, although it represents a man carrying water and pouring it out of a 
large pot. 
12 Since the constellations at that time approximately coincided with the signs to which they had assigned the same 
names. 
13 The system of triplicities with its four elements seems rather to reflect the influence of Greek philosophy, 
14 Cardan, Opera Omnia, vol. 5, p. 326, col, 2. 
15 The so-called Trepidation of the Equinoxes, a supposed backwards and forwards movement of the equinoxes first 
mentioned by Theon of Alexandria in the fourth century. 
189 

===== PAGE 194 =====

Furthermore, from the confrision of the starry signs with the twelfths it has resulted that those things that 
seem to be naturally derived from the constellations as well as the strengths of the individual fixed [stars] 
have hitherto in greater part remained unknown, for the understanding of which however from the begin- 
ning it was necessary to be free from great contention of the mind. And now we are usually compelled to 
frame our judgments from these twelfths and from the planets, just as if there were no fixed [stars] or as if 
they were of no virtue, with only a few of the brighter ones excepted, whose force cannot escape notice be- 
cause of their sudden and notable effects, and I do not see how such a defect can be restored in this [age of}, 
decline of the world; for if any fixed [star] has its own proper virtue that is influential upon inferior things 
(which cannot be denied), who will deny that when they join with the signs and the planets in the same effect 
they alter the significations of these or their effects? I certainly confess this freely, and 1 marvel at how those 
things which are predicted to occur from the signs and planets alone, without any consideration of the fixed 
[stars], may also often happen so fortunately,16 and it should not seem to be so marvelous if they did not 
come to pass, especially because the fixed [stars] move not unlike the planets in the twelfths, and conse- 
quently even their aspects to the planets may seem to be admissible. 
But to this the reply can be made that every fixed [star] has its own inherent influential force, but only the 
greater [stars] have the capacity of producing visible effects, either in the air or in men. Which is proved 
from the fact that for any man there are directions of the significators to the fixed [stars] in individual years, 
indeed in months or weeks, on account of the countless multitude of them, then in individual hours transits 
of the planets to them; however, no great or visible effects are produced except from the occourse of the 
planets and their aspects or from the more notable fixed [stars]. Moreover, there are no effects just from the 
transits of the planets over the places of the fixed [stars], or at least none are observed in genitures; and 
therefore I would not deny that the minor fixed [stars], such as those of the fourth, fifth, or sixth magnitude 
do nothing at all, although I should think that not even the far smaller satellites of Jupiter are devoid of pow- 
ers towards us.17 Whence I think it should be concluded that in astrology men can at least discern and predict 
the more conspicuous things, but that demons, being by nature most perspicacious in all these things, can 
also discern and predict lesser things. Also, it can be said that the lesser stars, if not individually at least col- 
lectively, produce notable effects, as is plain in the case of the Pleiades. 
And, having expounded these things, I now judge that the title of this chapter has been satisfied in accor- 
dance with the principles of this science as established by us and based upon experience. When any fixed 
[star] or constellation is moving in any twelfth, it plainly determines that twelfth in the same way as a planet 
passing through the same sign, and it does not change its own proper nature or its virtue, nor does it receive 
anything formally from the sign in which it acts, as was said in the case of the planets, but it determines the 
sign for many [more] years than any planet, since a fixed star stays in a sign 2,118 years according to the 
Rudolphine Tables, but Saturn, the slowest of the planets, stays only two and a half years. Therefore, 
through all that time the sign may act with the conjoined powers of that constellation or fixed [star], whence 
it is no wonder that it has seemed to some astrologers, and especially to Cardan, The Judgments ofGenitures, 
Book 4, Chapter 22, "...[that] now the powers of the twelfths are different from what they once were,"18 
16 Morin means that astrologers are lucky to have their predictions come to pass when they have ignored the influences of 
the fixed stars. 
17 This sentence seems to mean that Morin feels obliged to say on the basis of experience that the minor fixed stars do not 
do anything in nativities, although he thinks that they, and even the satellites of Jupiter, do have some small power. 
18 The Judgments of Genitures is not divided into books. Nor does the 22nd chapter contain the exact words Morin 
quotes. However, Cardan does say {Opera Omnia [1663 ed.], vol. 5, p. 451. col. 1) "For the fixed [stars] or the erratic [stars] 
or the parts of the caelum do not signify exactly the same things as they did in Roman times...and the zodiac has another na- 
ture, for the fierce and violent stars that were formerly in Leo are now in Virgo, whence both signs are more moderate." By 
which he means that the departure of those active stars from Leo has reduced its penchant for violent action, while their ar- 
190 

===== PAGE 195 =====

namely because when a starry sign passes from one twelfth into another, it alters considerably the proper ef- 
fects of that [twelfth] because of its own new concurrence in action with that [twelfth], just as happens with 
the planets. And consequently in any twelfth these three things must be looked for: the nature or virtue of the 
twelfth, the nature of the constellation, and the nature of the planet if there is one present corporally or by as- 
pect. And from these three, judgment must be made. Because, even though Alexander de Angelis, Against 
the Astrologers, Book 4, Chapter 8, thinks it impossible on account of the variety of causes and cries out in 
his fashion against astrology, yet he must be pardoned for his ignorance, for indeed he had no experience in 
this science, nor did he know how to erect a horoscope, as is revealed by his book.19 For if he had not de- 
voted himself to eradicating astrology instead of to discovering its truth by experiments, he would have rec- 
ognized that we also in these present times experience the same forces from the individual twelfths as were 
attributed to them by Ptolemy and the older astrologers from the Cabala or from observation, even though 
they are now occupied by other constellations than they once were—not because they have no effect, but be- 
cause in their concourse the twelfths (which are parts of the prime physical cause) as well as the planets (the 
principal governors of the world) prevail over the fixed [stars] and the constellations; and consequently 
these [fixed stars] only produce sudden and fleeting effects, but not lasting ones unless they are supported 
by the planets, as is generally known among astrologers.20 
Besides, a constellation or a fixed [star] depends upon the twelfth that it occupies, and the planet to which 
it is conjoined, only so much as [it would] upon a companion in action, just as two men hauling the same 
boat; for a fixed [star] is like another planet, and vice versa, and the planets are not rulers of the fixed [stars], 
because these are said to be of the nature of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, etc., just as the fixed [stars] do not 
preside over the twelfths; for a fixed [star] is not said to be of the nature of Mars because it has accidentally 
been determined to the nature of Mars, but because it is essentially similar in nature to Mars; nevertheless, 
Mars is the ruler of the fixed [stars] that are moving in Aries no less that it is of Saturn moving in Aries, for 
this is proper. And so the fixed [stars] in their action depend upon the planet whose sign they occupy, but the 
planets never depend upon the fixed [stars] in the same way. But if the twelfths are viewed as parts of the 
primum mobile, then a constellation and the fixed [stars] are subordinate to those on which they depend, as 
an inferior cause or secondary cause is to a superior or primary cause. And from what is said above the ma- 
jority of the difficulties raised from time to time by those who hate astrology and those who are ignorant of it 
have been clearly resolved. 
rival in Virgo has invigorated a previously mild sign. This agrees with Morin's dictum that the fixed stars determine the 
signs. 
19 Alessandro Angeli (1562-1620), In astrologos conjee tores libri quinque. (Rome: B. Zannetti, 1615). According to 
Lynn Thorndike, HMES 6, pp. 202-4, he was director of the Jesuit college at Rome. His book seems to have been first pub- 
lished in 1604 and again in 1615 (both at Rome and Lyons). Thorndike says "...de Angelis gives an elaborate rehearsal of 
past arguments against astrology, but there is little or nothing new said." He also notes Angeli's acceptance of "...the state- 
ment that a child weaned on goat's milk, after it had grown up, would leap like a goat and eat such plants as goats are wont to 
crop." Which perhaps shows that Angeli understood nutrition about as well as he did astrology. 
20 Here, and in what follows, Morin addresses the naive charge frequently leveled against astrologers that the signs of 
the zodiac no longer correspond with the constellations bearing the same names. 
191 

===== PAGE 196 =====

Book Twenty-Three 
Chapter 18. The Universal Laws of Judgments on Solar and 
Lunar Revolutions of Nativities. 
Although from what was said in all of Book 21 about the determinations of the celestial bodies and then 
especially what was said in Chapters 6 and 7 of the present book, it should be plain enough how revolutions 
should be judged, at least in a general way; nevertheless, because the universal laws of judgments are com- 
mon to genitures and revolutions, the doctrine of revolutions also possesses some laws of its own, both uni- 
versal and particular; therefore, it seems to us that the universal laws ought to be given here, lest anything 
should be lacking in a theoretical doctrine of such importance; and we shall give the particular laws in our 
[book] Astrological Prediction, if God grants us the time to compose it.1 Therefore, the principle ones of the 
universal laws follow, from which the lesser principal laws can easily be discovered by a skillful astrologer, 
1. In a revolution, nothing should be predicted—at least nothing significant—unless it is signified by the 
radix or by its directions at the time of the revolution. For if the Sun in the 1 Oth of the radix is directed to the 
trine of Jupiter well disposed (which is a distinguished and fortunate direction per se), but in the revolution 
of the year indicated by the direction, the Sun is in the 12th square Saturn or Mars without any fortunate as- 
pect of Jupiter, which is also badly afflicted, the direction will produce nothing, and only ineffective at- 
tempts for honors will occur along with impediments, and perhaps also misfortune in connection with 
honors; and so with the rest. But generally one ought to look in every revolution, both of the Sun and of the 
Moon, how the planets on that day are related to the places of the geniture. For, if favourably related [they 
indicate] good, if unfavourably related, evil in the affected type of accident of life, wealth, honors, etc., hav- 
ing taken into account the determination of the planets themselves, both radical and revolutional. 
2. Similarity of signification of a revolution with the geniture brings forth the things signified in the 
geniture. But dissimilarity suppresses or retards them, or fulfills them in a minimal fashion or corrupts them. 
And therefore whatever is performed by a revolution must certainly be presignified in the nativity. But 
whatever is presignified in the nativity for any particular year, is not performed by the revolution of that year 
in the absence of similarity to the thing predicted, which actuates the potential of the geniture and its direc- 
tions in the things signified. Therefore Cardan rightly warns that nothing should ever be pronounced about 
radical directions without having inspected the revolution of the year indicated by the direction—but in fact 
also the one immediately preceding or following; otherwise, even the best astrologer will be deceived. 
3. The more the figure of the revolution, whether solar or lunar, is similar to the radical position of the 
signs and planets, the more efficaciously it will bring forth the significations of the geniture, whether good 
or evil, and especially those that will be signified by a similar direction. For that similarity is not always fa- 
vourable and a promise of some great good, as Origanus and many others suppose, but it only signifies the 
same things as the figure of the geniture, whether good or evil. Otherwise the planets would not act in accor- 
dance with their determinations; and a malefic influx in a nativity would be corrected by one similarly ma- 
lefic, or it would be completely changed, which is inconsistent with experience and nature. But this greater 
similarity (at least in the position of the signs) can be acquired or vitiated by the native's travelling to appro- 
priate places of the earth for the time of the revolution, and especially for that of the Sun, as was already said 
in Chapter 4. And this is a secret of the science that should by no means be despised. And in particular those 
revolutions should be watched for in which the same degree of the ecliptic is found in the Ascendant as was 
in the Ascendant of the radix; for then each planet rules the same houses in the revolution as it ruled in the ra- 
1 This work was unfortunately never written, as Morin died not long after finishing the Astrologia Gallica. 
193 

===== PAGE 197 =====

dix, which does not usually happen without [producing] some notable effect signified by the nativity, since 
the force of signification of the signs will also be doubled, at least in the place of the nativity and there- 
abouts. 
4. A thing strongly signified by the nativity or by a radical direction can be reduced to actuality or per- 
fected by a weak solar revolution of the same signification; and therefore much more readily by a strong 
one. But it will not be perfected by a weak lunar revolution. And vice versa, a thing weakly signified by the 
nativity or one of its directions can be brought forth into actuality by a strong solar revolution of the same 
signification, but hardly by a strong lunar revolution. But a thing weakly signified in the nativity will hardly 
be brought into actuality by a weak solar revolution of the same signification, and it will not be done at all by 
a weak lunar revolution, because a strong resistance of secondary fate, i.e., a strong contrary disposition (if 
it is present) of sublunar causes passively or actively joining in an effect, wards off a weak celestial influx. 
Therefore, in all things signified in a particular year the disposition of the secondary fate must be carefully 
attended to. And the natives must be questioned about those things, so that where their undertakings, ac- 
tions, and experiences lie may be discovered; and from this [information] a more sagacious prediction can 
be made after having considered the virtue of the revolution. 
5. When the Ascendants of the radix and the revolution are opposed, it is evil and disturbing, and worse 
still when the degrees [themselves] are opposed, especially in the case of a solar revolution. For, since the 
revolution either brings forth or inhibits the effect of the nativity, and it can only bring it forth from a simi- 
larity of the figures, it is plain that this contrariety of position, both of the Sun and of the whole caelum, will 
inhibit the radical influx and prevent it from bursting forth into action, but especially into good action, and 
will only bring forward ineffective efforts in connection with the good things signified by the directions in 
that year, with many contrarieties, damages, anxieties, sicknesses, and dangers to life. And the reason is be- 
cause the signs are then determined to significations contrary to the radix. For just as bad changes and harm 
happen in the Great World, or in universal nature, when the sign Leo of solar nature is determined to the 
contrary saturnine nature by Saturn's movement into Leo, and Saturn's virtue is also corrupted there, so also 
when the planets and signs in revolutions, and especially in transits, are determined to significations con- 
trary to their radical ones, or the planets themselves are disposed in a contrary manner, bad changes and mis- 
fortunes must be expected in the Microcosm, or the native. But if Jupiter or Venus is in the 1 st [house] of the 
revolution, without rulership in the 8th or 12th of the radix or the revolution, the evil things in the essential 
significations of the 1st house indicated by this contrariety will be removed or mitigated, and some happi- 
ness and joy will also happen in connection with marriage, lawsuits, and contracts, especially if the 7th of 
the radix is well disposed and the directions are in accord—namely because each house of the radix can 
[also] signify for its opposite. But if any evil is signified by the geniture and its directions in that year, espe- 
cially in connection with sicknesses, lawsuits, and open enemies, and the 7th of the radix is badly disposed, 
and there are bad planets in the 1 st of the revolution, those evils will happen in that year. And the same thing 
should be thought in the case of opposed signs culminating2 in the radix and the revolution, and also in the 
case of the other cusps. 
6. If the Ascendant of the revolution is trine the radical Ascendant, it is good for the significations of the 
1st house; if it is square, it is evil. But one must not pronounce about the good or evil of the significations of 
the first house simply from these [aspect indications] alone, but the state of both Ascendants and also the 
state of the planets in the revolution must be looked at, and especially the state of the rulers of the Ascen- 
dants of the radix and the revolution, along with the direction of the radical Ascendant and its ruler. And one 
must think about the Midheaven's of the radix and the revolution in the same way. 
7. The sign ascending in the revolution, in which some planet is posited in the radix, and especially the 
2 That is, on the cusp of the 10th house. 
194 

===== PAGE 198 =====

place of that planet on the Ascendant of the revolution, affects the native in the things signified by the 1 st 
[house] according to the nature, state, and determination of that planet in the radix and the revolution. And 
the same thing is true of the Midheaven of the revolution and the other cusps. And if in the solar revolution 
the Ascendant is the place of the radical Saturn, or of Mars in the 8th, or of the ruler of the 8th, [the native] 
will have to be on guard against death in that month in which the Ascendant of the lunar revolution is the 
same, or in that quarter in which it is the same, and with the rest in agreement. 
8. Each sign's effect signified by the geniture happens in connection with the significations of the house 
of the figure that that sign occupies in the revolution, especially if the radical directions arc in agreement. 
And thus the sign of the 1 st [house] of the radix in the 12th or the 8 th of the revolution threatens sicknesses, 
imprisonment, enemies, death, or dangers to life if the radix and its directions agree; in the 11 th it presages 
friends; in the 1 Oth, undertakings, actions, dignities, etc. The sign of the 2nd of the radix in the 7th of the rev- 
olution [indicates] wealth from marriage, lawsuits, and contracts, or expenses and losses in connection with 
these same things in accordance with the state of the 7th and its ruler, both in the radix and in the revolution. 
For the signification of good or evil state of the 7th of the revolution does not overturn the signification of 
the state of the 7th of the radix or act against it [as was explained] in Chapter 7. And the reasoning is the 
same in the rest. 
9. Any planet in the revolution can act in accordance with the nature of the house that it occupied in the 
radix, yet it acts more evidently according to the nature of the house that it occupies in the revolution, 
whether it is a solar or a lunar revolution. This is proved from the Sun itself, which in all its own revolutions 
is in the same house of the radix, although it will vary its effects in individual years—indeed, that which is 
radically signified by the Sun from the house of the [natal] figure will be specified and determined to the sig- 
nification of the house that the Sun occupies in the revolution; and it will be proved similarly by the Moon in 
its revolutions. Therefore, if Mars from the 2nd [house] of the radix comes to the 5th of the revolution, it will 
signify prodigality or outlays for pleasure in that year. But on the contrary, if Jupiter from the 5th of the ra- 
dix comes to the 2nd of the revolution, it will presage increases in wealth from children or lovers3 or games 
and pleasures. But although the same thing could be said of the ruler of the 2nd of the radix in the 5th of the 
revolution or the reverse, yet, because the presence of a planet is stronger than its rulership when absent, if in 
the nativity the ruler of the 2nd is in the 5th, but in the revolution it is in the 12th, one will have to say that 
[the native] will become sick as result of pleasures, or that he will be incarcerated because of them or from 
outlays on them,4 and thus the significations of the three houses 2, 5, and 12 are combined. But it is not al- 
ways necessary to combine the significations of all the houses. And the reasoning is the same in the rest. 
Nevertheless, it must be noted that in revolutions the determinations of the planets by reason of bodily posi- 
tion and rulership in the figure of the revolution must be combined in accordance with the doctrine of Book 
21, Section 2, but always with respect to the determinations of the same planets in the radical figure also 
thus combined. And this is to combine the radical combinations with those of the revolution, because who- 
ever does this more sagaciously will judge more certainly. 
10. In the case of any planet in the figure of the revolution, one must first turn his attention to which 
house of the radix it falls in, and after that to which house of the revolution. For the radical figure precedes 
the figure of the revolution in time, in virtue, and in universality. And therefore one must first look at how 
these planets are related to the figure of the radix, rather than how they are related to the figure of the revolu- 
tion. And this is proved by the fact that if Saturn is the anaereta in the radix and in the revolution it comes to 
the Ascendant of the radix, it threatens the native with danger to his life no matter in which house of the rev- 
olution that Ascendant is. But that house can decree the type of danger, e.g., if the Ascendant comes to the 
3 Reading amasiis 'lovers1 instead of amesiis. 
4 That is, from going into debt from expenditures on pleasures. 
195 

===== PAGE 199 =====

5th of the revolution, the danger will be from pleasures or from their cause, because there it takes a new de- 
termination to pleasures. But if the radical Ascendant and Saturn in it comes to the 8th of the revolution, 
sudden or violent death is signified or some great unforeseen danger to life on account of the doubled 
anaeretic force of Saturn and the doubled aphetic force of the subordinated Ascendant. And consequently, 
the following things must be looked at for each planet in the revolution. First, what is its nature. Second, 
what is its celestial state in the radix. Third, what is it determined to in the radix by body and by rulership. 
Fourth, which house of the radical figure does its [position] in the revolution fall into. Fifth, what is its celes- 
tial state in the revolution. Sixth, what is it determined to in the revolution by body and by rulership. Sev- 
enth, how can the radical and revolutional determinations be combined with regard to their conformity, 
contrariety, or dissimilarities. For the greatest secret of revolutions lies in these [considerations] before [all] 
the rest. 
11. Any planet will fulfill its own radical significations in any year mainly in accordance with the house 
that it occupies in the revolution. And therefore one must judge about its effects from each of its determina- 
tions—the radical, namely, and the revolutional—arising from its celestial and terrestrial state in each fig- 
ure. And it must be seen from what and into what it may be changed from the radix to the revolution by 
reason of sign, house, ruler, and configuration. Noting that its radical determination is specified [as to type] 
and determined by its signification in the revolution. And therefore the ruler of the 1 st [house] of the radix, 
or the planet that is in the 1 st of the radix, if it comes to the 5th of the revolution, and especially Venus,5 will 
incline to pleasures; if it comes to the 1 Oth, and especially Jupiter, it will cause ambition for honours; and the 
reasoning is the same with the others. 
12. A planet migrating from one house of the radix to another house of the revolution does not have a 
simple and absolute influx on its significations as it does in the radix, but a mixed one and dependent upon 
the significations of its radical house. And one must always look in both places, insofar as it pertains or re- 
fers primarily and per se to the native and not to other persons. And therefore Schoner and others are mis- 
taken when they assert that a planet migrating from the 11 th of the radix to the 8th of the revolution signifies 
the death of the native's friends. For the 8th house in the native's particular, or radical, figure is not the 
house of death of the native's friends or for everybody in general, but it is only the house of death of the na- 
tive himself, as we have explained elsewhere. And consequently such a planet is determined to the native's 
death, and it will rather signify death for him or danger to his life from a friend. But in universal 
constitutions6 the 8th house is the house of death in general. And it will be better to say that if a planet in the 
11 th of the radix comes in a revolution to the 6th of the radix, which is the 8th from the 11th of the radix, 
some friend of the native will die, especially if that planet is evilly disposed in the revolution. In this regard, 
a planet migrating from the 11 th of the radix into the 8 th of the revolution does not signify the same thing as 
a planet migrating from the 8th of the radix into the 11th of the revolution. For the former signifies that a 
friend concurs per se in the native's death, especially if it is a malefic planet, but the latter signifies that it 
happens to a friend that accidentally and without any intent he is the cause of the native's death. But it can 
also signify escape from death through the favour or assistance of a friend. Similarly, a planet from the 11th 
of the radix coming to the 7th of the revolution turns a friend into an open enemy or it stirs up lawsuits be- 
cause of friends or it gives a spouse through the efforts of friends, or it settles lawsuits. But a planet from the 
7th of the radix coming to the 11th of the revolution turns an open enemy into a friend, or it settles lawsuits 
with the aid of a friend. But the nature of the planet must always be noted, and in these examples how it is re- 
lated to each Ascendant, and especially to the radical Ascendant. Furthermore, that which is said here about 
5 That is, 'and especially [if it is] Venus'. However, only the planet's symbol is given in the Latin text, so it could also be 
translated 'and especially to Venus', but I incline to the former interpretation. (And similarly for Jupiter in the latter part of 
the sentence.) 
6 The charts erected in mundane astrology. 
196 

===== PAGE 200 =====

a planet in the 7th can also be said about the ruler of the 7th. 
13. A planet in a revolution is returned either only to the sign or only to the house that it occupied in the 
figure of the radix, or to both of them at the same time, or to neither. If it is only returned to the sign, it will 
produce an effect signified by the radix in accordance with the house that it occupies in the revolution. If 
only to a similar house, it will produce its own radical effect from the house by reason of the sign and its 
ruler in the revolution, also by reason of the radical house that that sign occupied, and both of these cases are 
strong on account of the doubled force of the planet, either from the sign or from the house. But if it comes to 
the sign and house at the same time, this case is the strongest of all and will very often produce effects from 
unexpected sources, which makes the influx even more admirable. But if a planet returns to neither [sign nor 
house], it must be seen whether it returns to its own opposition by sign or by house, which is very bad, but 
less so if it only returns to the opposition of the latter. And if it comes to its own trine, it will bring forth its 
own fortunate radical significations; but if to its own square, the reverse. And the nature and celestial and 
terrestrial state of the planet must be taken into account in each figure. But if the planet does not come to any 
of its own radical aspects, it will generally be weak in regard to its own radical significations, although it can 
do something else. 
14. A planet in the revolution coming to the radical place of another combines the radical significations 
of both planets, and these are specified or determined by the signification of the house of the revolution in 
which the place [of the planets] is. However, it must be noted which of these planets is in the stronger place 
there, then whether they are friends or enemies by nature and by radical determination, i.e., whether they 
presage similar or contrary things in the radix. But a planet in a revolution coming to the radical aspect of an- 
other, whether good or evil, is affected—being made fortunate or unfortunate—in those things that it signi- 
fies in the revolution by reason of both of its determinations, viz. the radical and the revolutional, by that 
aspect in accordance with its type and the nature of the aspecting planet and the latter1 s radical determina- 
tion. And consequently, if the ruler of the radical Ascendant comes in the revolution to the 12th house in 
square to Saturn ruler of the 8th of the radix, a lethal sickness or one with danger to life will be portended by 
this. And if Venus [comes] from the 7th of the radix to the 5th of the revolution in trine to Jupiter ruler of the 
Ascendant of the radix, [the birth of] children from his wife will be signified for a married native. And thus 
with other [combinations]. 
15. If a planet in the radix that is in evil aspect to another comes in the revolution to the evil radical aspect 
of that same planet, and there is no reception between them by house or by exaltation, it will be very evil, but 
less so if there is reception; but if it comes to a good radical aspect of the same planet without reception, it 
signifies no good from this, [but] with reception, a little good, in which one can hardly trust. But if a planet 
in the radix in benefic aspect to another comes in the revolution to a malefic radical aspect of the same planet 
with mutual reception, a great good [accomplished] by contrary means is signified if the determination is to 
good; [but] if there is no reception, evil will happen, no matter what the determination of the planets is. 
16. If planets conjoined in the radix are conjoined anew in the figure of the revolution or similarly config- 
ured, they will bring forth the radical effects, whether good or evil, that are signified by their radical connec- 
tion, [but] in accordance with the significations of the house of the revolution that they occupy. [But] if they 
are configured dissimilarly, i.e., if they are in trine in the nativity and they aspect each other by square or op- 
position in the revolution, or the other way around, and if there is no reception by house or exaltation be- 
tween them, the change to a trine will produce nothing, but the change to a square will produce harm. But if 
there is reception between them, especially mutual reception, the change to a trine will be potent for good, 
and the change to a square will hardly produce any harm. 
17. If the celestial state of a planet is the same in the geniture and the revolution, as if in each figure it is in 
its own domicile or exaltation, or it is direct, swift, oriental of the Sun, occidental of the Moon, free from the 
197 

===== PAGE 201 =====

rays,7 in fortunate aspect with other planets, diurnal by day above the earth, etc., it will be very effective in 
bestowing its own radical significations in that year, especially if its direction and determination in the revo- 
lution are in agreement. But if the state is entirely contrary, it is very evil and disturbing for those same sig- 
nifications, especially if the change should be made from a benefic state in the radix to a malefic state in the 
revolution. But [if it is] partly similar and partly contrary, it insinuates that [the effect] must be declared ac- 
cording to the part that prevails. 
18. A planet determined to the same signification in both the radix and the revolution will undoubtedly 
produce it in that year if its direction is in agreement or there is something else of similar or concordant sig- 
nification. [But] without a direction, it will either do nothing or little. 
19. If two planets are determined to the same thing8 or something similar in the radix, and in the revolu- 
tion they come together or are in concordant aspect and in concordant places of the figure, they will also pro- 
duce their effect for certain in that year, as [was said] above. 
20. For any planet, it must be seen in both the radix and the revolution whether it is subject to the same 
ruler or to different rulers. For if the latter happens, the prediction about its effects will be more obscure and 
confused; and one will have to pay attention to whether the different rulers are mutually friendly or inimical 
by their nature, connection, and determination in the revolution, and one must judge according to that. 
21. In solar revolutions, one must chiefly look at the Sun itself and those things that it signified in the ra- 
dix, for because its virtue is greater than that of the others, it will always do something in each year in accor- 
dance with its own radical determination, even without any new solar directions. This is plain in my case, as 
1 have the Sun in the 12th with Jupiter, the Moon, and Saturn, and I have always had great opposition in all 
my undertakings, either by magnates, or by the lords whom I served, or by public affairs, such as wars, the 
plague, new laws, the state of the royal court, or such like. And the same thing must be said about the Moon 
in lunar revolutions. And one will have to be fearful when Saturn by its own proper motion transits the 
Moon's sign or the opposite sign in lunar revolutions because of the conjunction or opposition of Saturn, es- 
pecially if it is partile, also on the day of the revolution. And if Saturn is the significator of sickness or death 
and the Moon is the significator of life, one will have to be very fearful of sicknesses or death in that month, 
especially if there is a concordant radical direction. And the reasoning is the same with the rest. Besides, in 
solar and lunar revolutions, those things that concur with the radical directions of the luminaries must be 
more diligently attended to than the rest; for if they agree in their signification, they will undoubtedly pro- 
duce their effect. 
22. Whoever has many planets in the same house of his geniture will experience many things throughout 
his whole life in connection with the things signified by that house. Because each year those planets act in 
the revolution in accordance with their radical determination; and therefore, whether [instigated] by one of 
them or by another, something of the things signified by that house will always happen. This is plain in my 
case, as I have Venus, the Sun, Jupiter, Saturn, and the Moon in the 12th, and there is never lacking a year in 
which there are not some things from among those signified by that house that must be endured or over- 
come. 
23. In a solar revolution, see how the significator and the promittor of the new direction are related to 
each other, especially in the case of a strong direction that falls in that year or close by and has not yet pro- 
duced its effect. For if the significator is in the place of the promittor or comes to its good or evil aspect (ac- 
cording to the goodness or malice of that direction), and the promittor is there by body or by concordant 
7 That is, not under the Sunbeams. 
8 Reading ad idem 'to the same thing' instead of ad diem 'to the day'. 
198 

===== PAGE 202 =====

aspect, it will complete the effect of the direction in that year. But if the promittor is absent by body or by 
ray, the direction will be less effective. But it will also be very effective if the planet that is the promittor in 
the revolution is in its own radical place, and the significator is concordant in its ray with the direction; then, 
if each of them returns to its own radical place without an aspect, one must also see first whether they are al- 
lotted a determination in the revolution that is similar to their radical determination or its direction. 
24. In the case of the ruler of the year, or of the solar revolution, one must generally judge from its nature, 
then from its state, both celestial and terrestrial, in each figure. But in particular, the ruler of the year benefic 
and strong in each chart will in general bring forth the fortunate things signified for that year, but especially 
those that it signifies by reason of each figure and its own direction. In this regard it mitigates the evils of the 
revolution, especially if it sees the significators of evil in the revolution by a friendly ray, or if it rules them. 
But the ruler of the year in each chart malefic by nature or by determination and unfortunate will bring forth 
all the misfortunes of that year, but especially those that it signified by reason of its own determination in 
each figure; and it will impede all the good things in the revolution, especially if it sees the significators of 
good things by a hostile ray. And the same judgment must be made about the ruler of the month, or the ruler 
of the lunar revolution. 
25. If the ruler of the revolution, either solar or lunar, is combust, it threatens evil in those things that it 
signifies in both charts, and in hidden things, either in being acted upon or in suffering, and especially from 
[the action of] magnates. 
26. If the ruler of the revolution, either solar or lunar, is also the ruler of the geniture, it will be very strong 
either for good or for evil. The same thing must be said about the ruler of the lunar revolution if it is also the 
ruler of the solar revolution. 
27. If the ruler of the revolution comes to the place or the radical aspect of another planet, it will have to 
be judged by Law 14 [above], but the influx of the ruler of the revolution will be more effective. 
28. In every revolution, one must pay particular individual attention both to the rulers of the Ascendant 
and the rulers of the Midheaven, then to the Sun and the Moon, namely by taking note of the nature and de- 
termination of the individual rulers in each figure, to what radical places they return, and what their state is 
in the revolution, and especially which planet they apply to, and how, and what they are determined to. 
29. If any house of the radical figure that signifies good is well disposed and is also well disposed in the 
revolution, and not [affected] by planets determined in the radix to a contrary signification, the significa- 
tions of that house will be advantageous in that year, but if it is evilly disposed in the revolution, especially 
by planets determined in the radix to a contrary signification, and they are malefics, the significations of that 
house will be evil. But on the contrary, if a house of the radical figure that signifies evil is also evilly dis- 
posed in the revolution, the evil significations of that house will happen; but if it is well disposed, the evils 
will not happen, or they will be mitigated. 
30. The agreement or disagreement of two revolutions of the Sun following one after the other must be 
noted not only universally but particularly, both as regards [the charts] themselves and also the radical di- 
rections. For universally, a bad [revolution] succeeding universally to another bad one certainly threatens 
misfortune universally. But particularly, one indicative of sickness succeeding another one indicative of 
sickness certainly portends sicknesses, especially if the directions are in agreement. For what one could not 
do, or could only begin, the other one will perfect. And the reasoning is the same in the case of other particu- 
lar significations. 
31. One must not judge any revolution without having inspected the radical figure and its directions for 
the year of the revolution. However, in every revolution pay careful attention to that which it principally sig- 
199 

===== PAGE 203 =====

nifies, for it will principally bring that forth if it is signified strongly. And the greater part of the contents of 
the above laws are made plain in the examples given previously. 
Chapter 19. Compendiously Embracing General Things that must be 
looked at in Revolutions, with a Directory of Judgment. 
Here we have compressed into a few words those things that are said at greater length in the chapters 
above. 
Therefore, note first: Whether in the figure of the revolution, either of the Sun or of the Moon, the caelum 
is disposed as it is in the radix, and whether the Ascendants are opposed or in trine or square, and into which 
houses of the revolution the signs of the houses of the radix are removed. 
Second. Note whether the cusps of the revolutional figure are the places or radical aspects of the planets, 
then of which [planets] by nature, determination, and state, also to which rulers they are subject by nature 
and to what kind of rulers they are subject by state and determination in the revolution. 
Third. For each planet in the revolution, note which house of the radix it is in and especially which 
houses it rules. Then, note what it presages from these positions and from its own celestial state in the radix. 
Fourth. Note whether it has returned to its own radical place or to any aspect of it. And to the place or as- 
pect of any other radical planet, and how these are related among themselves by connection and determina- 
tion in each figure. 
Fifth. Note from which house of the radix it departs and to which house of the revolution it comes and 
which it rules, and in which house of this revolution its radical house is located and and how it is disposed in 
the revolution. 
Sixth. Note to which ruler it is subject and how it is related to it, both in the radix and in the revolution. 
Seventh. Note whether its celestial state in the revolution is the same as its state in the radix or contrary to 
it and how much or in what respects. 
Eighth. Note whether it is allotted the same determination in the revolution as it has in the radix or one 
similar to it. And this should particularly be noted in the case of significators and promittors of directions 
completed within the current year. 
Ninth. Note whether the same house in each figure, such as the 10th or the 8th, presages the same things 
or at least something related, or whether they presage contrary things. 
Tenth. Note whether the directions favour or are contrary to the things signified by the revolution, both in 
their kind and type. 
Eleventh. Gather the significations of each planet from its nature and its celestial state and determination 
in the figure of the radix and keep this collection [of information], made accurately and once for all, for [use 
in] judging the individual revolutions. And do the same with the figure of the annual revolution. Then, see in 
what respects the radical and revolutional significations agree and disagree among themselves and with the 
significations of the direction of the planet if any new direction is completed then; and judge about the ef- 
fects of that planet in the revolution in accordance with the combination of these significators; and take this 
for a secret [of astrology]. 
Twelfth. From those directions agreeing in the same kind or type of effect in both the radical figure and 
200 

===== PAGE 204 =====

in the annual revolution, select the one in the revolution that agrees and is most concordant with the radical 
direction; and at its time inspect the revolution of the Moon, and if it is also in agreement, the effect will hap- 
pen in that month, and on that day on which that lunar revolution revolution supplies a concordant direction, 
especially [when accompanied] by a concordant transit. But perhaps it will be safer to erect all the individ- 
ual lunar revolutions of the year, so that the more concordant one can be selected, especially if an effect of 
great importance is expected. 
And from these considerations it is plain that astrological judgment is very difficult, especially when the 
types of effects and their accurate times are to be described. And for this purpose not only is an outstanding 
perspicuity and sagacity of intellect required, but also good luck, which God alone, or a Good Spirit, or the 
natal stars bestow by some impulse of nature. But it is also plain that the solar revolution must be judged 
first, rather than erecting [all] the lunar revolutions, since only those that are conformable to the solar revo- 
lution are investigated, so far as this is conformable to the radical signification and its direction. For if the 
solar revolution does not agree with the signification of the radix and its direction, the lunar revolutions will 
hardly produce anything at all, unless the effect is strongly signified by the radix and its direction and a simi- 
lar lunar revolution, i.e., one which also signifies the same thing strongly. 
Chapter 20. A Caution of no Small Importance that Must be 
Observed in judging Revolutions. 
Lest the mind of the astrologer be terrified by the multitude of directions established both in solar revolu- 
tions for the Ascendant, the Midheaven, and all the planets to the places of the radical figure and of the solar 
revolution, and in lunar revolutions to the places of the radix and to those of the revolutions, both of the Sun 
and of the Moon itself, it must be known that the greater part ofthese produces no effect or at least no signifi- 
cant effect in a [particular] year, but only some of them. For the number of significant effects that can hap- 
pen in a year is not so many as the number of directions that can occur from the solar and lunar revolutions 
(as I shall omit the revolutions of the other planets that are only satellites of the Sun to their own radical 
places, which I think are useless or superfluous, and at least of minor efficacy and less universal in significa- 
tion than the revolutions of the Sun and the Moon), and they cannot produce great or significant events; per- 
haps they serve to produce the daily minor [events] to which we pay little attention; and this is much more 
certain than the fictitious planetary hours from which some falsely think they can predict daily accidents,9 
even down to the hour. So that, if all the abovesaid directions are set up and the days on which they fall are 
sought out, all the things, both significant and trivial, may be known that are going to happen throughout the 
whole year from [the action of] the astrological influences, unless [some] secondary fate or human will 
should oppose them. For since it is established by certain experience that significant effects are produced by 
the greater and more powerful causes, why can't the trivial effects be produced by minor and weaker causes 
in accordance with their own determination in the figure? Certainly no valid reason can be offered in oppo- 
sition. And therefore, if anyone has calculated all these directions from the beginning of a year and has ar- 
ranged the days of the year on which the individual directions fall in order and according to their succession, 
he will have for almost every day, or at least very often, the means whereby he may marvel at the stupendous 
forces of the stars. But these minutiae are in fact concealed from men, but not from Demons. 
And because the Director does not concern himself with details, as it is commonly said, nor do men con- 
sult astrologers on account of them, but only for accidents of major importance, whether unexpected or un- 
dertaken deliberately, relating to life, dignities, marriage, journeys, etc., the astrologer should therefore see 
9 Accidents in the astrological sense, i.e., occurrences. 
201 

===== PAGE 205 =====

in a particular year which effects are signified by the radical directions in that year that are more significant 
in type or in kind, and whether the solar revolution confirms that signification. For when he has done this he 
will arrive at the effects for that year. And therefore in a solar revolution one should see which directions are 
more concordant in type or kind with accidents of a certain sort, for effects of that sort are produced by 
these. As, if a sickness is signified by a direction of the radical Ascendant to the square of Mars, the direc- 
tions of the Ascendant of the revolution to the body or the bad aspects of Mars, in the radix as well as in the 
revolution, should be made, or also those to Saturn or to the Sun and the Moon, especially if they are in bad 
houses of the radix or the revolution, or if they rule them. For the Ascendant of the revolution is determined 
to the life of the native in that year as the Ascendant of the radical figure is for his whole time of life; and 
among these directions, let the stronger one be selected, i.e., the one that is more concordant and closer to 
the terminus of the radical direction, for the principal effect will be produced by this one. And so, having 
found the day of the year on which that direction falls, one should see whether it falls in [the period of] a con- 
cordant lunar revolution. For when this is the case the effect will be produced in that month by a concordant 
direction of the lunar revolution, and especially by a direction of its Ascendant, especially when a concor- 
dant transit occurs [at the same time]. And the same thing will have to be done for the rest of the effects of 
greater importance signified by the radix and its directions, and in this way the immense labor of [calculat- 
ing] all the directions will be avoided, to which the recognition of particular effects [otherwise] compels us. 
But vice versa, if on some day anything unusual or new should happen, first having noted its type, by 
means of which it is referred to one of the twelve houses of the figure, and having made the directions in the 
solar revolution and the lunar revolution appropriate to that time, one will detect by what cause it was pro- 
duced, ' which by the way the transits do not furnish. 
But if anyone wants to know on what day the caelum may influence him in some way in connection with 
his health or his life, he will find this out as follows. First, let him direct the radical Ascendant and its ruler 
for that day, i.e., let him see where their direction comes to on that day. Second, let him direct similarly the 
Ascendant of the annual revolution and its ruler for that day. Third, let him direct similarly the Ascendant of 
the lunar revolution in whose [period] that day falls and its ruler, and the places to which the directions of the 
revolution come should be looked at, not Just in the figures of the revolutions but particularly in the figure of 
the radix. Fourth, one should look in the ephemerides to see which transits the planets may make in the fig- 
ures of the revolutions, and especially in the figure of the radix. And according to these [precepts] he will 
judge far more certainly than he has beenaccustomed to do hitherto. Noting, however, that planets in the 1 st, 
8th, and 12th and those that are the rulers of these houses also signify by accident in connection with health 
and life; therefore, their directions must be inspected as said above if you want nothing to be lacking [that 
would lead] to a more certain judgment. And the same thing will have to be done for [predicting] actions and 
dignities by directions of the Midheaven and its rulers in the the figures of the radix and the revolutions, etc. 
to a day on which the native wants to undertake something outstanding or difficult. 
However, two things must be noted here. First, that sometimes an effect that is also noteworthy happens 
without any radical direction, by the solar revolution concordant to that effect and powerful and its concor- 
dant direction to the places of the radix and of the solar revolution, with a lunar revolution concordant with 
them, and its direction, along with appropriate transits, not opposing but rather agreeing with the radical fig- 
ure. 
Second, not all the abovesaid causes must be subordinated to themselves for a particular effect, even a 
significant one, viz. the radix, its concordant direction, a solar revolution and its concordant directions, a lu- 
nar revolution and its concordant directions, nor concordant transits. But some of the subordinated causes 
will suffice with a radical figure that signifies the effect at least in kind. Thus in fact nothing (at least influen- 
tially) happens that is alien to the radical figure, but transits—as actual causes of the effects—are very effec- 
tive in producing them. But what has already been said about this is sufficient. 
202 

===== PAGE 206 =====

Book Twenty-Four 
Chapter 12, Whether the F\anets act upon the Native through 
their Syzygies outside of the Places of the Geniture through which 
their Transits are Customarily Made; and How and When. 
The planets, when transiting through the places of the geniture, not only produce effects upon the native 
or upon things pertaining to him in accordance with their own radical determination, as was said above, but 
they also act through their mutual syzygies1 outside of those places, or in vacant houses of the figure-—not, 
however, outside of their determination, but within it. For example, on the day when the ruler of the Ascen- 
dant and the ruler of the 8th are conjoined—even in empty houses of the figure—some sickness or danger to 
life will happen. And similarly, on the day when the rulers of the Ascendant and the Midheaven are con- 
joined or when they are in trine aspect some piece of good fortune will happen to the native in connection 
with his undertakings, actions, or honours. 
And yet, effects do not always result from these syzygies, but only when they make good a lack of tran- 
sits, i.e., if two things are perceived in them that render them efficacious. The first of which is that the plan- 
ets constituting the syzygy are badly configured and disposed to an evil effect by directions and by the 
presignification of revolutions, or favourably for good.2 Second, that the syzygies are made in a house or 
houses concordant with the effect of the radical figure. Thus in fact the planets act through their syzygies in 
accordance with the house or houses of the radical figure in which the syzygy falls and in accordance with 
the nature or quality of the syzygy. And the effect of a syzygy happens on the very day of the syzygy, and of- 
ten at the very hour, that is if the planets constituting the syzygy are found at this time to have been rotated 
by the diumal motion into a concordant position with respect to the horizon, i.e., in concordant,houses of a 
celestial figure that is erected for that time. Moreover, the reason why and how such syzygies are effective is 
this: the bodies of the planets are the causes of the celestial places in the figure of the radix, since those 
places are determined by the planets whose places they are said to be. And the planets themselves were also 
determined in the radix to this or that kind of accident with respect to the native in accordance with their own 
bodily position and rulership. And they retain their own force upon the native from such determination, and 
they continue to carry this efficacy for the native as long as he lives, as we said in Chapt. 4. Therefore, it re- 
sults from this that when the rulers of the Ascendant and the 8th come together by syzygies—even outside 
the radical places—they nevertheless act upon the native himself in accordance with the syzygy and its radi- 
cal determination, for it is proper that both of them concur for the effect. 
Chapter 13. Aphorisms or the Principal Laws 0/Transits. 
One who is strong in the theory of astrology can compose innumerable particular aphorisms because par- 
ticulars depend on universals already known from theory. Therefore we shall only put here some principal 
universal aphorisms, from the knowledge of which, other aphorisms both universal and particular pertain- 
ing to transits may easily be deduced. Let it be then: 
First. The transits of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars are more efficacious than the transits of the other planets. 
For these, being slower than the others, stay longer in the places they transit; especially if they are station- 
1 That is, their conjunctions. 
2 The Latin text has & fauste pro bono 'and favourably for good', but & must be a typographical error for aut 'or'. 
203 

===== PAGE 207 =====

ary; and consequently from these places they make a more efficacious actual impression on the native. And 
hence it follows that the Moon's transits (at least the solitary ones) have the least virtue of all; otherwise 
their effects would be the most frequent, contrary to experience; but those of Saturn are the greatest of all, 
especially the stationary or retrograde ones. 
2. The effect of any transit arises from the actual combination of the radical significators of the transiting 
planet and of the place through which it is transiting, having taken into account the natures and analogies of 
the planets. 
3. The transits of the planets other than to the places of the geniture, namely the twelve cusps, the seven 
planets, the Part of Fortune, and their aspects and antiscions, have no efficacy for the native. For as the es- 
sence of the native depends upon these places, so also do all his changes. And yet, the syzygies of the planets 
in empty houses of the figure are efficacious, as we said in Chapter 12. 
4. The bodily place of the transiting planet must be noted in transits, for Mars transiting over the cusp of 
the 7th in opposition to the Ascendant more certainly portends lawsuits by reason of its bodily position than 
sickness by reason of its opposition to the Ascendant. 
5. The celestial state of the transiting planet at the time of the transit must be noted in every tran- 
sit—namely, whether it is in accordance with or contrary to the effect signified by the transit. For the energy 
of the transiting planet is increased or decreased by this. And its radical latitude must also be noted and that 
of the transit. 
6. During an effect caused by directions and transits of the stars, the motion of the Moon and of those 
planets that are judged to be the cause of the effect must be carefully observed, and how in the radical figure 
they may move by transit from place to place of similar or dissimilar signification; then too, how by their 
own motion they apply by syzygies to the luminaries and planets of similar or dissimilar signification, either 
by nature or by determination. For from this the success and end [result] of the effects can be discovered. 
7. The transits of the Moon through the places of a figure erected for the beginning of a sickness, but es- 
pecially through its own square and opposition, are of great virtue, as is established by .experience; and it 
will be set forth when in Astrological Prediction (if God gives us [the length of] life to do this) we will treat 
of the use of astrology in medicine.3 Why then, in a figure erected for the beginning of any other thing, will 
the transits of the Moon (and the other planets that signify the thing) through the places of that figure not be 
efficacious at any time in its duration? And this is certainly useful in the doctrine of elections; but if the fig- 
ure of the geniture is at hand, its transits will have to be especially taken into account. 
8. Since all the planets act in accordance with their own radical determination and their proper nature 
both by direction and by transit, but in a nativity they are determined to some thing, such as life, or to its op- 
posite, such as sicknesses and death, or neither to life nor to death, but to some other thing, such as dignities; 
therefore, in directions and in transits, a promittor planet, determined to life and benefic and well aspected, 
coming to the significators of life, but especially to the Ascendant, strengthens life, [but] determined to the 
contrary, is harmful to life, or destroys it; but, if it is determined to neither of these, it neither helps nor hin- 
ders, or it does nothing (at least nothing significant) in connection with life. Similarly, a planet transiting 
through the Midheaven, appropriate to honours by its nature and radical determination, will confer honours; 
but determined to the contrary, such as prison, exile, or death—especially when it is malefic by nature and 
badly aspected or unfriendly to the Midheaven—will destroy them, or it will do much harm to them, or it 
will prevent them from happening; but if it is determined to neither of these, it will cause nothing (at least 
nothing significant) in connection with honours, actions, or undertakings, although it can occasion some- 
3 Another reference to the Astrological Prediction that Morin had in mind to write. 
204 

===== PAGE 208 =====

thing trivial to occur in connection with them in accordance with its own nature or radical determina- 
tion—indeed, to confer or destroy a dignity is a greater effect than to introduce some trivial good or evil 
occurrence into an [existing] dignity. But major effects are from major causes, and minor effects from minor 
causes that are not determined to anything. And the same reasoning applies to other things. 
9. In transits, not otherwise than in directions, the more ways a planet coming to the Midheaven is deter- 
mined to honors and is in better state, both in the radix as well as at the time of the direction and especially at 
the time of the transit, the more efficaciously and abundantly it will bring good fortune to the native in his 
undertakings and actions. Just as, if the Sun or Jupiter is the ruler of the Midheaven in the radix, and at an age 
concordant with dignities it is directed as promittor to the Midheaven, [and] on the day of the year in which 
the direction is completed, it—well aspected—will transit that same Midheaven bodily or by an appropriate 
aspect, especially with a concordant revolution, it will cause some notable good fortune in dignities or un- 
dertakings, since it is determined to honours in several ways—namely by nature or analogy, mlership, di- 
rection, and by a transit concordant with a fortunate state. But, on the contrary, the more ways a planet 
transiting the Midheaven is determined against honours, the more efficaciously it will bring bad fortune to 
the native in connection with honours and undertakings, as for example Saturn in the 12th of the radix, inim- 
ical to the Midheaven because it occupies the sign Leo, coming by direction and transit to that same 
Midheaven, badly aspected in the radix and also at the time of the direction and transit. And the same rea- 
soning applies to the rest of the significations. 
10. If two planets, the same or related in their signification, either by analogy, as the Sun and Jupiter for 
honors, or Saturn and Mars for sicknesses, or by radical determination, or both, transit at the same time by 
body or by concordant aspect through the same place of the same or related signification as just mentioned, 
then their signification and virtue will be doubled in their effect and consequently in the magnitude of that 
same effect. But the conjunction of the transiting planets in that place is stronger than their aspects. Espe- 
cially if it is the conjunction of the luminaries, or of one of them with another planet. And this aphorism is 
clear from many experiences. And therefore the conjunction of the Sun and the Moon in the degrees of the 
malefics in the natal figure or the degrees opposite them should be carefully noted, especially when both the 
luminaries or one of them rules the 1 st; but a malefic, in whose degree there is a conjunction, is a significator 
of sicknesses or death, or is inimical to the Ascendant; for such conjunctions certainly signify sicknesses or 
death with a concordant direction; and the effect will begin on the very day of the conjunction, as I have of- 
ten experienced. Similarly, the conjunction of the rulers of the Ascendant [and] the 8th of the radix in the 8th 
of the radix, and especially on the place of a planet that is in the 8th with a lethal direction, is lethal at the 
time of that conjunction. And in sum, the conjunction of two or more planets in the place of another planet 
must be carefully noted, and one must see what these planets are determined to, so that a correct judgment 
can be made about the event; and this can be applied similarly to conjunctions made in the places of good or 
evil aspects. 
11. The simultaneous transit of two planets, related in their signification as mentioned above, through 
different places, with the planets themselves mutually related by nature or by radical signification (just as 
the places of the ruler of the Midheaven and the ruler of the 2nd house are said to be mutually related by sig- 
nification, or the places of the ruler of the 12th house and the 8th house), strengthen themselves in turn for a 
more intense effect. For two concordant transits are stronger than one. 
12. If there is a cluster of planets in any house, a planet transiting through that cluster will act in accor- 
dance with its own nature and determination and with that of each of the planets [in the cluster] when it tran- 
sits through their individual places, and from the succession of transits the success of producing an accident 
may be discovered, or what other accidents will accompany it. 
13. Luminaries joined by body or concordant aspect to a transiting planet still increase the force of the 
205 

===== PAGE 209 =====

transit even though they are alien to the transit's analogous or radical signification. How much more then 
will they increase it when they are related? 
14. When transits are being made to places in the radix, the states of those same places in the current rev- 
olutions should be noticed. For if the radical place of Saturn is in the 8th, and Saturn is in the 12th of a revo- 
lution, especially when it is badly aspected and badly configured in its own radical place, on the day that the 
ruler of the Ascendant transits that radical place either some sickness or some danger to the life will happen; 
but especially if at the time of the transit Mars or Saturn or either of the luminaries makes a bad aspect to that 
place. And not only should the state of a place through which a transit is being made be noted, but also the 
state of the transiting planet. For if Mars, transiting the Ascendant of the radix, is in the 8th or 12th of a revo- 
lution and badly afflicted, its transit across the Ascendant will be very bad. 
15. The transit of planets conjoined over the degree of a direction of the radix, even an empty degree, i.e., 
one that is not the place of a radical planet or cusp, will not be lacking in effect; indeed, there will be a nota- 
ble effect if the transit is of the luminaries conjoined, and especially with an eclipse. 
16. The actual virtue of a lunar transit lasts for six hours before and after the partile transit, but in the case 
of the other planets, for one day before and after, by the common agreement of astrologers that esteems 
partile aspects much more than platic. And yet whenever a planet by its own orb of virtue rules the place 
through which a transit is said to be made, it has a force efficacious to produce the effect of the transit, espe- 
cially the swifter planets, such as the Moon, which effect is often produced quicker or slower than the limits 
given above; but a single transit by itself is not equal to [producing] an effect it would demand the neces- 
sary concourse of other causes also having an influence upon the action, which happens quicker or slower. 
And it must be noted that the fixture effect depends upon a transit, not only with regard to its actual time, but 
also with regard to its own nature, mode, and circumstances; for a transit produces all these things, and con- 
sequently they can also be foreseen from a transit. Moreover, when one bad transit is followed immediately 
by another one through the same place in a short interval of time, during a concordant radical direction and 
solar revolution, as for example if the transit of Saturn ruler of the 12th across the Ascendant is followed by 
the transit of Mars ruler of the 8th across that same Ascendant by body or by square or opposition, it will be 
lethal. And you will judge similarly about the rest of the significations. 
17. If a benefic planet is in the Midheaven of the radix or is its ruler, and, in a concordant radical direction 
or solar or lunar revolution [indicative] of honours, that same benefic transits the Ascendant of the radix or 
the place of its ruler, especially if it is well-disposed and powerfully configured with the ruler of the Ascen- 
dant by syzygy, then the native will have good fortune in dignities or undertakings. 
Chapter 14. from What has been Explained so far. Future Events can be 
Predicted from the Stars with Regard to the Type, the Year, Day, and Hour. 
In this chapter we shall repeat in a very brief compendium what was said about this subject in Books 22, 
23, and 24. 
First, therefore, one must have the figure of the nativity exactly rectified, with the true places of the plan- 
ets, especially of the Sun and the Moon. 
2. From Book 22, Section 1, Chapter 9; Section 2, Chapter 3; and Section 3, Chapters 3 and 4, the year of 
the completed direction of one of its significators to any promittor may be found. 
3. From the same book, Section 4, Chapters 2 and 3, the kind of future accident signified by any direction 
206 

===== PAGE 210 =====

may be deduced. 
4. From Book 23, Chapters 4 and 5, the figure of the solar revolution can be erected for the year found 
above. Then, from Chapter 12, one can determine from the agreement or disagreement with the radical fig- 
ure, the direction, and the annual revolution of the Sun, whether or not any effect may be expected from 
these three in that year, especially of the kind discovered above. 
5. Having made the hypothesis that an effect is to be expected and having deduced its kind as discovered 
above, one must establish directions of the concordant significators in the annual revolution, [as explained] 
in Book 23, Chapter 15, both to the places of that revolution and especially to those of the radix that are con- 
cordant with the effect that is signified; and from these it will be plain on what day of the year that effect may 
probably be expected. 
6. In accordance with Book 23, Chapter 9, erect the lunar revolutions that immediately precede the times 
indicated by the concordant directions in the solar revolution. And if one of these revolutions agrees closely 
with the signified effect, establish the directions of the significators that are concordant with it to concordant 
promittors, but especially to the places concordant in the radix. For in fact those times of the directions that 
coincide to the day in both revolutions promise the effect for that day. And a direction in a lunar revolution 
will also indicate the hour, as was seen in Book 23, Chapter 16, in events for which the hour is given. And 
this will be more certain, the more directions there are that are concordant with the effect in each revolution 
that agree on the same time. 
7. But if concordant transits of the planets occur at this same time, from [what is said in] Chapters 5,7,8 
and 9 of this book, there can scarcely be any doubt about the effect signified on the indicated day; and fur- 
ther, the hour can be discovered from the transits and the position of the planets with respect to the horizon, 
[as is explained] in Chapter 11. And this procedure for predicting future events is the most natural and genu- 
ine of all, and the most certain. 
But perhaps the following procedure will seem briefer and more pleasing to some. If a solar revolution 
agrees with a radical direction, look at each day of a lunar revolution4 to see how the celestial state of the 
Moon and the planets compares with the radical figure and the radical direction. And on that day on which 
the state is found to be most concordant with the direction, erect a figure of the lunar revolution; for if the 
times of the concordant directions in both the solar and lunar revoutions coincide to the day, [the effect] will 
be on that day and in that hour, as was set forth above. 
You will object: This procedure for discovering the state of a whole year and the true time of the effects is 
not only very tedious, but also one very much abounding in confusion. For besides the radical directions, 
there are now established revolutionary directions, both annual and monthly—and of the angles as well as 
of the individual planets—not only through the individual places of the radix, but also through those of the 
revolution, scattered through the whole zodiac. And since there are ten significators, the Ascendant, the 
Midheaven, the Part of Fortune, and the seven planets, and four principal aspects of these, the opposition, 
trine, square, and sextile, of which the trine, square, and sextile are duplicated on the right and the left; there- 
fore each significator in a revolution can be directed to 56 places of the aspects alone for the seven planets in 
a single figure; and consequently 560 directions for the ten significators, just to the aspects of planets; to 
which, if the 63 directions of these ten significators to the bodies of the planets are added, there will be 623 
directions to be established in a single figure, such as a solar revolution. And since the directions of a solar 
revolution should be established for these ten significators both for the places of the radix as well as for the 
solar revolution, then by doubling 623 there will be 1,246 directions to be calculated for a solar revolution; 
therefore, in each lunar revolution there will be 1,869 directions by reason of the solar revolution itself and 
4 That is, each day on which a lunar revolution will occur. 
207 

===== PAGE 211 =====

the radical figure; and consequently, for twelve lunar revolutions in a year, [the total comes to] 22,428 direc- 
tions;5 and by adding to this 1,246 for the Sun, it becomes 23,674 directions6 for the solar and lunar revolu- 
tions, determined to their day, and not even judged, so that with the associated transits, which are also very 
numerous, the state of the whole year might become known. But if from so great and so confused a task 
some Demon is able to extricate himself, there is no human, who could do it. And consequently this doctrine 
is either not true or it must be confessed that judiciary astrology is incomprehensible by a human, and should 
therefore be given up. 
But I reply firstly: A wolf always seems bigger than he really is, and astrology is indeed the most difficult 
of the physical sciences, in accordance with that common saying Those things that are beautiful are diffi- 
cult. But on this account it should not be set aside by man, but rather pursued by a more eager skill. 
I reply secondly: In the old or common astrology, which admits annual, diurnal, and monthly progres- 
sions, along with the solar and lunar revolutions handed down by Cardan, scarcely fewer operations occur if 
the individual [factors] in the higher sense are minutely examined and considered. And the revolutions are 
to be individually or absolutely judged, without respect to the nativity, as Cardan himself did in his Book of 
Revolutions, and especially with the terms of the planets admitted.7 
I reply thirdly: In solar and lunar revolutions, not [all of] the aforesaid ten significators are to be directed, 
but only the important ones, namely the Ascendant, the Midheaven, the Sun in solar revolutions, and the 
Moon in lunar revolutions. And even this is not always necessary, but [only] after it has been perceived from 
a radical direction falling in the year, and from a concordant solar revolution, that some new effect, espe- 
cially one that is notably good or evil, is to be expected. If the significator of the direction is a cusp, such as 
the Ascendant, then the Ascendant of the revolution will also have to be directed. If it is a planet, the same 
planet will have to be directed in the revolution. However, it will always be useful to direct the abovesaid 
four significators in revolutions of both the Sun and the Moon, viz., the Ascendant, Midheaven, the Sun, and 
the Moon on account of the native's great dependency on them in being, acting, and being acted upon, 
whether a new radical direction is completed in that year or not; for there is not a year without a new radical 
direction, nor is there a year for the native without action or being acted upon. Besides, the previously com- 
pleted direction of a radical significator to some promittor lasts in its virtue up to the occourse of another 
promittor, unless the latter is distant from the former by more degrees. Moreover, it will also be useful to di- 
rect the same planet in either the solar or lunar revolution, for it may also be the one that is alloted a determi- 
nation concordant with the signification of the radical direction. As, if a sickness or dignity is signified, it 
will be useful to direct the planet which is found in the 12th house or the 1 Oth of the revolution, especially if 
it was also in the 12th or the 10th of the radix, or if it was the ruler of the same house. Furthermore, the 
significator that will be directed in revolutions for an accident that is only signified by the nativity, or also by 
a new or recently elapsed radical direction, should not be directed to all the places of the nativity or the revo- 
lution, but only to those, i.e., to those promittors which, from their own nature and determination in the na- 
tivity or in the revolution, will be stronger and more concordant with the same accident, whether good or 
evil is going to be produced. And when, on the days that are indicated by those same directions for years and 
months, concordant transits occur, the effects will burst forth on those very days. And an astrologer skilled 
in the concordance of causes and effects will only need a few directions for the state of the whole year, i.e., 
for recognizing the principal changes emanating from the stars for the native in that year. 
5 The text has erroneously 22028. 
6 The text has 232[7]4, having added 1246 to 22028. 
7 Taking the terms into account would at least double the amount of work, for not only would the condition of the ruler 
of a significator's sign have to be considered, but also the condition of the ruler of the significator's term. Thus, Cardan's 
procedure would be even more tedious than Morin's, since the latter ignores the terms. 
208 

===== PAGE 212 =====

But since it is certain that no effect, from the stars at least, ever happens without the actual concourse of 
concordant transits, or at least very rarely from syzygies, as was explained in Chapter 12, it will be briefer to 
note down from the ephemerides those transits of the planets through the places of the geniture that are more 
concordant with the accident signified, whether good or evil. Then, to consider whether from the solar revo- 
lution any concordant direction may fall upon any of the days indicated by the transits; and this without con- 
jecturing, from the comparison of the distance of the promittor from the significator, with the distance of the 
day indicated from the first day of the revolution, before the matter is defined by calculation, and by not tak- 
ing in a solar revolution a significator and promittor that are 3008 degrees apart for a transit that is made on 
the 60th day from the beginning of the solar revolution. Which being supposed, if in a lunar revolution that 
closely precedes the same day of the transit any concordant direction also falls at the same time, then there 
can be no doubt about the effect. And this is a secret of the science, evident nevertheless in the figures ex- 
plained in this book and in Book 24, by means of which a confident and sagacious astrologer may come 
upon his object through the densest forest of directions by [following] the right path. 
But lest the tyros in this new doctrine be deterred from seeking out the truth that is so much wished for, 
we shall set forth here for their benefit two of the abovesaid procedures in a systematic method. 
First. Direct the principal significators of the annual revolution; the Ascendant, the Midheaven, the Sun, 
the Moon, and the planet that has completed any important radical direction in that year, and then their rulers 
if it seems needful; and dispose the individual arcs of direction according to the order of their ascensions in 
the first column of a Table constructed for that year, which may rightly be termed a speculum for that year. 
Second. See on what numbered day from the beginning of the revolution of the year each month begins 
and at what hour, or what is the distance in time from the beginning of the revolution to the beginning of 
each month. And you will put the names of the months with that same number of days and hours [for each] 
across from the abovesaid arcs with the approximate same number [of days], as the number [of days] for 
each month, in the second column of the same Table; and so it will be plain which directions of the year fall 
in the individual months. 
Third. Having erected the revolutions for the whole year, arrange their times similarly in the third col- 
umn of the abovesaid Table, i.e., the month, day, and hour of the beginning of the revolution; and thus simi- 
larly it will be plain which directions of the year fall in the individual lunar revolutions. 
Fourth. When this has been done, each annual direction of each significator may be taken, with a concor- 
dant radical direction; i.e., its arc may be taken in the first column of the Table and it may be reduced to time 
by the first and second Table of Directions for solar revolutions9 in Book 23, Chapter 15 (unless you prefer 
from the beginning to reduce the arcs of the individual annual directions to days, hours, and minutes of the 
annual revolution, which individual times arranged in order will be understood to have been measured from 
the beginning of the annual revolution), and if the number of the time is the same as the number of the begin- 
ning of any month, that direction will fall at the beginning of that month; but if it is different, subtract from it 
the nearest smaller number of the beginning of a month taken from Column 2, and the difference will be 
number of days and hours of that month in which the annual direction will be completed. 
Fifth. From the time found thus, subtract the nearest time of the beginning of a lunar revolution from Col- 
8The Latin text actually has ;00 (a semi-colon followed by two zeros). I have put 300 because a 3 looks something like a 
semicolon. 
9 These tables are on p. 653 of the Astrologia Gallica and are constructed by setting 360 degrees of arc equal to 365.25 
days. The reader with a pocket calculator can turn arc into days by multiplying arc by 1.014583, and days into arc by divid- 
ing days by that same constant (or by multiplying days by 0.9856263). (The fundamental equation should be 360 degrees - 
365.2422 days, but the difference is slight.) 
209 

===== PAGE 213 =====

umn 3. And the difference of these two times will give the arc of the equator from the second and third T able 
of Directions for lunar revolutions;10 and this added to the right ascension or the oblique ascension of the 
Midheaven or the Ascendant or the Sun or the Moon in the figure of the lunar revolution will show in 
Regiomontanus's Tables of Ascension where the monthly direction of any one of these significators extends 
to. Therefore, if a direction conforming to the annual direction is then completed, and finally a concordant 
transit of the planets is also made, the effect signified by the radical direction will happen at that time or [on 
that very] day; and this can also happen from a transit concordant with a single direction of a concordant an- 
nual or monthly revolution; in fact it can happen from the transit alone with a radical direction and a concor- 
dant solar or lunar revolution, especially if the transit is important and strong. But the more causes there are 
in agreement, the more certainly and efficaciously will the effect be produced. The same thing will be done 
if it is desired for individual annual directions whether a new radical direction is completed in the same year 
or not. And thus the state of the year will be perfectly plain if the right judgment is made about the individual 
[directions]. 
There is another and shorter kind of procedure without [the use of] the preceding table. Having taken 
from the ephemerides the day of a transit that is in accordance with an efficacious radical signification of the 
geniture, i.e., with a concordant radical signification of the geniture, count the number of completed days 
from the beginning of the annual revolution to that same day, and turn that into degrees of the equator by 
means of the second and third table of directions for solar revolutions; and add that arc to the right ascension 
or the oblique ascension of the concordant significator, chosen in the figure of the solar revolution; and look 
up their sum in the tables of right ascension or oblique ascension; and it will then be plain whether that 
significator pertains to the concordant promittor in the natal horoscope or the solar revolution. For if that is 
the case, there is a great probability of a future effect on that very day. But for greater certainty, count the 
time similarly from the beginning of the monthly revolution most nearly preceding the day taken above to 
the day itself; and turn that into degrees of the equator with the second and third table of directions for lunar 
revolutions. And add that arc to the right ascension or oblique ascension of the concordant significator, cho- 
sen in the figure of the lunar revolution; and look up their sum in the tables of ascensions as before; and it 
will then be plain also whether that significator pertains to a concordant promittor in the natal horoscope or 
the lunar revolution. And if that is the case, there is a great probability of a future effect on that very day. 
But if there are many days of transits that suit these requirements, it will be necessary to judge which is 
the stronger. For even though the effect from a strongly signified radical direction may happen on one par- 
ticular day, not on several, yet in this most difficult science to hit the target with the first shot is very difficult 
for the human intellect, but not impossible; and continual exercise in this procedure is required to achieve 
this, along with an uncommon shrewdness of intellect that is able to discern which of the whole year's tran- 
sits is the more suitable and powerful to actuate the potential of a radical direction, so that [needless] labor 
may be reduced. 
Besides, I don't think there is any need to caution [the reader] that if the significators to be directed are 
placed in the descending half of the caelum,11 the equatorial arcs about which we spoke above will have to be 
added to the OD's of their significators for their directions, or (which is easier) the place diametrically oppo- 
site to the significator will have to be directed by its ascensions, and the place diametrically opposed to the di- 
rection will be obtained, for we have supposed that this is sufficiently known from the doctrine of directions. 
10 These tables are on p. 657 of the Astrologia Gallica and are constructed by setting 360 degrees of arc equal to 27,325 
days. The reader with a pocket calculator can turn arc into days by multiplying arc by 0.0759028, and days into arc by divid- 
ing days by that same constant (or by multiplying days by 13.17475). (The fundamental equation should be 360 degrees = 
27.32158 days, but the difference is slight.) 
11 The right side of the chart. 
210 

===== PAGE 214 =====

Only we should therefore caution [the reader] that since the doctrine we have set forth up to now for di- 
rections, revolutions, and transits is natural and uniform in both natal horoscopes and their revolutions, then 
it is also true, as is very plainly shown by the examples given in Book 23. And he will have to rely on this 
alone and not spare the labor [of making] the lunar revolutions for the whole year, especially when a new 
radical direction is completed in that year or it is allotted a determination in the radix that is of particular im- 
portance. For he will always produce the revolutions of the Moon and consider its directions either for any 
annual direction or for any concordant transit.12 And from this it is plain that particular events and their exact 
times cannot be predicted by an astrologer without great labor; because in fact particular effects depend not 
only upon universal but also upon particular causes, to which one must descend in order to obtain these 
same particular effects. 
You will object secondly: That the native's future accidents cannot be predicted from the doctrine set 
forth by us above. So in fact the radical figure and its directions do not act without both the solar and lunar 
revolutions and the transits of the planets through the places of those three figures according to what was 
said above, and also the revolutions must be erected for the place in which the native is located at the time of 
each revolution, either of the Sun or of the Moon, in accordance with Book 23, Chapters 4 and 9; and this 
[future] place cannot be known from the natal chart. Indeed, it can scarcely be known even one year before 
the time of each solar revolution; therefore, astrology is unusable and worthless for predicting the future. 
I reply first: That this objection only applies to those natives who travel some distance away, not to those 
who remain at their natal place, among whom are especially women,13 or close to that place. 
I reply secondly: From the nativity and the radical directions it can be known whether the native is going 
to travel and at what time, prior to which the revolutions erected for the natal place will be usable. 
I reply thirdly: Some journeys are long, and others are short. Those which do not exceed 50 Gallic 
leagues from the natal place will scarcely make any noticeable change in the influx of revolutions erected 
for the natal place unless a difference of Ascendants is produced that exceeds 2 degrees.14 And for those rev- 
olutions beginning with the native further distant, especially when a difference of sign is involved, they 
must be erected for the place where he is, and thus the things that are going to happen to him in that year may 
be known in advance. And it must be noted that a solar revolution, erected for the place where the native is, 
is valid for that whole year, however much he may travel during it, for he carries along with him the influx 
newly impressed at the beginning of that revolution, not otherwise than through the whole course of life he 
carries along the influx received at birth just as it was impressed upon him; but the lunar revolutions will be 
erected for the place in which the native is at the time. For just as the revolutions are related to the nativity, 
so the lunar revolutions are to the solar revolution, which they actuate similarly. And hence astrology cannot 
be said to be unusable and worthless. Especially since the native can conjecture in individual years, and 
much more so in individual months, where he will be at the time of the next solar or lunar revolution. But 
whoever would do otherwise and would deliver an opinion about the native's individual accidents through- 
out the whole course of his life just from his nativity and its directions, or even with the addition of revolu- 
12 That is, he will select the appropriate one of the lunar revolutions and consider its directions. 
13 In Morin's time women generally stayed at home and did not travel nearly so much as men. 
14 A Gallic league was about 2.5 statute miles; hence 50 leagues would be 125 miles. In the latitude of Paris a degree of 
longitude is equal to about 49.6 miles, so in the worst case—when the native was due east or west of his birthplace at the 
time of the revolution—the RAMC would be increased or decreased by 2o30' or so. Again in the worst case with 0 Capri- 
corn on the Midheaven—such a change in the RAMC would alter the longitude of the Ascendant by 5.04. To keep it down to 
the 2-degree maximum that Morin mentions, the maximum E or W distance from the birthplace would have to be restricted 
to 46 miles or 1814 Gallic leagues. But in an average case this distance would be increased to about 100 miles or 40 Gallic 
leagues. 
211 

===== PAGE 215 =====

tions erected only for the place of the nativity, that one will certainly be deceived in many things, and more 
or less on account of the discrepancy of the revolutional figures in the different places [where the native may 
be]. For the stars do not make their influx upon the native except where he is. But let what has already been 
said about this suffice. 
212 

===== PAGE 216 =====

Index of Persons 
Abu 'Ali al-Khayyat see Albohali. 
Abu Ma'shar see Albumasar. 
Adam 89,178 
Agarrat, Antoine 41, 42 n. 79, 139-140 
Albohali 176 a 11 
Albumasar 22 
Alchabitius 22, 143 
'Ali ibn abi al-Rijal see Haly Abenragel. 
'Ali ibn Ridwan see Haly Abenrudian. 
Ambrose, St. 109 
Anaxagoras 188 
Angeli, Alessandro 103,107, 109-113, 191 
Anne of Austria, Queen of Poland 37 n. 58 
Arabian Astrologers xii, 2, 121 n. 209, 176 n. 11 
Argol 32 n. 50, 50, 58,59,64, 136 
Argoli, Andrea see Argol. 
Aristotle 188 
Ashmand, J.M. 2 n. 4, 35 n. 35, 57 n. 101 
Attila 4 
Augustine, St. 109 
Avicenna 104 
Baldwin, Richard S. xi n. 2, xii, 39 n. 66 
Barbarians 76 
Bede, The Venerable 155, 188 
Bellando, Lucio see Bellantius, Lucius. 
Bellantius, Lucius 2, 49, 50, 51, 107 n. 179 
Benedictines 164 n. 20 
Bianchini, Giovanni 32, 123, 127,128, 132, 135-137 
Bonne, Francois de see Lesdiguiercs. 
213 

===== PAGE 217 =====

Bouillau, Ismael 42 n. 79-80, 78, 139 
Brahe, Tycho 47 n. 57, 108 n. 184, 127, 134 n. 15 
Caesar 76 
Cain 65 
Calvin, John 4 
Cardan, Jerome xii, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,11, 12, 22, 25 n. 35, 28, 31, 32, 44, 56, 57, 58, 59, 62,63, 87, 88, 
89, 90,96, 107, HOn. 187, 115, 123 n. 2,126, 134, 137, 141, 143, 164 n. 23, 169-171, 179-180, 189, 
190, 193,208 
Cardano, Girolamo see Cardan, Jerome. 
Casimir V see John 11 Casimir. 
Catastini, Angelo de 107 
Catherine de' Medici, Queen of France 98, 147 
Catholics 76 
Chaldeans 179 
Charles V, Emperor of Germany 99 n. 162, 110 
Charles 1 Gonzaga see Mantua. 
Chavigny, Leon Bouthillier, Count of 87 
Chinese 76,104 n. 171 
Christ, Jesus 2, 76,155, 156,179,188,189 
Christians 77 
Christian Philosophers 179 
Cibo, Maddalena de'Medici 99 n. 161 
Classical Astrologers 74 n. 120 
Coley, Henry 182 n. 2 
Condren, Charles de 84 
Constance of Austria, Queen of Poland 39 n. 64 
Cooper, John 11 n. 16, 178 n. 16 
Copernicus, Nicolaus 47 n, 91, 127 
Cottrel, James 107 n. 181 
Culpeper, Nicholas 139 
Davis & Dickson 11 n. 16 
Demons 91, 94, 155, 169,178,190,201 
214 

===== PAGE 218 =====

Des Noyers, Lord 39 
Devil 76, 178 
Dorotheus of Sidon 169 n. 2, 176 n. 11 
Dunet, Noel 36 
Ecclesiasticus 111 
Eichstadt, Lorenz 41 
Ezekiel 64 
Pagan, Cyril 189 n. 9 
Famese, Ottavio see Parma and Piacenza. 
Famese, Pieriuigi see Parma and Piacenza. 
Fessel, Philip 53 
Ficino, Marsilio 114 
Firmicus Matemus, Julius 74 n. 120,104 n. 173 
First Astrologers 189 
France, King of see Henry II; Louis XIV. 
France, Queen of see Catherine de' Medici Queen of France. 
France, Queen Mother of see Marie de' Medici. 
Francis I seeTuscany. 
Gadbury, John 107 n. 181 
Galen, Claudius 55, 111 
Galilei, Galileo 74 n. 117 
Gassendi, Pierre 139-140 
Gaston of Bourbon see Orleans, Duke of. 
Gaurico, Luca 110 n. 187 
Gingerich, Owen 36 n. 53, 41 n. 76, 139 n. 1 
Giuntini, Francesco see Junctinus, Franciscus. 
God 2, 5, 9, 52, 64, 76, 77, 80, 93, 94, 95, 155, 163, 178, 182, 193, 201, 204 
Good Spirit 201 
Goulas, Nicolas see La Mothe. 
Greek Astrologers 2, 169 
Gulliver, Lemuel 74 n. 119 
215 

===== PAGE 219 =====

Gustavus II Adolphus, King of Sweden 87 n. 136 
Haileseus see Roeslin, Eucharius. 
Hall, Asaph 74 n. 119 
Haly (Abenragel) 6 n. 7, 8 
Haly Abenrudian 6 n.7 
Hayes, Louis des 185 
Hebrews 155 
Hemminga, Sixtus ab 7, 66,110-120 
Henry II, King of France 98, 148 
Heretics 76 
Hermes 182 
Herodotus 188 
Hevel, Johann 139 n. 6 
Hieroz, Jean xi n. 2 n. 3-4 
Hipparchus 189 n. 6 
Hippocrates 111 
Huygens, Chrisriaan 74 n. 117 
Ibn Sina seeAvicenna. 
Jews 155 
John, St. 76 n. 121 
John II Casimir, King of Poland 37 
John of Alexandria 111 n. 190 
John of Seville 169, 179 n. 17 
Jones, W.H.S. 166 n. 28 
Junctinus, Franciscus 2, 8,10, 21, 22, 31, 88, 92, 98 n. 154-55, 107, 111, 114, 141, 147, 148, 
Jupiter 95 
Kepler, Johann 36 n. 53, 41 n. 76, 42 n. 78, 51, 52, 53, 56, 57, 58, 59, 62, 63, 64, 127, 129, 133, 134, 
137, 141, 155, 156 n. 3, 188 
La Mothe, Nicolaus Goulas, Lord of 38 
Lansberge, Philip van 137 n.22 
Latin Astrologers 169 
216 

===== PAGE 220 =====

La Tour d'Auvergne, Madeleine de see Urbino, Dutchess of. 
Leo, Alan 98 n. 154, 141 
Leovitius, Cyprian 110 n. 187 
Lesdiguieres, Francois de Bonne, Duke of 184 
Libert, J. 81 
Liliputians 74 n. 119 
Lilly, William 3, 52, 139 
Linnaeus, Carl 160 n. 8 
Little, Lucy xi n. 2 
Loeb, James 166 n. 28 
Longomontanus, Christian Severin 57, 155, 188 
Louis XIII, King of France 39 n. 62 
Louis XIV, King of France 39 
Luther, Martin 4 
Magini, Giovanni Antonio 22, 57, 59,64 
Maginus see Magini. 
Malatesta, G.B. 11 n. 16 
Mammon 76 
Manilius, Marcus 104 n. 173 
Mantua, Charles I Gonzaga, Duke of 37 n. 57 
Margherita see Parma and Piacenza. 
Marie, Princess 39 
Marie de' Medici, Queen Mother of France 39 
Marie Louise of Gonzaga, Queen of Poland 37 
Masha'allah see Messahala. 
Matthew, St. 76 n. 122 
Medici, Catherine de' see Catherine. 
Medici, Cosimo I de' see Tuscany. 
Medici, Francesco I de' see Tuscany. 
Medici, Giuliano II de' see Nemours. 
Medici, Lorenzo II de' see Urbino. 
217 

===== PAGE 221 =====

Medici, Lorenzo de1 (II Magnifico) 98 n. 157, 98 n. 160 
Medici, Pietro II de' 98, 134 n. 159-160, 144 
Melissus 188 
Mersenne, Marin 171 
Micheria, Clara 90 
Mirandola, Giovanni II Pico, Lord of 2,49,92,103, 106,107,110,112,120 n. 208 
Mohammed 4 
Montanus & Neuber 179 n. 17 
Morin, J.B. xi, xii, xiii, 1 n. 1,2 n. 4, 3 n. 5,10 n. 15, 14 n. 19, 22 n. 25, 24 n. 33, 25 n. 35,26 n. 39, 28,n. 
45, 29 n. 46, 33 n. 52, 36 n. 53,42 n. 79-81, 43 n. 83,45 n. 85,45 n. 86, 47 n. 91, 50 n. 94, 62 n. 106, 63 
n. 109, 74 n. 117,74n. 119,77n. 124, 79 n. 125,81 n. 129, 88 n. 141-143, 89 n. 144, 90 n. 147-148,98 
n. 154-155 n. 158, 103 n. 170, 104 n. 173, 105 n. 176, 106 n. 178, 111 n. 191, 112 n. 196, 117n. 
206-207,120 n. 208,129 n. 7, 130n. 11, 131 n. 12, 133 n. 14,134n. 15, 135 n. 17, 135 n. 19-20, 
139-140, 141, 142, 151, 153, 164 n. 23 n. 24 166 n.27n. 36, 176 n. 11, 177 n. 15, 184 n. 2 190 n. 16 n. 
17-18, 191 n. 20, 208 n. 7 
Miiller, Johann see Regiomontanus. 
Na(i)bod, Valentine 22, 23, 24,26, 27, 28, 43, 57, 58, 59, 90 n. 150 
Nemours, Giuliano II de' Medici, Duke of 98 n. 159, 145 
Newcomb, Simon 139 
Northern Peoples 175 
Old Astrologers 1, 121, 169, 187, 188 
Oppolzer, Theodor, Ritter von 139 n. 1 
Origanus, David 7, 10, 28, 31, 32, 136, 155, 193 
Origen 109 
Orleans, Gaston of Bourbon, Duke of 38,41 
Orleans, Marguerite of Lorraine, Dutchess of 57 
Orsini, Alfonsina99 n. 161 
Pagans 76 
Parma and Piacenza, Margherita, Dutchess of 99 n. 162 
Parma and Piacenza, Ottavio Famese, Duke of 99 
Parma and Piacenza, Pierluigi Famese, Duke of 99 n. 162 
Paul III, Pope 99 n. 162 
Paul of Alexandria 179 n. 18 
218 

===== PAGE 222 =====

Pharisees 2 
Philosophers 32, 104 
Pico della Mirandola see Mirandola. 
Pilate, Pontius 76 
Placidus xii, 11 n. 16, 23 n. 30, 25 n. 36, 26 n. 37,28 n. 43, 135 n. 18 
Plato 114 n. 202, 188 
Pliny the Elder 159 n. 5-6 n. 8 
Plotinus 114 
Poland, King of see John II Casimir; Sigismund III; Vladislav IV. 
Poland, Queen of see Marie Louise of Gomaga. 
Pontano, Giovanni Gioviano see Pontanus. 
Pontanus 46 
Proclus 2 n. 4, 25 n. 35 
Pseudo-Ptolemy 6 n. 7, 79 n. 125 
Ptolemy, Claudius xii, 1, 2, 6, 7, 8 12, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 31, 32,43,44,46 n. 88,47 n. 90, 50, 55, 
57, 58, 59, 62, 74 n. 20, 87, 88 103, 114, 115, 116, 127, 128, 135, 164 n. 23,169,170, 171, 172,173, 
176, 177, 179, 180, 181, 182, 187, 191 
Pythagoras 57 n. 104 
AI-Qabisi see Alchabitius. 
Rabbis 155 
Recent Astrologers 136 
Regiomontanus xii, 22,23 n. 31, 24,25, 26, 38,31, 32, 50, 58, 127,132, 135, 151 
Reinhold, Erasmus 136 n. 22 
Renata Cecilia of Austria, Queen of Poland 37 n. 58 
Richelieu, Armand Jean du Plessis de, Cardinal 38 n. 61, 39, 81, 87, n. 135, 185 n, 9 
Rispe, Joao De Giam, Lord of 185 
Robbins, F.B. 2 n. 4, 35 n, 35, 57 n, 101 
Roeslin, Eucharius 53 
Rossi, Gioseppe de 53 n. 98 
Rossini 53 
Salvation Army 164 n. 20 
Sarton, George 111 n. 190 
219 

===== PAGE 223 =====

Satan 52 
Schoner, Johann 6, 32 n. 50, 58, 170, 172, 196 
Schwickert, Friedrich xi n. 3 n. 5 
Scribes 2 
Selva, Henri xi n. 2 
Siderealists 189 n. 9 
Sigismund III, King of Poland 37 n. 58 
Socrates 188 
Southern Peoples 175 
Spain, King of 174 
Strozzi, Clarice 99 n. 161 
Strozzi, Filippo 99 n. 161 
Sweden, King of see Gustavus II Adolphus. 
Swift, Jonathan 74 n. 119 
Syrigato, Antonio 107 n. 179 
Theon of Alexandria 189 n. 15 
Thomdike, Lynn 103 n. 169, HOn. 187, 111 n. 190, 139 n. 3, 191 n. 19 
Timocharis 189 
Tooke & Sawbridge 182 n. 2 
Tronson, Louis 14 
Turk 76 
Tuscany, Cosimo I de' Medici, Grand Duke of 99 n. 164 
Tuscany, Francis I de' Media, Grand Duke of 99, 150 
Urbino, Lorenzo 11 de' Medici, Duke of 99, 146 
Urbino, Madeleine de La Tour d'Auvergne, Dutchess of 99 n. 161 
Vettius, Valens 177 n. 15 
Vladislav IV, King of Poland 37 n. 58, 38,39 n. 62 
Weiss, Adolph xi, 3 n. 5 
Welther, Barbara 36 n. 53 
Zannetti, B. 191 n. 19 
220