=== Page 1 ===
ASTRO LOG IA GALLIC A
BOOK TWENTY-FIVE
THE UNIVERSAL CONSTITUTIONS
OFTHECAELUM

=== Page 2 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Astrologia Gallica
Book Twenty-Five
The Universal Constitutions
of the Caelum
Translated from the Latin
by
James Herschel Holden, M.A.
Fellow of the American Federation
of Astrologers

=== Page 3 ===
This book is dedicated to:
Kris Brandt Riske
iii

=== Page 4 ===
Table of Contents
Translator's Preface
Book Twenty-Five
Part I.
Chapter 1. What is the Doctrine of the Universal
Constitutions of the Caelum
Chapter 2. The Universal Mode of Action of the
Celestial Bodies
Chapter 3. The Subordination and Dependency of
Universal Constitutions
Chapter 4. How the Annual Revolution of the World
should be erected for any Place on Earth, as well
as the figures of the Quarters of that Year
Chapter 5. The Radical and Synodic Revolutions of
the Planets and their Syzygies
Chapter 6. How Should the Figures of the Synods of
the Sun and the Moon be erected
Chapter 7. The Eclipses of the Lights and what should
be particularly observed about them
Chapter 8. The Grand Conjunctions of Saturn, Mars,
and Jupiter
Chapter 9. How the Rulers of Universal Constitutions
should generally be chosen
Chapter 10. The Application of what was just said, and
the Election of Rulers in the Figures shown above
Chapter 11. Which Places on Earth a Universal
Constitution may be acting upon
Chapter 12. The Times of the Events that will occur
from the Universal Constitutions
Chapter 13. The Quantity of Effects emanating from
Universal Constitutions
Chapter 14. The Quality of the Effects of Universal
Constitutions in general
IX
1
14
20
30
37
49
53
61
65
75
80
85
100
101
V

=== Page 5 ===
Chapter 15. Some particular things that should be noted 105
about the Nature and the Actions of the Planets
in Universal and Particular Constitutions
Part II.
Chapter 1. In which some important things are mentioned 108
first about the kinds of Effects emanating from
Universal Constitutions, or are taught about the
kinds of Prediction
Chapter 2. The Difference between the Periodical and 121
Synodic Revolutions of the Planets as regards their
Efficiency
Chapter 3. The Kinds or Types of Effects emanating 123
from Universal Constitutions. And first, the Effects
of the Mundane Revolution of the Sun
Chapter 4. The special Effects of the Planets that are 126
Rulers of the Year, resulting from their Nature
Chapter 5. The special Effects of the Rulers of the Year 137
[that result] from their own Celestial State. And first,
by reason of the Sign in which they are posited
Chapter 6. The special Effects of the Planets that are 144
Rulers of the Year by reason of their Connection
with other Planets or Fixed Stars
Table of the Mansions of the Moon 154
Chapter 7. The special Effects of the Planets that are 155
Rulers of the Year, from their Position in relation
to the Sun and the Moon
Chapter 8. The Special effects of the Planets that are 164
Rulers of the Year from the Mode of their Motion
Chapter 9. The special Effects of the Planets that are 168
Rulers of the Year due to their Terrestrial State,
or their Position with respect to the Horizon
Chapter 10. The Effects of the Quarters of the Mundane 171
Revolution of the Sun
Chapter 11. The Effects of the Synodic Revolution of the 175
Sun and the Moon and its Quarters
VI

=== Page 6 ===
Chapter 12. The Synodic Revolutions of the Planets, 184
both among Themselves and with the Lights, their
Quarters, and their Effects
Chapter 13. The Order of Subordination of the Universal 191
Constitutions of the Caelum and the Mixture of their
Effects
Chapter 14. The Dependence of the particular Constitutions 194
of Nativities on the Universal Constitutions already
discussed; and how they act upon individual Natives
during their Lifetime.
Chapter 15. The general and particular Significations 203
of Comets
Chapter 16. How the daily Effects of the Stars on these 207
Sublunar Things should be predicted
Appendix 1. The Method of Offusius as revised by Morin 217
Appendix 2. World War II Charts 221
Appendix 3. Aries Ingresses for 1914 227
Appendix 4. Table of the Equation of Time 229
Appendix 5. The Mansions of the Moon for the Year 2000 231
Index of Persons 233
Bibliography 237
VII

=== Page 7 ===
Translator's Preface
J. B. Morin, M.D. (1583-1656) worked for 30 years on his mas-
sive Astrologia Gallica [French Astrology] but did not live to see
it in print. Its posthumous publication at The Hague in 1661 was
subsidized by Queen Marie Louise of Poland (1611-1667), a
grateful former client. The main text of the Astrologia Gallica fills
784 double-columned folio pages. It has approximately 548,000
Latin words, which translated into English would amount to ap-
proximately 995,000 words—a truly massive book! By way of
comparison, the English Bible, contains about 775,000 words. The
Astrologia Gallica is divided into 26 books. The first 12 are
mainly concerned with philosophical and religious considerations.
Books 13-26 cover the several branches of astrology in great de-
tail.
Since the Astrologia Gallica is so extensive, it has never been
filly translated into any modem language. After 240 years, Book
21 on Determinations was translated into French1 by the French re-
vival astrologer Henri Selva (1861-1952). This was the book that
first called the modem astrological public's attention to the Morin
method. In effect, it launched the modem study of the Morin
method of interpretation. Nothing more appeared until 1941, when
Jean Hieroz (b. 1889) published a manual on the Morin method of
horoscope interpretation,2 and in that same year he published a
translation of the latter half of Book 26 on Horary Astrology and
Elections, followed in 1943 by a compilation of short biographical
passages from the AG under the title Ma vie devant les astres (My
Life before the Stars), and in 1946 he published what he called a
'La Theorie des Determinations Astrologiques de Morin De Villefranche, trans,
by Henri Selva (Paris, 1897; repr. by Bodin, 1902) and repr. in facsimile (Paris:
Editions Traditionelles, 1976 ; repr. 1991).
2L 'Astrologie selon J-B Morin de Villefranche. 'Astrology According to J.B.
Morin of Villefranche' (Paris: Payot, 1941.).
IX

=== Page 8 ===
complete French translation of Book 25. Hieroz was a well-known
French astrologer who had studied with Selva.
The first English translations from the Astrologia Gallic a were
published in 1974, when two independent translations of Book 21
appeared.1 Then, after another 20 years, more English translations
began to appear. First, Book 22 on Primary Directions (with ex-
cerpts from Books 2, 13, 15, 17, 18, 20, 23, and 24),2 followed by
Book 23 on Revolutions,3 Book 18 on the Strengths of the Plan-
ets,4 Book 24 on Progressions and Transits,5 Books 13-15 and
Book 19,6 Book 16 on Rays and Aspects, and Book 17 on the As-
trological Houses.7 So far as I am aware, no other parts of the
Astrologia Gallica have been published in English.
The French translations of Books 21 on Determinations, Book
25 on Mundane Astrology, and the latter portion of Book 26 deal-
ing with Elections may still be available in reprints.8
1 Astrosynthesis/ The Rational System of Horoscope Interpretation/ according to
Morin de Villefranche, translated from Selva's French version by Lucy Little
(New York: Zoltan Mason, 1974); and The Morinus System of Horoscope Inter-
pretation, trans, from the original Latin by Richard S. Baldwin (Washington;
A.F.A., Inc., 1974).
2Astrologia Gallica/Book Twenty-Two/Directions, translated by James Herschel
Holden (Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 1994).
21 Astrologia Gallica/ Book Twenty-Three/ Revolutions, translated by James
Herschel Holden (Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2002; reprinted with revisions
2004).
* Astrologia Gallica/Book Eighteen The Strengths of the Planets, translated from
the Spanish version of Pepita Sanchis Llacer by Anthony Louis LaBruzza
(Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc. 2004)
sAstrologia Gallica/Book Twenty-Four/Progressions and Transits, translated by
James Herschel Holden (Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2005).
Published in an omnibus edition, translated by James Herschel Holden (Tempe, Az.:
A.F.A., Inc., 2006).
7Published in individual volumes, translated by James Herschel Holden (Tempe,
Az.: A.F.A. Inc., 2008).
8Z, 'astrologie mondiale et meteorologique de Morin de Villefranche, traduction
integrate du XXV Livre de L 'Astrologie Gallica trans, by Jean Hieroz (Paris: Les
feditions Leymarie, 1946) and La doctrine des elections de Morin, trans, by Jean
Hieroz (Nice: Les Cahiers Astrologiques, 1941).
x

=== Page 9 ===
Despite Hieroz's assertion, his translation of Book 25 is not
complete,1 and it often resorts to paraphrase and to his own expla-
nations interpolated into the translation. However, I have some-
times benefited from his rendering of the Latin. At the end of his
translation he has added a Summary of Morin's rules, his account
of Offiisius's rules, examples of the application of Morin's rules to
predicting the outbreak of World War II, and Morin's Tables for
calculating Solar returns.
At the end of my translation, I have added translations of
Hieroz's statement of Offusius's rules, and his discussion of the
World War II charts. I have also added a few Mundane charts for
the year 1914 as a convenience to students, an appendix containing
a Table of the Equation of Time, an Index of Persons, and a Bibli-
ography.
In 1996, having temporarily mislaid my photocopy of the
Astrologia Gallica, I translated Hieroz's French version of Book
25 and its appendices, and at the request of Kris Brandt Riske, Li-
brarian of the American Federation of Astrologers, I later supplied
some excerpts from my translation. These dealt mainly with the
prediction of the weather. I had originally intended to publish my
English version of Hieroz's French translation, but a decade later
on comparing it with the Latin text, and noticing the numerous dis-
crepancies mentioned above, I decided to translate Book 25 di-
rectly from the Latin original, and that is what you have here.
Some Remarks about Book 25
It might be helpful to the reader who is not familiar with the
Astrologia Gallica to mention that Morin makes frequent use of
some of his own technical terms, in particular the term determina-
tions. This term describes his theory of the facets of a person's life
'it is in fact an abbreviated translation. For example, he begins by omitting
Morin's Preface to Book 25 and continues by skipping more than half of Chapter
1. Throughout the remainder of the translation there are frequent omissions of
passages that Hieroz evidently thought were unimportant—I estimate that he has
omitted 20% of the text of Book 25.
xi

=== Page 10 ===
or the field of activity in which a Planet will be active in a particu-
lar horoscope or mundane chart. The main criterion is the house
position of the planet, e.g. a planet in the 2nd house is primarily de-
termined to money matters, but its house rulerships, and its aspects
to other Planets also have an influence.
Two other distinctive terms are celestial state and terrestrial
state. Celestial state describes the universal influences arising
from a Planet's sign position and its aspects; these influences are
viewed as being descriptive of the planet's potential influence at a
given moment. Terrestrial state refers to a Planet's house position
in a particular chart, which establishes the determination and also
the strength of the planet, which depends on the house's relation-
ship to the angles—angular houses being strong, succedent houses
middling, and cadent houses weak.
Morin also consistently uses the older term revolution where we
would speak of ingresses or solar or lunar or planetary returns, and
he uses the word universal where we would use mundane. In this
book he very frequently uses the term universal constitution,
which means what we would call a mundane chart, i.e. a chart
drawn to make predictions for a region rather than for an individ-
ual—the commonest example is the annual Aries Ingress chart, but
the chart of a Mars-Saturn conjunction would be another example.
And occasionally he uses the term constitution to refer to a natal
chart.
He also frequently speaks of synods, i.e. conjunctions, and
syzygies, which can be either conjunctions or oppositions (and
sometimes squares or even trines). I have usually retained these
terms. And I have also kept the Latin word Caelum to refer to the
configuration of the celestial sphere at a given moment, rather than
translate it as sky or heaven.
It is perhaps worth mentioning that while Morin's theory of in-
terpreting Aries Ingress charts seems sound, his own experience
with such charts is now known to have been misleading. The
xn

=== Page 11 ===
Rudolphine Tables that became available in 1627 had a cyclic er-
ror in the Sun's longitude that amounted to about 0o07,30" at the
equinoxes (but only about 0o00,20" at the solstices). This caused
the tabular time of an Aries Ingress to be about 3 hours early and
the tabular time of the Libra Ingress to be about 3 hours late, while
the times of the Cancer and Capricorn Ingresses were only off by
10 or 15 minutes.
Hence, every single Aries Ingress chart that Morin (or any other
astrologer of his day) ever drew and considered was 3 hours off
and consequently had the wrong ASC and MC (as well as the
wrong house positions)!
In Part I, Chapter 2, Morin gives a table of the times of the Solar
Ingresses for the year 1600 as calculated from the Rudolphine Ta-
bles} They are shown in the following table with the times re-
duced to Greenwich, the solar longitudes calculated for those
times from modem theory, and the error of the older tables in the
time of the Ingress in hours and minutes.
Uraniborg Greenwich Time
LMT UT Longitude Error
T Ingress 20 Mar 1600 05:41:02 359052.5 -3:03
06:31:50 AM
S Ingress 21 Jun 1600 09:40:28 89059.6 -0:11
10:31:16 AM
Ingress 23 Sep 1600 00:02:44 180o07.0 +2:49
0:53:32 AM
^ Ingress 21 Dec 1600 10:35:32 269059.5 -0:14
11:26:20 AM
Prior to 1617, when Kepler began to publish ephemerides that
probably anticipated the positions (at least for the Sun) that could
later be calculated from his Rudolphine Tables, the available
ephemerides were even more in error. The sad truth is that no Aries
'They seem to have been calculated fairly accurately. If we calculate the Sun's
position from the Rudolphine Tables for the times given by Morin, we find
0o00.7, 90o00.0, 179059.4, and 269059.9 respectively.
xni

=== Page 12 ===
Ingress calculated by any astrologer anywhere before that time
was accurate, because the astronomers had been unable to produce
ephemerides of the Sun that were accurate to within 1 minute of
arc.1 Astrologers had almost universally trusted the tables and
ephemerides prepared by astronomers, and the astronomers had let
them down with their faulty solar theories!
James Herschel Holden
August 15, 2007
'The ephemerides published by the French government achieved this accuracy
from about 1710 onward. By the end of the 18th century the French, German, and
English government ephemerides gave solar positions that had a maximum error
of about 10 seconds of arc. This amounted to 4 minutes of time, so Aries Ingress
charts calculated from them would have had an error in the house cusps of 1 or 2
degrees at most. Twentieth century tables and computer programs are generally
accurate to within 1 or 2 seconds of arc, so the error in the house cusps of a Solar
Ingress chart is now negligible.
xiv

=== Page 13 ===
Preface
Since the previous books on particular constitutions of the
Caelum, i.e. natal charts, have been sufficiently treated, it follows
now that we should also open our mind to the other part of astrol-
ogy, which is concerned with universal constitutions. Moreover,
that part embraces a veiy beautiful doctrine, one very broad and
of maximum importance: about which the old astrologers wrote in
various ways but confusedly, imperfectly, and erroneously from
the lack of a true understanding of this very noble science, so that
it was by no means a little difficult for us, having read their volu-
minous treatises, to recast that doctrine into some method worthy
ofthis science. And yet, from the principles previously stated by us,
and with GOD favoring, we have done it, with the errors of the old
astrologers overthrown and cast out, so that in what follows it will
be plain to the learned Reader, and not without the greatest plea-
sure to his mind, when he will contemplate the true and marvelous
modes of action of the celestial bodies in this book, illumined with
the light that was hitherto hidden.
Section I.
Chapter 1. What the Doctrine of the Universal
Constitutions of the Caelum is.
A particular Constitution1 of the Caelum is that which is deter-
mined for some particular [thing], as for the man being bom or the
'The phrase 'particular constitution' refers ion natal chart, while the phrase 'uni-
versal constitution' refers to a mundane chart drawn for a particular place and
time, such as an Aries Ingress (or Revolution, as Morin calls it), the chart of an
eclipse, the chart of a conjunction of the Major Planets, etc.
3

=== Page 14 ===
horse to which it refers. Whence it follows that a constitution of the
Caelum should be called universal that has not been determined
for any particular [thing], but rather one that affects and refers to
many [things] universally, such as a total region or a city.
And Ptolemy1 sets forth this doctrine in Quadripartite Book 2,2
but briefly; since, however, Cardan,3 in the beginning of his Com-
mentary on Chapter 1 [says] "it is more difficult and more of a ma-
jor work than the doctrine relating to an individual man." and
Cardan himself offers the reason, "that we have by far a lesser un-
derstanding of general constitutions than we do of individual
ones." but exactly why we should be unacquainted with this, he
does not remark.
However, he will hold the understanding of general things to be
more necessary than the understanding of particular things, since
from Ptolemy, Book 1, Chapter 2,4 "many things happen to men on
account of a general constitution, not from the proper quality of a
particular nature; such as when great conversions or changes of the
atmosphere, which can [only] be guarded against with difficulty,
kill whole nations, or things such as disease or floods [that dam-
age] trees, since always the inferior cause was submitted to the
greater and stronger cause." This [from] Ptolemy.
'Claudius Ptolemy (2nd cent.), the famous writer on astronomy, astrology and
geography.
2The Latin translation of Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos was called Quadripartite. For the
convenience of the reader, in what follows I will give the correspodning Book
and Chapter numbers of Robbins's translation of the Tetrabiblos, which differ
slightly from the numbeimg of the chapters in the Quadripartite.
3Girolamo Cardano, M.D. (1501-1576), usually called Jerome Cardan in English.
Very famous physican, mathematician, astrologer, and miscellaneous writer.
Amongst other things, he wrote a very detailed Commentary on Ptolemy's Quad-
ripartite, and it is to this Commentary that Morin repeatedly refers.
4The reference numbers are reversed. It is actually in Book 2, Chapter 1, that Ptol-
emy says "the first and more universal [part of astrology] is that which relates to
whole races, countries, and cities, which is called general, and the second and
more specific is that which relates to individual men, which is called
genethlialogical, we believe it is fitting to treat first of the general division, be-
cause such matters are naturally swayed by greater and more powerful causes
than are particular events ... since weaker natures always yield to the stronger..
." (Robbins's translation.)
4

=== Page 15 ===
Besides, the old astrologers begin the doctrine of Universal
Constitutions from the motion of the apsides of the planets, the
change of the eccentricity of the Sun, and the variation of the
Obliquity of the Ecliptic; and to these universal causes, as if they
are primary causes in Nature, they attribute the most considerable
forces of changing kingdoms, empires, religions, etc.—but ab-
surdly!
For First, there is no change in the eccentricity of the Sun or in
that of the other planets1; and no variation of the Obliquity of the
Ecliptic2; as we have stated in our Theories of the Planets in agree-
ment with Kepler in his Epitome of the Astronomy of Copernicus
and in the Rudolphine Tables? And such fictions were introduced
into astronomy by a lack of understanding of the fundamental
principles of astronomy that are stated by us in our Astronomy Re-
stored?
For how could it have been known hitherto whether the eccen-
tricity of the Sun would have changed, since until now that eccen-
tricity of the Sun was unknown, because until now the parallax of
the Sun was unknown, without which the true Obliquity of the
Ecliptic, and the true place of the Sun, and its eccentricity, without
which the maximum and the minimum distance from the Earth can
be known? Therefore, it is plain that the eccentricity of the Sun and
the Obliquity of the Ecliptic are varied rather by astronomers [stat-
ing] those differences than by Nature herself.5
'Wrong! The eccentricities of the Sun and the Planets do vary slowly, although
this was unknown in Morin's time.
2This is also wrong, for Kepler has tables in the Rudolphine Tables, Part 4, pp.
103-104, for calculating the long term variation of the Obliquity of the Ecliptic,
although he expressed some doubt as to whether the variation was real or whether
the value 23° 30' 30" that he had determined for his own time was actually fixed.
Morin chose to think it was fixed. But in fact, it is now known that the Obliquity
slowly decreases at about 49" per century.
* Tabulae Rudolphinae ... (Ulm: J. Saurius. 1627).
*Astwnomia jam a fundamentis integre et exacte... 'Astronomy, now wholly and
completely restored from its Fundamentals ...,' (Paris: The Author, 1640.) 4to 361 pp.
5But Nature, that is the force of gravity, slowly alters the Obliquity and all of
these orbital elements.
5

=== Page 16 ===
Second. Is it not ridiculous to ascribe no smaller virtue to
causes that are altogether fictitious or at least uncertain—certainly
to the revolution of the orbital center of the Sun in a little circle
around the center of the World—rather than to raising up, expand-
ing, suppressing, and destroying the greatest monarchies of the
World? And this without experiences, unless perhaps frivolous
ones, such as Joachim Rheticus did,1 to which Origanus2 sub-
scribed, speaking of the Roman and Turkish Empires, as if the rev-
olution itself would be determined to these rather than to other
monarchies of the Chinese, Persians, Tartars, Mexicans, Peruvi-
ans, and others?
Third. Every influential virtue is inherent only primarily and
per se in each celestial body—either a Planet, or a fixed star, or the
Caelum itself. But the aforesaid Astronomers locate such a force in
a point or in its imaginary revolution; even if it is made under the
signs of the zodiac, with a concourse of those conceived to be uni-
versal, which however is absolutely alien to true philosophy.
Therefore, of the three aforesaid universal causes, two of them are
already rejected by us—that is, the variations of the eccentricity of
the Sun and the Obliquity of the Ecliptic, one of which supposes
the other to be scarcely proven.
But that which pertains to the motion of the apsides3 is a given
certainty, and in the case of the Moon is most evident; that is, be-
'Georg Joachim Rheticus (1514-1576), German astronomer and mathematician.
He was a pupil of Copernicus and the person responsible for having Copemicus's
book, De revolutionibus orbium celestium printed (Numberg, 1543). Morin's
reference is probably to Rheticus's book Narratio Prima [The First Narration],
an account of the Copemican theory that was published at Danzig in 1540.
2David Origanus (1558-1628), professor of mathematics and Greek. The refer-
ence is probably to his hooV, Astrologia Naturalis 'Natural Astrology' published
at Marseilles in 1645.
3The apside is the point in the Planet's orbit where it is the farthest from the Sun.
It is equal to the perihelion (the closest point of the orbit) + 180°. Following Ptol-
emy's lead for 1,500 years, astronomers reckoned a Planet's anomalistic or mean
motion from its apside. But once they began to calculate parabolic and hyperbolic
orbits for comets, they reversed the origin of the mean motion and began to
reckon it from the perihelion (since those cometary orbits have a perihelion but
no aphelion).
6

=== Page 17 ===
cause its apogee is moved forward almost 41 degrees per year in
the zodiac; but it is more obscure in the other Planets, of which the
swiftest aphelion is that of Mercury, which is moved forward not
even two minutes [of arc] annually. And a yet slower aphelion is
that of Jupiter, which is moved forward 13o06' every thousand
years according to the Rudolphine Tables. Which surely is suffi-
ciently convincing that the apsides of all the Planets revolve, for
[otherwise] so great an error of the Tables could scarcely agree
with observations.1
Moreover, nothing in universal Nature seems to be more wor-
thy of admiration than those apsides and their motion in the zodiac.
For certainly it is a primary [fact], because the Sun and the Moon
seem, at some times nearer to the Earth., and at other times more
remote; and consequently, the Earth is not at the center of the or-
bits of the Sun and the Moon.
But a line connecting the center of the Earth with the center of
the orbit of the Sun or the Moon, continued in both cases to the pe-
riphery of the orbit and the sphere of the fixed stars or the Primum
Mobile is called the line of apsides of the Sun or the Moon, in the
extremities of which, when the Sun or the Moon is there, they are
said to be in the highest or lowest apside or in their apogee or peri-
gee; and the reasoning is the same for Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Ve-
nus, and Mercury with respect to the Sun.
Secondly, it is certain that the lines of the apsides cut them-
selves at the center of the Earth, which is consequently the node of
the orbits of the Sun and the Moon, as if the Sun and the Moon be-
long to the Earth's system.2 Moreover, the lines of the apsides of Sat-
'The Rudolphine Tables have for the centennial motion of the apsides 1019' for Jupi-
ter and 2055' for Mercury, while modem tables have rj?' for Jupiter and r33' for
Mercury. We must remember that precise planetary elements were not known in the
17th century. Those in the Rudolphine Tables were derived from observation and
speculation, since the theory of gravity had not yet been postulated.
2Here, and elsewhere, Morin is disagreeing with Kepler's theory (which was cor-
rect) that the Sun was the center of the Solar System, not the Earth. But the dogma
of the Catholic Church stated that the Earth was the center of the Universe, and
Morin accepted that.
7

=== Page 18 ===
urn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, the satellites of the Sun, cut
themselves mutually in the center of the Sun itself, which is also the
node of the orbits of those same satellites that belong to the system of
the Sun, as the astronomical observations confirm. And similarly, it
can be said that the lines of the apsides of the satellites of Jupiter are
intersected in the center of Jupiter,
But from this, Kepler concludes in his Epitome of the Coperni-
can Astronomy that the Sun is the source of the motion of the Plan-
ets for their own revolution around their own axis, which opinion
we have however refuted in our Theories of the Planets, in our So-
lution of the Famous Problem of the Motion and the Stillness of the
Earth. But by what force and how the apsides are moved, he has
not said, nor can the motion of the Sun be explained by him, since
the apside of Saturn according to him is moved more quickly than
the apsides of Jupiter and the Sun, which are closer than that of
Saturn.
Since therefore we have hitherto seen no astronomer or philoso-
pher who can satisfy us in this matter, and I do not have anything
of certainty about this matter, I think it to be better for the divine
wisdom to be venerated in this matter with a modest silence, than
to set forth false or dubious [explanations]. For even if it is con-
ceded that God, who is the power and wisdom without end, has
made the machine of the World to be naturally internally mobile
from the beginning, and in the case of the Earth, the Sun, and Jupi-
ter, the sources of the motions for the above said orbits are estab-
lished; nevertheless, how from this to explain how the Planets and
their apsides revolve, surpasses man's own understanding.1
But if we keep [the idea that] the Heavens and Planets are
moved from an external beginning, namely by the understandings
of Aristotle, [and] Theologians, and by a more probable opinion, it
'This was true in Morin's time, but after the publication in the 18th century of Sir
Isaac Newton's laws of motion and gravity, it became possible for mathemati-
cians to calculate the variations of the orbits from the mutual gravitational attrac-
tions of the Planets.
8

=== Page 19 ===
always remains obscure, by what way that motion is distributed to
the heavens, Planets, and their apsides; and it seems to be denied to
the omnipotent wisdom of God, because just as an artisan con-
structs a machine that is artificially mobile; so God could have nat-
urally constructed the mobile machine of the World. But I do not at
all deny it, I who believe in and adore the omnipotent wisdom of
God.
But because neither the Caelum nor the stars are moved by the
grace of their own goodness, but for the grace of man, for the bene-
fit of whom this whole World was founded, as we have already
stated elsewhere; and the motion of the celestial bodies will cease
at the moment in which God imposes an end to the generation of
men; it seems more probable that just as each one of us according
to the theologians and sacred scripture has a personal Guardian
Angel; and so do Bishops and Kings, then the provinces and king-
doms of this Earth, have other general rector angels, it seems that
no valid reason can be offered for not concluding that this univer-
sal World and its individual globes are ruled by angels that are
movers,1 since in the way of an efficient moving cause locally,
nothing can be done by a corporeal spirit, which cannot be done by
understanding, unless we have said that the spiritual nature is
inferior or weaker than the corporeal.
And it does not matter that we cannot explain the means by
which the understandings perform that, since the ways of acting of
understandings or Demons are unknown to us, and the work of un-
derstanding may not seem to be material reins for ruling the course
of the Sun and its satellites, just as for them the charioteer has the
work to rule the horses of his chariot, and as an ant by an elephant,
so one understanding can differ from [another] understanding in
strength and also in knowledge.
'The motion of the Planets was a mystery to Kepler (who thought it might have
something to do with magnetism) and everyone else. People were used to the fact
that something had to pull a wagon, so it seemed logical that something must be
pulling the Moon and the Planets around in their orbits. Here Morin supposes it
might be angels.
9

=== Page 20 ===
But actually the difficulty cannot be resolved about the motion
of the apsides, for it is not sufficient that angels are in charge of the
globes of the Planets that move them regularly (which can be done
by immovable apsides), but in addition it is sought how and by
whom the apsides are moved. For the motion of these cannot be
conceived otherwise than if the center of the ellipse described by
the Planet in its own motion is moved circularly and equally
around the other focus of that ellipse.
Just as, with the Earth placed in the other focus of the ellipse of
the Moon arranged in circular motion around the Earth, and placed
at an invariable distance from the center of the ellipse of the Moon
from the center of the Earth (which connecting center line, is
called the line of the apsides) from the motion of the center of that
ellipse around the center of the Earth there will arise the motion of
the line of apsides of the Moon—indeed the motion of the line of
apsides of every ellipse—and perhaps that includes the motion of
the Ether, always having preserved the same elliptic figure. But al-
though I know from the phenomena that this can certainly be done;
nevertheless, how and by whom it can be done, I freely confess
that I don't know, and I do not envy him who will satisfy everyone
in this matter.1
The same difficulty arise about the motion of the nodes of Sat-
urn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, and the Moon, which differ
greatly from the motion of the apsides, which are moved more rap-
idly than the nodes, just as was observed by our predecessors, es-
pecially in the case of the Moon; so that consequently the motions
of the nodes and the apsides cannot be [caused] by the same princi-
ple.2
Therefore, having conceded the motion of the apsides, it re-
mains to define whether universal effects may be produced in the
"it was Sir Isaac Newton (1642-1727), who deduced the true reasons for all the
celestial motions.
2But, unknown to Morin and his contemporaries in the 17th century, both of these
motions are caused by the force of gravity.
10

=== Page 21 ===
lands [of the Earth] by that same motion. Cardan, in Book 1, Apho-
rism 37, says "The mutations of the apsides change kingdoms, re-
gions, and religions." But in the case of change from the apside of
the Sun, he says in Book 5, Aphorism 129, "The apside of the Sun
being in the arc from Aries to Cancer renders the southern part [of
the World] uninhabitable, but it makes the northern part habitable.
From Cancer to Libra, the northern part is very habitable, and it
will dominate the southern part. From Libra to Capricorn, the
southern part will be habitable, but it will scarcely rule the north-
em part. From Capricorn to Aries, the southern parts will rule the
northern parts as if they were abandoned."1
These [remarks] of Cardan, who inserted here not the least of
his own fictions—not only fictions devoid of all reason, but also
contrary to experience—when he makes the southern part of the
World inhabitable only when the apogee of the Sun is moved from
Libra to Capricorn, that is after 5044 years have elapsed from the
present2; and yet from all the centuries that have already passed it
has already been inhabited in both hemispheres. And in addition,
he extends the duration of the World to more than 20,000 years,
which is absolutely absurd.3
Besides, the influential force inherent only and per se in some
celestial body, but not in a point or line, as was already said above;
"therefore..etc." And it must not be said that the influential force
of the upper or lower apside is in a point of the Caelum at which the
continued line of the aspsides leaves off. For if it is sought from
'Modem figures for the motion of the solar apogee show that it would require
about 5234 years to move through lA of the zodiac
2If Morin was measuring from 1646, this would be the year 6690. However, mod-
em figures put the motion of the solar apogee at 1.71953° per century, so it will
reach a longitude of 270° in about 752 years or in the year 2752.
3Morin was a devout Catholic, and in his day the religious faithful (Catholic as
well as Protestant) believed that God had created the Universe about 5,600 years
previously. Consequently, Morin could not accept Cardan's implied hypothesis
of 20,000 years or more for the age of the world. Cardan was estimating that the
solar apogee would make a complete 360° revolution in somewhat more than
20,000 years. His estimate was good modem figures indicate that about 20,900
years would be required!
11

=== Page 22 ===
what that point has such a force, it will have to be said from the
apside, in which however it is not present; but no one gives what
he doesn't have.
Besides, the point of the Caelum at which the continued line of
the apsides leaves off is absolutely indivisible; but no active virtue,
especially a physical one, can be in an indivisible point. Other-
wise, the thing would have itself in the places of the Planets and in
their aspects in the Primum Mobile, and in the cusps of the houses.
For the place of a Planet is a part of the Caelum, which the planet
conceals from us by its own body; still, with the orb of virtue am-
plified, to which an equal amount is determined in the Caelum for
the individual aspects by that same Planet for whom the virtue for-
mally exists.
And the cusp is the beginning of a celestial house, for which the
virtue also exists by determination. But the line of the apsides only
and simply leaves off at a mere point, for which no virtue can ex-
ist—neither formally nor by determination.
Therefore, no active virtue must be attributed to the apsides or
to their places in the Caelum [that can act] upon these sublunar
things, at least per se, nor consequently to their motion; for the ce-
lestial motion is not active per se, but only by accident, as far as be-
ing mobile it spreads its force; moreover, there is no force in the
mobile apside, as was already made plain.
You will object. Having conceded a motion to the line of ap-
sides of the Moon, it is certain that the site of the ellipse of the
Moon with respect to the Primum Mobile or the signs' and the
Earth, so that the maximum and minimum distances of the Moon
from the Earth runs through the whole zodiac in 9 years, or it is
done in the individual signs of the zodiac. But this is done in vain
and without any notable effect of its own with respect to the Earth,
lMorin has used the word duodecatemoria 'twelfths', i.e. twelfths of the zodiac,
for 'signs'. I usually translate the longer word by 'signs', but sometimes by 'true
signs'.
12

=== Page 23 ===
on account of which we have many times said that the motion of
the Planets is not conjectural. And the same logic applies to the rest
of the apsides.
I reply. If any particular effect can come forth from the motion
of the apside, it must not be ascribed to the apside per se or to its
motion, on account of the reasons set forth above, but only the
maximum or minimum distance of the Planet from the Earth in this
or that sign; namely because with the Planet not acting at an indefi-
nite distance, it would act more strongly both elementally and in-
fluentially at a closer distance than at one more remote. But of
these effects, no observations have hitherto been made in the case
of the Moon1; and much less can they be done in the case of the
other Planets, since the line of the Solar apsides, from the founda-
tion of the World has down to now traversed only three signs and
six degrees.
Therefore, those things about the effects of those apsides that
have been handed down up till now by the astrologers are
groundless, especially because the greater or lesser distance of a
Planet from the Earth cannot vary the kind of effect, for other-
wise it would continually vary; and so the judgments of astrology
would be utterly overturned. And it must only be conceded that a
Planet in its least distance from the Earth may act more effec-
tively upon the Earth itself when it is in the sign that it occupies
when it is in its lesser distance from the Earth. And so the virtue
of the Planets [acting] on these inferior things is increased or
slackened by that distance, when it is now under this sign, and
now under that sign.
But as for that which looks to the great orb and its revolution in
360 individual years for the universal and most powerful cause,
and for the great mystery of Nature thought up by Albumasar2 and
'Curiously enough, the longitude of the lunar apside is now given the name Lilith
by modern European astrologers, who suppose that it does have a noticeable as-
trological influence.
2 In his book De magnisconiunctionibus' The Great Conjunctions' (Augsburg:
13

=== Page 24 ===
accepted by many, I would be ashamed to waste time in refuting
nonsense and fictions, by which it is indeed established in futility,
so that if the reason of anything is sought from Albumasar or an-
other, it is plainly irrational.
Therefore, it is established from what was said above, that the
old astrologers had wrongly imagined the causes hitherto set forth
as an active and universal force and allotted their effects on these
inferior things; and consequently, the doctrine of universal consti-
tutions is not concerned with such causes. Moreover, we shall
show below that it is only concerned with the annual revolutions of
the World, the synods of the Sun and the Moon, as well as the con-
junctions of the other Planets, both among themselves and with the
Lights,1 about which we shall speak individually in what follows,
after we have expressed some things about the universal mode of
acting of the celestial bodies.
Chapter 2. The Universal Mode of Action
of the Celestial Bodies.
This mode of acting is discussed at length in Book 20, Sections
2, 3, & 4, and especially in Section 3, Chapters 2, 3, & 8, for the
Planets, concerning which it must be chiefly discussed in this
Book, from which we shall take excerpts only cursorily that will be
seen to make our instruction.
And so we have said in the same place First. That as the Pri-
mum Caelum pours forth its own eminently universal force
throughout this whole World like some spirit, so do the planets
also pour forth their own and formal virtue throughout the whole
World, both elemental as well as influential, and that by some
ray—the Sun by a solar ray, the Moon by a lunar ray, etc., [they
act].
Erhard Ratdolt, 1489), Albumasar (9th century), the great Arabian astrologer,
speaks of a large number of profections associated with the mean conjunctions of
the superior planets, thus postulating various cycles of time. See the Note to
Chapter 3 below.
'That is, the Sun and the Moon.
14

=== Page 25 ===
Second. The seven Planets are of a diverse nature, and each one
acts on sublunar things more effectively in accordance with its
own nature, temperament, habits, age, region, dignity, etc.—more
akin to its analogy, and to those things that it more easily affects,
moves, directs, and produces.1 Therefore, in these sublunar things
the Sun principally affects, moves, directs, produces, and perfects
Solar things, the Moon Lunar things, Saturn Satumian things, etc.;
which is plain in the individual kinds of things shown in our Table
on the Rulership of the Planets in Book 13, Section 2, Chapter 3;
but those that are contrary, either moderate or destroy, especially if
the Planets are strong for that effect and [acting upon] subjects that
experience weaknesses.
But from this it follows, that when the Sun is badly afflicted in the
Caelum by the conjunction, opposition, or square from Saturn or
Mars, then the solar things or those that are analogous to the Sun in
these inferior things are also badly afflicted; but if it is well dis-
posed, those things will also be well. And so with the lunar, Satur-
nian, and Jovian things, etc.; moreover, the subject experiencing
an analogy will be known from the site or the rulership of the Sun
in the figure erected at the moment of the conjunction, opposition,
or square with the malefic that is badly afflicting. And so with the
others.
Third. Generations and corruptions of these inferior things, and
also the diversity of effects on each kind of thing are caused not
only by the common motion of the Planets around the Earth, but
especially by their own motion in the zodiac and by their various
mutual syzygies.2 For when they are combined in various ways by
two motions, with the signs of the zodiac and the houses of the fig-
ure, then among themselves, they make a mixed virtue by their
configurations, and they produce every possible diversity of things
generated and of effects.
'See the translation of Astrologia Gallica Book 13 by James Herschel Holden
(Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2007).
2By syzygies he usually means conjunctions, squares, and oppositions.
15

=== Page 26 ===
This is sufficiently discussed in Book 21, Section 2, as far as
those figures that are not only particular or genethliacal, but also as
pertains to universal figures; for the doctrine is the same for both;
namely, because Planets that are well disposed by their celestial
state, and especially by their benefic nature, act fortunately on the
house of the figure that they occupy; that is, they promote the good
things of the good houses, and they temper or hinder the evils of
the evil houses. Moreover, Planets that are badly afflicted by their
celestial state, and especially those that are malefic by nature,
plainly act in a contrary fashion.
Fourth. The Planets never act alone, but perpetually along with
the signs of the zodiac. But with these they act elementarily for the
whole Earth, by reason of their own nature, and their sign, and
their ruler. For the elemental action of the stars is not changed by
the houses of the figure; except by more or less, they do not vary
the kind of effect, as we have said elsewhere.
And a Planet always acts stronger elementally in that place
where it is more perpendicular.1 But what it does can be known
universally, as that Saturn in Capricorn freezes and dries the whole
Earth, by reason of its own nature and the sign; and therefore cold
and frost increase in winter, and especially in the frigid zones, but
particularly in the southern part [of the Earth] to which it is then
more perpendicular. But on the contrary, it lessens the heat in the
summer throughout the whole Earth, but more in the southern part;
and therefore, it harms the more frigid natures by freezing, espe-
cially in the frigid zones—both plants and animals, for whom heat
is necessary for vegetation and life. Moreover, it tempers the hotter
things, that an intense heat harms; however, Mars in Leo does the
contrary to that. And so with the rest [of the Planets].
But the Planets also act influentially throughout the whole
Earth by reason of their own nature and the sign and its ruler, and
its celestial state, on account of the causes expounded by us else-
'That is, where it is elevated in the figure.
16

=== Page 27 ===
where; for the elemental and influential virtues are transmitted to
these inferior things by the same ray, although they act in a diverse
way.
But why they act can be known in general, as that by Saturn in
Capricorn an especially saturnine influx on all sublunar things is
produced, so that seen in general rather than specifically and indi-
vidually, it also benefits some things, but it harms others. From
Saturn in Sagittarius a mixed influx of the Saturn and Jupiter na-
ture comes forth, etc.; but why Saturn acts in a particular way,
whether it influences life, death, marriage, wars, kingdoms, etc.,
cannot be determined other than by the erection of a celestial fig-
ure, without which looking only at Saturn in the Caelum, it must be
said to act influentially on everything at the same time, in accor-
dance with its diverse application for individual places on Earth.
Fifth. In universal figures erected for a particular place on
earth, such as a region or the city of any kingdom, the individual
houses of the figure are allotted a universal meaning of those
things that that house signifies by its nature. For they cannot be of
one nature in particular figures of nativities and of another nature
in universal figures, since that same division of that same mundane
space is [the same] to both, in which the rising of sublunar things,
their vigor, their decline and their death are seen—the former par-
ticularly, but the latter universally.
Wherefore, the 1 st house in universal figures will in fact be es-
pecially [the House] of the Life and temperament of the plants, of
the animals, and of the men in that region, arising or being bom un-
der the universal constitution or during its [effectiveness]; but be-
sides those natives who inhabit that region, or who will pass
through it during the [time of the] effects of that constitution. If in-
deed it is established that those who only pass through a region af-
flicted by plague, war, famine, or an immoderate inclemency of
the air, are made to be exposed to those evils, and are participants
in them.
17

=== Page 28 ===
The 12th [house] will be about the illnesses, secret enemies,
prisons, and bodily miseries common to that region, according to
the nature and disposition of each individual experiencing them.
The 11th [house] about friends and confederates. The 10th about
honors, magistracy, kingdom, undertakings, actions, and their suc-
cess. The 9th about religion, travels, and missions. The 8th about
death. The 7th about spouses, lawsuits, and wars; and so with the
rest [of the houses]. And constantly, from the particular place of
the universal constitution in the figure, from its rulers, and their ce-
lestial and terrestrial state, judgment is made about the things
signified by those houses.
Sixth. The older astrologers formerly handed down many apho-
risms on universal mutations in the air, the land, peoples, king-
doms, etc, for the Planets in Aries, Taurus, Gemini, etc., which
were perhaps then true from the concourse of the signs and the
constellations that they were occupying, and then from the un-
known motion of the fixed stars. But because the constellations are
moved from Aries into Taurus, Gemini, etc., and the constellation
that in the time of Ptolemy and the older astrologers was in Aries,
is now found in Taurus, and so with the others, there is nothing in-
deed marvelous if such aphorisms are now apprehended to be
false, inasmuch as they are not corresponding either to the constel-
lations alone or to the signs alone, but to both at the same time,
which concourse will never return.
Therefore, first the effects of the Planets in the simple signs
must be defined from the proper nature of the Planets and the
signs; and then the powers of the fixed stars and the constellations
must be observed added to them, so that from the concourse of
these three, the [joint] effect may be conjectured. But thus the ef-
fects of the Planets in the signs will always be the same and immu-
table per se, and they will only be varied by the access of new fixed
stars or constellations into those same signs, or by the syzygies of
those same Planets among themselves.
Furthermore, the proper elemental and influential forces of the
18

=== Page 29 ===
fixed stars and constellations are becoming known from diligent
observations, when in individual months and years the Sun and the
Moon and also the other Planets will apply to them and be con-
joined to them, or they will rise with them, culminate with them, or
set with them; for having known in advance the nature of the Plan-
ets or the signs, it will have to be noted what fixed star or constella-
tion increases or decreases [its effect] by its concourse, for that was
from the mixture of its own proper virtue, which thus may become
known.
In fact, Cardan in his Comment in Book 8, Chapter 3, which is
on the forces of the fixed stars, must be corrected here, for he
thought with Haly1 that
"the powers of the fixed stars are not brought
down to the Earth, because they are very remote
from it, but the light of the Sun reflects them to us,
which light imbued with the powers of a star, es-
pecially when that star rises by night, not at all
hindered for the natives (that is, for us directly) by
the rays of the Sun, produces the greatest, sudden,
and swift effects on these inferior things."
For it is false that the Sun's light extends to the fixed stars, as we
have demonstrated in Book 9, Section 4, Chapter 8. And therefore
it is false that it is reflected by the fixed stars, which would thus not
shine by their own light, since indeed from that demonstration the
opposite [conclusion] would follow. And finally it is false that the
fixed stars transmit their own force by the light of the Sun or by
other Planets; for from what was said before they shine with their
own light; if they can launch their own light onto these inferior
things, much more can they launch their influential force, which is
still more subtle than that light and which penetrates the whole
globe of the Earth.
'Haly is the Western name of several Arabic astrologers. The two best known are
Haly Abenragel fAli ibn abi al-Rijal, 11th century) and Haly Abenrudian fAli
ibn Ridwan, 11 th century). Probably the former is meant here.
19

=== Page 30 ===
Chapter 3. The Subordination and Dependency
of Universal Constitutions.
It is not unreasonably done that, contrary to Ptolemy's method,
particular constitutions of nativities are by us put ahead of univer-
sal constitutions. For as Aristotle said in the first of his Physics,
"particulars are more preferable and more noticeable for us than
universals; and [yet] the latter are more preferable and more no-
ticeable in themselves than particulars." That is to say, this [partic-
ular] man is easily recognized by the senses by anyone, even by a
rustic or a boy; but as a universal man, not except by a philosopher
and by an intellectual abstraction. Moreover, in discovering the
sciences progress must be made from things that are more known
to us [personally] with regard to things that are inherently known;
for the universals are known from the particulars.
As, therefore, in the particular constitutions of men, a subordi-
nation and a dependency of the signs or of the celestial constitu-
tions is given; and the primary one of all of these is the radical
figure, on which they depend, and to which are subordinated the
revolutions of the Sun and also the revolutions of the Moon dur-
ing the whole life of the Native, who is commonly termed the mi-
crocosm.
Just so, in the universal constitutions of the World, there is
given a dependency and a subordination. And the primary elemen-
tal universal constitution of the World is the state of the Caelum at
that moment of time for individual places on Earth when the ele-
mental World itself was [first] exposed to the forces of the celestial
bodies, both elemental and influential. But that moment and that
constitution is unknown, although some have wanted to define it
by plainly chimerical concepts,1 even as Julius Firmicus Matemus
has handed down his own fictitious genethliacal figures for Alex-
ander the Great, Achilles, Homer, Thersites, etc.—a venture not
'Probably a reference to the chart of the World given by Firmicus in Book III of
the Mathesis. It is ascribed to the early Alexandrian writers and has the Sun in
Leo and the Moon rising in Cancer, with each of the planets in its own sign.
20

=== Page 31 ===
only ridiculous but also stupid, since he knew for certain neither
the natal hour, nor the month, nor the year.1
Similarly, moreover, it is not precisely known how many years
ago this world was founded, since the Chronologists disagree
among themselves about this—not only as to the number of centu-
ries, but even the number of millennia. And much less do they
agree on the time of day at various locations on Earth. And then on
what the location of the Planets in the Caelum was, at least with the
exception of the Sun, which we have shown by valid reasons in
Book 2, Chapter 4, to have been posited at the beginning of Aries.2
Moreover, with these things unknown, it is the premier or radi-
cal constitution of the Caelum with respect to any particular place
on Earth, on which the proper fate of that place principally and pri-
marily depends while this World lasts (just as the fate of a Native
depends upon his radical figure while he lives) and to which all the
other constitutions erected for that place are subordinated—
namely, the revolutions of the Sun, the conjunctions of the Lights,
etc.—which explain and dispense the fates of that radical constitu-
tion that pertain to that place with respect to the dependency on
that radical constitution, as is done in particular nativities; for as-
trological science ought to be uniform, both in universal [constitu-
tions] as well as in particular ones; otherwise, particulars could not
'This is mostly wrong! In Book VI of the Mathesis, Firmicus cites horoscopes for
Homer and several other ancient persons, but not for Achilles nor for Alexander
the Great. (There is a chart for Paris Alexander, Prince of Troy. Morin must have
supposed that that was Alexander the Great. It wasn't!) Firmicus states that some
of these persons are said to have had such a chart, which shows that he himself
was skeptical of them. They are in fact schematic charts that he found in some
Greek astrological treatise that has not come down to us, and they were obviously
intended to present a horoscopic pattern that was thought to resemble the charac-
ter and life of the famous person, not an actual horoscope. Morin was right to dis-
regard them.
2But here Morin is simply making just such a speculation, as did the old astrolo-
gers whom he criticizes. It seems likely that he has taken this idea from
Albumasar, who, following a Hindu speculation, proposed a grand conjunction
of the mean longitudes of all the Planets at 0° Aries at some remote epoch. Morin
rejected the part of the idea that dealt with the conjunction of all the Planets, but
he kept the part that put the Sun at the beginning of Aries.
21

=== Page 32 ===
be concluded or deduced from universals, nor could universals be
inferred from particulars.
Therefore, just as in the figures of Natives, the radical figure, its
directions, revolutions, and transits are given, so the same things
are given in universal figures. And in the radical figure of the
World with respect to any place on Earth, directions must be made,
just as in the figures of nativities, with the same measure of 59'
08", etc. for each year. For if Adam and his sons and grandsons
would have lived to the end of the World, then the measure for di-
rections would have been the same as it is now; and every 360
years the significators would have returned to their own radical be-
ginnings with a completed revolution to begin a new revolution;
because there must not be any doubt that it happened to the first
men who surpassed 800 and 900 years of life.1
So, therefore, the directions of the radical figure of the World
with respect to each place on Earth return to their own radical
places every 360 years. And that is perhaps that true Great Cycle2
of 360 years, about which Albumasar, Omar, and the other old [as-
trologers] handed down many fictions on account of their igno-
rance, asserting that it had begun from the conjunction of Saturn
and Jupiter that preceded the Flood by 279 years, and was its natu-
ral cause, which is mere nonsense, as we have shown in Book 2,
Chapter 32.
Besides, even so among Adam and the other first men, with the
first or second circuit of directions completed, not the same acci-
dents at all could have recurred, as those that happened in the first
circuit, on account of the different state of the Caelum that was
'Morin is referring to the exaggerated life spans assigned to some of the early fig-
ures in the Old Testament.
2As mentioned in a footnote to Chapter 1 above, Albumasar in his book De
Magnis Coniunctionibus 'The Great Conjunctions' sets forth a detailed scheme
of world history based on Jupiter-Satum conjunctions with very elaborate sets of
profections measured from them. One of the profection cycles is called in English
the Great Fardar or Great Cycle, and it has a period of 360 years. This is probably
the one to which Morin refers.
22

=== Page 33 ===
current in the second circuit, and also different revolutions for the
Native; although some similar things would have happened on ac-
count of the identity of the directions; so at any place on Earth it
must be judged with respect to its own radical figure of the World,
by which that great cycle is allotted some effects on the individual
places on earth.
But because that radical figure of the World is lacking to us for
any particular place on Earth; and it is only just permitted to us to
erect a figure of the Revolution of the Year of the World for that
same place; hence it is [the case] that for predicting the fates for in-
dividual places, regions, and kingdoms on Earth, we are no less in
the dark than a person who, from the known true place of the Sun
in the figure of some Native, but with the year and the day of the
nativity unknown, and therefore the radical figure and its revolu-
tions, would like to set up forecasts for the fates of that Native in
individual years, and to put them out for true fates. But the situa-
tion is otherwise in the nativities of men, in which the radical fig-
ure is given, which is the certain foundation of judgments for the
following revolutions of the Native. And therefore, it can be
judged much more certainly than about the effects of universal
constitutions.
Nevertheless, since every revolution always acts according as
and as much as it can on that subject with respect to whom it is
erected, to the extent that the figure is particularly plain for that
and determined to that; nevertheless, it does not act on it simply
and absolutely, as we have said in Book 23, but with respect to the
radical figure, which we suppose to be unknown in the case of uni-
versal constitutions; and there is generally available to us no foun-
dation more certain for predicting future things for any year at any
place on Earth.
Therefore, we say that the annual Revolution of the Year of the
World for any place on Earth is the more substantial foundation
that remains to us for predicting those things that are going to be at
that place on Earth from the [indications of] the Caelum. And all
23

=== Page 34 ===
those other universal constitutions, namely both those of the
Lights and those of the other Planets with the Lights, and those
constitutions that are subordinated among them by conjunctions,
oppositions, squares, and the rest of the syzygies, all of which are
certainly nothing other than an explanation and a dispensation of
the fates of that place on Earth from the radical and annual consti-
tution. For even thought the Lights and the other Planets with the
Lights and the mutual conjunctions may be some special universal
causes and principles of the actions of the Caelum on these inferior
things, yet they are not simply and absolutely causes, but [only]
with respect to the radical (which is not known) or annual mun-
dane constitution of the place.
Moreover, this is plain from the practice of all astrologers, who
do not pronounce simply and absolutely from the new Moon or the
full Moon, but [rather] with respect to the annual Revolution; whose
effects, since without doubt they last until the next Revolution, do
not permit the pronouncement [to be made] simply and absolutely
from some [individual] new Moon, and without such respect.
But this is much more evidently plain in genethliacal particu-
lars, where each lunar Revolution takes into account the quality
and state of the [preceding] Revolution of the Sun. For if that was
very evil, there will certainly happen something of evil significa-
tion in that year, although even if the radical figure does not agree
it will be less than if it did agree. And the same thing must also be
said about a very good Revolution.
Therefore, if a Revolution of the Moon agrees with a Revolu-
tion of the Sun, the effects of the Revolution of the Sun will still
more certainly occur in that same Revolution of the Moon, and the
more so when the Revolution of the Sun agrees with the radical
figure. Therefore, it must be said that there is some force per se to
that same Revolution of the Moon, but with respect primarily in-
deed to the radical figure, but secondarily to the figure of the
Revolution of the Sun, so that consequently the latter can be said to
be subordinate to the former.
24

=== Page 35 ===
The same thing must be judged in the case of universal constitu-
tions about the radical figure of a region and the Mundane Revolu-
tion of the Sun and the lunations. In fact, other universal constitu-
tions—certainly mundane Revolutions or radical ones of the
Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, are not known
any more than the moments of the true conjunctions of Saturn, Ju-
piter, and Mars. But the time of the Revolution of the Sun is
known, which among all the other constitutions lays claim for it-
self to primacy of virtue and efficacy. Namely because the Sun
surpasses all the other Planets in magnitude and virtue, and Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury are only its satellites and there-
fore inferior. But the Moon with respect to the Sun is only like a
woman with respect to a man in the generation of offspring.
You will object first. Ptolemy, in Quadripartite, Book 2,
Chapter 9,1 Cardan in his Commentary, and the rest of the astrolo-
gers, judge from the annual Revolution of the World or its quarters
with respect to the closest preceding new Moon or ftill Moon, on
which they will have that Revolution to depend; therefore, that
Revolution is subordinated to those syzygies of the Lights, not the
opposite.
1 reply. A Revolution of the Sun does not depend on the preced-
ing new Moon, as [if it were] a superior or prior cause, by order of
its virtue or dignity, but only on the cause initially disposing it.
For, because it was said above that the conjunction of the Lights
and the other Planets are the particular principles of the actions of
the Caelum on these inferior things, and that the force of one con-
junction lasts until the next following conjunction; from this it
happens that when judgment is made from the annual Revolution
of the World, in the prognosis there would be had the signification
of the immediately preceding new Moon, to the extent that it is the
cause that is initially disposing and preparing the sublunar nature
to the effects of the annual Revolution of the World that is follow-
ing it, which is the primary one of all the universal constitutions.
xTetrabiblos (ed. Robbins), Book 2, Chapter 10.
25

=== Page 36 ===
But if a few days of the preceding new Moon would have
passed, say 4 or 5, it will not have that force in a future Revolution
of the Sun; namely because its force would be exhausted. More-
over, we think that only the new Moons ought to be looked at, and
not the full Moons; because the quarters of the Sun and Moon
would also have to be looked at, since the figures of those are also
erected by astrologers, and there would not be a greater consider-
ation of the former than of the latter, which was still never used by
the old [astrologers].
And there is no need to pay attention at the individual quarters
of the year to the new Moons next preceding them, but only to [the
one at] the beginning of the year, because of course the quarters are
only used for the transits with respect to the annual Revolution of
the World, as was already stated elsewhere, and they would not be
primary constitutions. And yet, whoever at the beginning of the
year and the beginnings of the individual quarters will look not
only at the immediately preceding new Moons but in addition at
the oppositions and squares of the Sun and the Moon that will oc-
cur between the new Moon itself and the Ingress of the Sun into the
cardinal point, that one will perhaps judge more accurately,
namely because the oppositions and squares pertain to the new
Moon itself.
And it must not be thought that the new Moon preceding the
Sun's Ingress into Aries would have force over the whole year, or
even its first quarter, since the active force of that new Moon
would only last for a synodic month; but it would have force on the
beginning of the year as a dispositive cause for the sublunar effects
of the Revolution of the Sun. And thereby the proper effects of
both charts must be distinguished among themselves, and their af-
finity or contrariety must be noted for their combination at the be-
ginning of the year. But if between the Ingress of the Sun into
Aries and the new Moon most closely preceding it, there occurs a
synod of the Sun with another Planet, especially Saturn, Jupiter, or
Mars, that will be of great virtue for the whole year, because the
period of these synods exceeds a year.
26

=== Page 37 ===
Moreover, if anyone argues about this—that having accepted
the subordination of the universal constitutions—if the Ingress of
the Sun is dependent in any way upon the preceding new Moon,
and that [in turn] upon the preceding Ingress of the Sun into Aries
as the monthly constitution of the year, it will give a progression
into infinity. It will have to be said that the last new Moon of the
year defines the force of the annual Revolution; and consequently
the latter must be seen to be no greater than the former—if not per-
haps much weaker which suffices to setting up a progress into
infinity.
But that which pertains to the preceding synods of the Sun with
Saturn, Jupiter, or Mars, since those last more than a year, their
signification and that of the annual Revolution in which they be-
gan must be taken into account, so that a more correct judgment
about the current annual Revolution may be made by combining
the significations of both years; which certainly demands a notable
skill in astrology and the greatest prudence.
You will object secondly. Ptolemy, in Quadripartite, Book 2,
Chapter 1, calls those constitutions to be universal causes that are
more powerful for moving more things, as for a whole region; act-
ing on which according to their own force, they are said to produce
a universal effect, of course by affecting each individual region
with its own disposition. Moreover, in Chapter 4, Ptolemy says
that the first and most effective cause of universal effects is the
eclipses of the Sun and Moon. And finally in Chapter 10, discuss-
ing the annual Revolution of the Sun and its quarters, he thinks that
these causes are less universal than the eclipses are; and conse-
quently, from the above said Chapter 1, they are subject and
subordinated to the eclipses.
I reply. From Book 7, chapter 8, a universal cause per se is said
to be that which produces an effect along with the principal cause
of the nature or the dignity inferior to itself. As when the Sun
causes a man to generate [another] man, the Sun is the universal
cause per se, because a sublunar body is by its nature inferior to a
27

=== Page 38 ===
celestial body; and the Sun acting with Saturn is the cause per se of
universal dignity. For the Sun is the primary Planet, not dependent
upon Saturn; but the latter is its satellite, dependent upon it also in
its own motion, and in its rulership of signs of the zodiac, as was
stated elsewhere.
But a cause is said to be universal by accident that produces
many [different] effects at the same time; as the Sun at the same
time liquefying wax and hardening clay by the same heat; or that
during its own time there is comprised the times of many other
causes of the same kind or nature, such as the annual Revolution of
the Sun, which includes the times of many Revolutions of the
Moon, both periodical and synodical,1 as well as a synodical Rev-
olution of Saturn and Mars.2 But from those two causes compared
among themselves, the one that is accidentally more universal is
the one that extends to more, as a cause that is affecting a whole re-
gion is said to be more universal than one that affects an individual
man of that region; and the one that lasts for a longer time is also
considered to be more universal.
But now, an eclipse is nothing else than a new Moon or a full
Moon, but [taking place] in the ecliptic, and therefore of greater
virtue than one happening beyond the ecliptic. Moreover, any fig-
ure of a new Moon erected for any particular region is equally
widely extended to other regions; and it lasts in its virtue until the
following new Moon, as will be said in more detail below.
Therefore, an eclipse of the Sun is not a more universal cause
than any other synod of the Lights, neither by nature, nor by dig-
nity, nor by duration, nor by its extension on the face of the Earth.3
Or if sometimes an ecliptic synod should last longer or should be
'Aperiodical Revolution of the Moon is a return to the same place in the zodiac,
which takes place in 27.322 days. A Revolution of the Moon is a return
to conjunction with the Sun—that is, the lunar month—which takes place in
29.531 days. (Both of these times are average times.)
2The synodical period of Mars-Saturn conjunctions is 2.0092 years on the aver-
age, so that on the average the conjunctions occur every other year.
Apparently a reference to the shadow path of a total solar eclipse.
28

=== Page 39 ===
extended more widely than a common synod, that one will be ebb-
ing. That is, any common synod will last longer and will be ex-
tended more widely than an ecliptical synod, as will be explained
further below. But a Mundane Revolution of the Sun includes
twelve time-periods of synods of the Sun and Moon, in which also
many eclipses occur in individual years.
Therefore, the annual Revolution of the Sun is at least by its du-
ration a more universal cause than any eclipse; for an eclipse is
only a part of the Mundane Revolution of the Sun, and the whole is
more universal than a part. I said "at least by its duration," since a
Mundane Revolution of the Sun erected for any particular region
is not even extended more widely across the face of the Earth than
a synod of the Sun and Moon. Therefore Ptolemy does wrongly
prefer eclipses to the annual Revolutions of the World or to their
quarters, insofar as the universality of the cause, and the Revolu-
tions are wrongly said to be subordinated to eclipses.
You will object thirdly. At least the synodic Revolution of Sat-
urn and Jupiter is a more universal cause than the annual Revolu-
tion of the Sun and the synods of the Lights. For a single synodic
Revolution of Saturn and Jupiter or Saturn and Mars includes in its
duration many revolutions of the Sun and [even] more synods of
the Sun and Moon.
I reply. A synodic Revolution of Saturn and Jupiter or of Saturn
and Mars, with respect to the annual Revolution of the Sun, is in-
deed by accident a more universal cause by reason of its duration.
But the Revolution of the Sun is per se a universal cause by reason
of its duration; and the Revolution of the Sun is [also] a more uni-
versal cause by reason of its virtue and dignity. For the Sun is the
primary and principal, and the prime planetary cause, of all the
sublunar effects, to whose primary and universal state those of Sat-
urn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury belong, which are com-
panions of the Sun that he perpetually carries them around,1 just as
a King does his satellites and ministers.
"This refers to the fact that those Planets revolve about the Sun.
29

=== Page 40 ===
Therefore, their motions, Revolutions, and conjunctions should
only be thought to be parts of the Revolutions of the Sun. Never-
theless, that Revolution of the Sun in which the conjunction of Sat-
urn and Jupiter occurs produces great effects more so than the rest
of the Revolutions, because among the Planets these are secondary
Planets especially of virtue and authority, in whose sign there are
also followers'; but that conjunction will be dependent on that
particular Mundane Revolution of the Sun.
Therefore, having set forth these things in advance, we should
now discuss the individual universal causes separately, having
taken a beginning from the annual Revolution of the World.
Chapter 4. How the Annual Revolution of the World
should be erected for any Place on Earth, as well as
the figures of the Quarters of that Year.
Of how great moment it is to restore astronomy [based] on its
own true fundamentals, which previously unknown, we have set
forth in our Asronomy Restored? will be plainly evident here. For,
since the radical figure of the World is unknown to us, with respect
to any particular place on Earth; therefore, all of the universal con-
stitutions for which we have certitude chiefly depend upon the an-
nual Revolution of the Sun to the beginning of Aries, which was its
radical place at the beginning of the World.
But the true moment of time of the Ingress of the Sun into that
point at individual places on Earth in individual years, has hitherto
been so in doubt, that although by the Very Noble Tycho Brahe the
gross error of the old [astronomers] was corrected by his outstand-
ing care, still the proper Tables of the Sun of Tycho and the
Rudolphine Tables1" constructed for the same meridian of Uraniborg
'Morin refers to the fact that both Saturn and Jupiter have satellites of their own
and thus resemble the Sun.
Astronomia jam a jundamentis integre et exacte restituta... 'Astronomy now
wholly and exactly Restored from its Fundamentals...' (Paris: The Author, 1640.
3Johann Kepler, Tabulae Rudolphinae... 'The Rudolphine Tables' (Ulm; Jonas
Sauk, 1627).
30

=== Page 41 ===
from the same hypotheses, still differ among themselves by some
minutes of an hour; namely because Kepler still [further] refined
Tycho's hypotheses. And yet the Lansbergian Tables^ and the rest
[of the astronomical tables] differ still more. And this error is com-
mon to [both] the mundane and genethliacal Revolutions of the
Sun. And there will not be had any true and certain remedy, until
the true parallax of the Sun and the true Obliquity of the Ecliptic
are discovered by the methods set forth in our Astronomy.
In the mean time, since it can be said that not the whole differ-
ence but only its part is in excess or in default of the true moment
of time of the Ingress of the Sun (which error would at least appear
to be small in the erection of the figure as is seen by its force and
directions), so the time of the Ingress of the Sun into the beginning
of Aries will be found with perfection from the Perpetual Table of
the Revolutions of the Sun appended to Book 23, Chapter 5,2 which
I consider to be preferable to all other [such Tables].
From Tycho's fundamentals as refined by Kepler, the mean
length of the tropical year is 365 days 5 hours 48 minutes 57 sec-
onds and 36 thirds, as is set forth in Chapter 2 of the Precepts in the
Rudolphine Tables? And therefore according to calculation and
that Perpetual Table, the Sun in the year 1600 entered the 4 cardi-
nal points of the zodiac at Uraniburg at these mean times:
The Beginning of T March 19 18:31:50
S June 20 22:31:16
^ September 22 12:53:32
^ December 20 23:26:20
'Phi lip van Lansberge (1561 -1632), Tabulae motuum coelestiumperpetuae 'Per-
petual Tables of the Celestial Motions' (Middelburg,1632) . His tables were
based to some extent on Kepler's theories of the planetary motions, but he intro-
duced some variations, which, according to reports were generally less success-
fiil than those incorporated in the Rudolphine Tables.
2See my translation, Astrologia Gallica Book Twenty-Three Revolutions (Tempe,
Az.: A.F.A., 2004) 2nd ed. revised.
3The latest modem figures are 365 days 5 hours 48 minutes 45 seconds and 18
thirds.
31

=== Page 42 ===
Now, for example, the true time of the Vernal Equinox at Paris
in this year 1646 is sought.
From Book 23, Chapter 5, the motion of the Apogee of the Sun
for 1600 is taken from the first Table, which is 3 signs 5 degrees 44
minutes (95° 44'). And this is subtracted from the true place of the
Sun located in the beginning of Aries, which is 0 signs 0 degrees 0
minutes, and there remains 264 degrees 16 minutes for the true
anomaly of the Sun at that time—namely, at the Vernal Equinox of
the year 1600, which you look for on the left side of the Table of
the Revolutions of the Sun in that same chapter; moreover, for 46
years elapsed from the year 1600; in breadth, with the doubled in-
gress, as is taught in that same place for nativities, and in the com-
mon angle (not having omitted the proportional part) there is
found 3 hours 37 minutes 46 seconds, which added to the time of
the Ingress of the Sun into Aries given above, [viz.] 19 March 18
hours 31 minutes 50 seconds, it makes 22 hours 9 minutes 36 sec-
onds for the mean time in which the Sun is in the beginning of
Aries at Uraniburg, for which are taken the places of the Moon and
the other Planets from the ephemerides, or the Rudolphine Tables,
and from which, having subtracted 8 minutes for the Equation of
Time, according to our Table of the true Equation of Time put in
Book 17, Section 2, Chapter 5, there remains 22 hours 2 minutes
for the true time, and having again subtracted from that 45 minutes
for the difference of meridians between Uraniburg and Paris
(which Kepler wrongly put at 40 minutes),1 there will remain 21
hours 17 minutes for the true time at Paris, for which the figure is
erected, as is the custom for nativities, and this figure will emerge.
'But Kepler's difference (40 minutes) was closer to the truth (41 minutes 27 sec-
onds) than Morin's (45 minutes). Tycho's Observatory that he called Uraniburg
is located on the (now) Swedish Island of Yen (Hven) in the Oresund at 55N54
12E42.
32

=== Page 43 ===
% ipO T
v2> -ft
J >?> -0
164.6.
Martii
D. R M
19. »t. 17. T.A
Puifiii
'V
Aries Ingress
Paris, France
20 March 1646 9:17 AM LAT
If you want to test the precision of this time, [do this]: At the
above said mean time at Uraniburg namely on 19 March 1646 at
22 hours 9 minutes 36 seconds, the mean motions of the [Sun's]
longitude and apogee are taken; and having subtracted the place of
the apogee from the place of the longitude, for the remainder,
which is the mean anomaly, the Equation of the Center of the Sun
is taken from the tables of the Equations of the Sun according to
Tycho's hypothesis, reported by Magini in the supplement to his
Ephemerides]\ and the Sun's place is found precisely at the begin-
ning of Aries, which can be done with no other Tables. Besides, it
must be known that the Perpetual Table of the revolutions is
founded on the length of the tropical year placed above, Kepler's
mean motions of the Sun, and the Tables of the Equations of the
Ephemerides... (Venice: D. Zenarius, 1582.), but probably a later edition is re-
ferred to. See the note to Section II, Chapter 6, below.
33

=== Page 44 ===
Center of the Sun reported by Magini from Tycho's fundamental
[motions].
But as for that which pertains to the figures of the quarters that
Ptolemy thinks should be erected for the more accurate under-
standing of the state of the whole year, in [Quadripartite] Book 2,
Chapter 9,' when the Sun enters the signs Cancer, Libra, and Cap-
ricorn, we have said in Book 23, Chapter 11, that in the
genethliacal Revolutions of the Sun and the Moon we should not
reject [this] in the subdivision of these into quarters. For even if the
force of these should be principally attributed to the transit of the
Sun and Moon through the squares and opposition of their own
radical places, for which the inherent force is greater than the rest
[of the aspects]; yet it is established by experience that a notable
virtue is inherent in these figures of the quarters—that is, they ex-
hibit the state of the Caelum at the moment of that transit; by rea-
son of the state of that Caelum, which state is stronger or weaker,
more fortunate or more unfortunate, and it operates in a varied
manner, both elementarily and influentially. Wherefore, in univer-
sal constitutions, namely in the annual Revolutions of the World,
and in the synods of the Lights, we think that the figures of the
quarters should also be erected—at least as secondary charts
dependent on the primary charts.
Moreover, the figure of the entrance of the Sun into the begin-
ning of Cancer, Libra, or Capricorn is erected in absolutely the
same manner as the figure of the Ingress into the beginning of
Aries explained above. And so, for those three quarters there will
be had the following figures for the mean time of Uraniburg, hav-
ing collected the mean motions of the longitude and apogee of the
Sun, and having taken the Equation of the Center of the Sun as was
done above, there will also be found very exactly those [times of
the] beginnings of Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn.
1 Tetrabiblos (ed. Robbins), Book 2, Chapter 10.
34

=== Page 45 ===
sfc. o
O %
*
x.o
164^.
Junri
\ D. H. M. T.A Q
3^
PanCit
r
Cancer Ingress
Paris, France
June 1646 0:36 PM LAT
f6. if
? \?
& &
)P
Sepiecnbrlt
a H. M.
ix 15.4f. T.A.
Par i Git.
0' O
9i
Libra Ingress
Paris, France
23 September 1646 3:45 AM LAT
35

=== Page 46 ===
%
/V
I64«.
DrtSrmbtii
D, H. M.
21. a, 53. T.A.
Par i fut.
O
'0
9^ ^r
4-
\ O
Capricorn Ingress1
Paris, France
21 December 1646 2:53 PM LAT
But here it should be warned incidentally that Cardan in his
Commentary on [Quadripartite] Book 2, Chapter 10, thinks that
the figures of the Solar Ingress into the cardinal points cannot be
erected because the hour of that Ingress cannot be known; and
therefore, one can only judge about those Ingresses from the celes-
tial state of the planets and from the figure of the conjunction or
opposition of the Lights immediately preceding [the Ingresses].
In all of which Cardan himself errs. First because it is false that
the hour cannot be sufficiently [well] known for erecting the figure
of the Ingress.2 Secondly, because a judgment on an Ingress of the
'There are several errors in this chart: (1) Saturn should be shown Retrograde; (2)
the Moon should be shown as 19 Gemini, not 4 Cancer; (3) Jupiter should be in 8
Leo, not in 7 Cancer; and (4) Mercury's degree number is missing - it should be
13 Capricorn.
2But alas, Cardan was right, since the true times of the Aries Ingress and the Libra
Ingress calculated by Morin were off by about 3 hours, and only the Cancer In-
gress and the Capricorn Ingress were within an hour of the truth. Calculated from
modem figures, the true times of the Ingresses were: Aries 0:31 PM, Cancer 0:02
36

=== Page 47 ===
Sun from the celestial state of the Planets is common to the whole
Earth. Thirdly, because the force and efficacy of any new Moon
or full Moon only extends down to the next following new Moon,
as will be shown below. Fourthly, because the conjunction and
opposition of the Lights is subordinated; and they depend for their
own effects on the Ingress of the Sun into Aries, Cancer, Libra, or
Capricorn. Therefore, with these unknown, the effects of the con-
junction and the opposition of the Lights is [also] unknown.
Chapter S. The Revolutions of the Planets, both to
their own Radical Places at the Beginning of the World,
and to their Synods and Syzygies among themselves,
as well as their general Effects.
In this chapter we approach a doctrine hitherto neglected, and
yet one without which astrology—both universal and particu-
lar—can only be understood confusedly and very imperfectly; and
it cannot be known by what means the seven Planets would govern
these inferior things by their own motions and by their syzygies
among themselves.
Moreover, the truth of this compelled the old astrologers to ob-
serve the synodical Revolutions of the Sun and Moon, and then
those of the superior planets, Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars. For they
discovered that these Revolutions are especially causes of changes
that are happening in this inferior World. And indeed they erected
figures for the synods of the Sun and Moon because the motions of
those Planets would have been better known than the motions of
the rest of the Planets; but they did not erect them for the synods of
Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, because their slower motion would deny
the hour of their true synod with respect to us to human under-
standing—at least for the Saturn and Jupiter synods.
But both about the latter and also the former conjunctions, by a
PM, Libra 0:58 AM, and Capricorn 3:49 PM. So, the errors of Morin's times were
-3:14 for Aries, +0:34 for Cancer, +2:47 for Libra, and -0:56 for Capricorn. But
he was not aware of this, since he believed that Tycho's and Kepler's theory of
the Sun's motion was exact. Unfortunately it was not.
37

=== Page 48 ===
very confused, indeed, by a false tradition, so that in the knowl-
edge of the celestial Lights handed down by them, the understand-
ing only comes upon obscurities. But from those things that be-
came known to the old [astrologers] by experience and that are de-
duced by the natural light from the principles of astrology pro-
pounded by me, the doctrine that follows is drawn, by which me-
dium that knowledge of the celestial Lights may at least illuminate
the human intellect.
Therefore, I say first. The seven Planets, the Sun, the Moon,
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, by their own motions
in the signs of the zodiac, their returns to their radical places at the
beginning of the World, then their synodic revolutions and their
syzygies among themselves, are the causes of all the sublunar
changes. For, with the Planets removed, no changes would occur
in the sublunar World. That is, the Caelum would always be the
same every day, or affected in the same manner for the same
[place] on earth. But the same remaining the same, always does the
same to the same.1
For what change would occur from the very slow motion of the
fixed stars?—even during the longest interval of years it would be
insensible. Moreover, the Sun by its own revolution through the
zodiac makes Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter during [the
course of] the year; and this [space of] time is given to it by the Di-
vine Wisdom for an individual period [to have] its own effects
upon the Earth. But the Moon revolves around the zodiac in the
space of a month; and it is also given this [space of] time for renew-
ing its own effects periodically upon the Earth. And so with the
rest [of the Planets], Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury.
For the individual Planets, by their own Revolutions in the zo-
diac to the same radical point in which they were placed at the be-
ginning of the World, can do only the same thing per se, namely
that because [all those Revolutions] are per se the same. But when
'Morin italicized this statement.
38

=== Page 49 ===
they are combined among themselves in various ways, they pro-
duce various effects. Just as from the combination of 23 letters all
the words and all the discourses are constructed; and from differ-
ent combinations of the four elemental qualities, different temper-
aments are also produced. Moreover, that the revolutions of the
Planets to their own radical places at the beginning of the World
are very effective, having taken into account the diversity of the
combinations among the Planets, is proved both by the Mundane
Revolution of the Sun, which is the norm for the rest, and by the
annual Revolution of the Sun itself in nativities.
And the reason is because in that radical place the radical force
of the Planet is renewed; and from it begins the revolution not only
of the motion, but also of the proper effects of a Planet on the
Earth, which are not distributed without [some] order. Moreover,
in every order there is given something that is first, which [in this
case] is the radical place of the Planet at the beginning of the
World. And the same thing must be said similarly about the Revo-
lutions of Nativities. Finally, that the synodic Revolutions of the
Planets and their syzygies are of the greatest virtue [in their action]
upon these inferior things is plainly proved, both by the synods
and syzygies of the Sun and the Moon, whose effects are also visi-
ble to the rustics, and by the conjunctions of Saturn, Jupiter, and
Mars to which all antiquity ascribed the greatest effects.
I say secondly. That in universal astrology—or what is in-
volved in universal constitutions—the radical places of the Planets
at the beginning of the World are unknown (except the place of the
Sun); and therefore, their periodic Revolutions to those same
places are also unknown—to the great detriment of astrology itself
as well as to us. Certainly no more solid fundamentals of universal
judgments remain, after the Mundane Revolution of the Sun that is
at least known to us, than the mutual synodic Revolutions of the
Planets among themselves and their syzygies, which were stated
above to be of notable virtue [in their action] on these inferior
things, which is proved by experience.
39

=== Page 50 ===
I say thirdly. The synodic Revolution of any two Planets has its
own force and its own effects that are mixed from the natures of
both Planets and of the sign in which the synod is located. For Sat-
urn with Jupiter does one thing, and Saturn with Mars does another
thing; and their conjunction does one thing in Aries and another
thing in Taurus, etc., according to the Book of Principles. And that
force and its efficacy lasts until the next following synod of those
same Planets, although their effect and impression, if it is at least a
strong one, can last not only through that whole time, but even be-
yond it. And that is plainly evident in the case of the synods of the
Sun and the Moon, whose forces and effects are renewed in each
new Moon on account of the change of sign and ruler in which the
following new Moon occurs; but if the Sun experiences an eclipse,
not only are more intense effects produced, but also effects lasting
longer than a month, on account of the magnitude of the cause and
its extraordinary force.
I say fourthly. The synodic revolutions of the Sun and the
Moon and their syzygies are the most effective of all with regard to
the Earth, because the Sun and the Moon are primary Planets ar-
ranged primarily around the Earth, but the other Planets are only
satellites of the Sun. Therefore, the Moon's configurations with
them are of less virtue, at least per se, than those with the Sun itself.
Then, because the Sun is the greatest and most powerful of the
Planets; but the Moon on account of its closeness is of the same ap-
parent size as the Sun. Whence both Planets are more active on the
Earth than the rest of the Planets.
I say fifthly. Among the syzygies of two Planets (among which
we hold their conjunction), there is some order and dependency;
and consequently, some one of them is primary, to which the rest
of them refer. But that one is the conjunction itself, or the synod,
for that one is independent, but the rest of them depend upon it, as
from their own beginning, from which when both Planets are be-
ing separated, the rest of the syzygies occur, as is plain per se.
I say sixthly. From what has already been said, it follows that
40

=== Page 51 ===
the synod, i.e. the celestial chart of the synod, has an effect that
continues in power from that synod until the next one following
it. And those things arising can be explained both from the synod
itself and from the rest of the syzygies of both of the Planets—the
sextile, square, trine, and opposition—among themselves ac-
cording as they are subordinated to the synod or conjunction,
from which those effects start, as they are returned to their own
beginning, as the synodic Revolution reduces its own force to ac-
tion.
I say seventhly. During a synodic Revolution of two Planets,
such as the Sun and the Moon between themselves, their syzygies
both between themselves and with the other Planets, especially
with those having power in the chart of the synod, pertain per se to
the effects of the Revolution itself. But not the syzygies of two
other Planets, such as Saturn and Jupiter between themselves, un-
less perhaps by accident, as when there is a syzygy of Saturn and
Jupiter, those syzygies also do something with the Sun or with the
Moon, or some other [Planet], or when both of them have power or
rulership in a synod of the Sun and Moon.
I say eighthly. From that, it follows that the same Planet with
several others produces at the same time many different effects; at
one time, because the same syzygy of two Planets can pertain at
the same time to the effects of many Revolutions; at another time,
because both Saturn, the slowest of all [the Planets], and the Moon,
the swiftest of all [the Planets], revolve synodically and are config-
ured with several others. Moreover, the effect of Satum and Jupiter
is of one kind, and the effect of Satum with Mars or the Sun is of
another kind.
And because there are only 7 Planets, namely the Sun, the
Moon, Satum, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, and Mercury, hence it
results that anyone of them in 6 Revolutions is exposed at the same
time to Revolutions of a diverse nature and virtue, such as the syn-
odic Revolutions of the Moon with the other 6 Planets, and so with
the rest of the [Planets]. And consequently there may always be
41

=== Page 52 ===
seen in the Caelum 42 synodic revolutions of the Planets.1 More-
over, some of the planets revolve swifter, like the Moon, and oth-
ers slower, like Jupiter with Saturn; therefore, not only in a year
from the Sun, but also in a month from the Moon, many synodic
Revolutions with the other Planets occur and [also] their syzygies
of diverse forces.
Nevertheless, it must be known that the swifter Planets are
properly said to revolve with the slower ones, and not the other
way around; and Saturn will be properly said to revolve with the
fixed stars, and those with fixed points in the Primum Mobile2-, and
the mobile points of the diurnal motion with the fixed points of the
Empyrean Caelum, which is absolutely immobile, and beyond
which there is no motion.
I say ninthly. The multiplicity of the virtues [resulting] from
the synodic Revolutions of all the Planets and from their syzygies,
and the mixture of so many diverse virtues is entirely incompre-
hensible by human understanding; and it would be sufficient if we
discern the greater and more evident ones. And the individual syn-
ods do not produce the same effect on each horizon on Earth, but
one effect in one place, and another [different] effect in another
place, according to their diverse applications to the individual ho-
rizons of the whole Earth, and according to the diverse particular
rulers of the synods.
For although a conjunction of the Sun and the Moon and their
syzygies may be common to all horizons on Earth; nevertheless,
throughout the whole circuit of the Earth there is not the same ruler
of the new Moon, as will be stated hereafter, from which however
the effects of the new Moon are varied in accordance with the
[ruler's] proper nature and its state; therefore, that multiplicity of
'Morin got 42 by multiplying 7 by 6, which would be the proper number of com-
binations if either planet could come first; but as Hieroz noted, when Morin says
that only the faster planet can combine with a slower one, that reduces the number
of possible combinations to 6+5+4+3+2+1, which equals 21.
2That is, the signs of the zodiac.
42

=== Page 53 ===
virtues allots its own effect—not only a particular effect in all hori-
zons, but also a particular effect in each individual horizon.
I say tenthly. For instance, in individual celestial charts, a con-
stitution is presented for judging—either a universal one, or a par-
ticular one—but so far it has only been judged insofar as its present
condition occurs, and without respect to its current synodic Revo-
lutions. But since there may be much to notice in the [current]
Mundane Revolution of the Sun—namely, what Planet the Sun
was last conjoined to and in what sign—that is what was then in
fact in its last synodic Revolution that is currently running, and
whether it is a Revolution with Saturn or with Jupiter, etc.—for
these are the most effective of those currently running, especially
if Saturn or Jupiter should be allotted the rulership in that
Revolution of the Sun.
And for that reason, in the case of the annual Revolution of the
Sun, the old [astrologers] were accustomed to observe the new
Moon, or the full Moon most closely preceding it. And similarly,
in the case of a new Moon there may be much to notice—to what
Planet the Moon was conjoined immediately before the new
Moon, and in what sign; and the same thing should be observed
about the Planets that are individual significators in nativities; e.g.
if Saturn is ruler of the ASC and therefore the significator of those
things that are attributed to the ASC, and the Moon was last con-
joined to it, but she was the ruler of Saturn in the genethliacal fig-
ure, the force of the Moon in connection with those things signi-
fied by the ASC will be greater than if it was only the ruler of Sat-
urn, which ruled the ASC. And so with the rest.
I say in the eleventh place. That having added in the case of the
Planets the determined force of the degrees of the Primum
Caelum, which are the true places and aspects of the Planets them-
selves, each force in the figures of nativities and in others erected
for the annual Mundane Revolution of the Sun, the new Moons,
the beginnings of illnesses, etc., is most evident; and it is ade-
quately proved by us in Book 21, Section 1, Chapter 4, that it can-
43

=== Page 54 ===
not be denied that in the conjunction of two Planets, the places in
the Primum Caelum in which those conjunctions fall, and their
squares and oppositions, are most effectively determined to the na-
ture of the conjunctions of the Planets; and those same places are
the most notable in virtue, because they are determined not by a
single Planet but by two at the same time.
And Ptolemy himself favors this doctrine at the end of
[Tetrabiblos], Book 2, Chapter 5, even though the arcanum of the
determination was unknown to him. For he says, "the increases
and decreases of the effects of an eclipse are to be judged from the
conjunctions that are in that place where the eclipse was, or in
those aspecting that place." Which is to ascribe the virtue to the
places determined by both of the Lights.
I say in the twelfth place. That the squares and oppositions of
the syzygies of the Lights put in the ephemerides do not have any
force by reason of the determination of the parts of the Primum
Caelum by the preceding conjunction of the Lights. For the Moon
shown in the ephemerides in the first square (which can be said to
be the quarter of the light), around 6 or 7 degrees has gone past the
sinister square of the preceding conjunction of the Moon and the
Sun; and in the opposition by around 12 or 13 degrees it has gone
past the tme opposition preceding the conjunction; and it has gone
past the true dexter square of that conjunction by around 21 de-
grees; which are very noteworthy differences.
And yet because they intercept the elemental and influential
force they have on these sublunar things, all astrologers are accus-
tomed to erect figures for their times to predict the future from
them; and it cannot be said that that force is reflected upon these
inferior things [more] from the light of the Sun than from the light
of the Moon, namely because the sole source of the light is for illu-
minating, but not for doing anything else per se, as was shown by
us in Book 11, Chapter 13; [so that] it must necessarily be said that
the force itself is from the partile aspect of the square or opposition
of the Lights between themselves, which is of itself effective on
44

=== Page 55 ===
these sublunar things, even as the syzygies of the rest of the Plan-
ets, both with the Sun and the Moon, and among themselves,
which we have stated in Chapter 3 to be particular universal
causes, and the beginnings of actions on these inferior things.
I say in the thirteenth place. Both of the above said
oppositions in the synodic Revolution of the Sun and the Moon
have one determination,1 and another of the simple syzygy, so then
both of the squares2 must be observed as being effective in their
own effects of the synodic Revolution. Nevertheless, the greater
force is inherent in those that are by determination; for the
syzygies of the Lights among themselves certainly operate in na-
tivities according to their determination in the Native's radical fig-
ure, and according to the houses of the figure in which the syzygies
occur, as is plain from the observation of their daily effects; but the
transits of the Lights through the places of the squares and the op-
position to their radical places are more effective and more fre-
quent, as experience teaches. And therefore, the force inherent in
the square and opposition aspects is greater by determination than
the squares and opposition of the simply syzygy.
Moreover, that which we say for genethliacal figures must simi-
larly be judged to be valid for new Moons and the other primary
universal constitutions, which are the synodical Revolutions of the
Sun, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars among themselves with re-
spect to their own square and opposition syzygies. For the con-
junctions of the Planets are the first or radical principles, with re-
spect to which the rest of those syzygies are related, as was already
said above. Moreover, the force inherent in the radical principles is
the principal one for effectively determining the Caelum, as is
plain from nativities.
'Here and in what follows, when he speaks of the determination, he is referring to
the actual chart of the lunation, and to the position of the Sun and Moon in that
chart.
2That is, the squares to the radical position of the lunation (i.e. to the determina-
tion) and the subsequent squares of the syzygies, which occur later in the lunar
month.
45

=== Page 56 ===
Therefore, the transits of either of the Planets of a conjunction
through the place determined by the conjunction are effective, and
they reduce the force of the synodic Revolution from potentiality
to action by reason of their transit. And that is proved in the Mun-
dane Revolution of the Sun, for the transit of the Sun through the
beginnings of Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn, places that are square
and opposed to the place of the Revolution of the Sun itself for the
remaining three quarters of the year—Summer, Autumn, and Win-
ter. And the effects of the constitution of the Mundane Revolution
of the Sun are not suppressed by the constitutions of the quarters,
the new Moons, and the rest of the synodic Revolutions of the
Lights with the other Planets, but they are only explained, in-
creased, diminished, and moderated in accordance with the agree-
ment or the disagreement of the figures, or of the subordinate con-
stitutions, with the primary ones and among themselves, as much
as it can be conceded to the primary itself—that is to the solitary
Mundane Revolution of the Sun, that is apart from the radical fig-
ure of the World.1
Similarly, the transits of the Moon through the squares and op-
position to the place of the [preceding] new Moon do not suppress
the effects of the constitution of the new Moon, but they explain,
increase, or diminish, and moderate them in accordance with the
agreement or disagreement of the figures. To which the rest of the
syzygies of the Sun and the Moon concur. And the reasoning is the
same for the synodic revolutions of the other Planets. But the prin-
cipal universal causes are the Mundane Revolution of the Sun and
the synods of the Sun and the Moon, because these are the primary
Planets.
But as for that which pertains to the synodic Revolutions of the
Sun and Venus, they cannot be deployed to the other syzygies of
the sextile, square, trine, or opposition because the maximum
elongation from the Sun of Venus and Mercury does not extend to
a partile sextile, nor does the maximum mutual distance of Venus
'Which, as was explained above, is unknown.
46

=== Page 57 ===
and Mercury in the zodiac with respect to us extend to a partile
square.1 But nevertheless, in the case of their conjunctions, the
places of the conjunction, square, and opposition are effectively
determined in the Caelum, not otherwise than in the case of the
other Planets, which is proved from their transits and those of the
other Planets through those same places in genethliacal figures.
And this still confirms that the efficacy in the aspects from their
determination is greater than in the aspects of a simple syzygy,
seeing that a synodic Revolution can be lacking to the latter, but
not to the former.
I say in the fourteenth place. That since in the case of the syn-
ods of the Sun and the Moon, the Sun can in only three months
reach the sinister square of the place of the new Moon; but then the
virtue of that new Moon will have lapsed; therefore, not the tran-
sits of the Sun through those places determined by the new Moon
should be looked at, but only those of the Moon during the synodic
Revolution of the Moon. And the same thing should similarly be
considered about any swifter Planet with respect to a slower one,
unless it should happen that some powerful planets in that synod
should transit by body or by aspect through those places.
I say in the fifteenth place. That both the opposition and the
squares from the determination and from the simple syzygies of
the synodic Revolution of the Sun and the Moon, pertain to the ef-
fects of the synodic revolution itself. And in the case of the opposi-
tion and the squares of the determination, that is evidently plain
because they formally depend upon the very place of that new
Moon, as they are referred to it. And in the case of the opposition
and squares of the simple syzygy, that is also proved because oth-
erwise there would be no primary syzygy, and no subordination
between the syzygies; and no effects of one new Moon would last
until another one, but only until the next following syzygy that is
acting independently of the chart of the new Moon. And as for the
'The maximum elongation of Venus from the Sun is about 48 degrres, and the
maximum elongation of Mercury from the Sun is about 28 degrees. Therefore,
their maximum distance from each other is the sum of these or about 76 degrees.
47

=== Page 58 ===
rest, they would all be confounded; that is, because in the case of
the squares, there are given two places, namely of the Sun and the
Moon that are mutually independent of each other; moreover, the
beginning of every quality ought to be some unity to avoid confu-
sion, that is the place of the synodic Revolution. And the reasoning
is the same for the rest. Moreover, a judgment should be rendered
both on the transits through the aspects of the determination, and
by the simple syzygies of the figures erected for those same mo-
ments, giving primacy to the transits unless the syzygies of the Sun
and the Moon and their opposition are in the ecliptic.1
I say in the sixteenth place. The aspects from the determina-
tion, and the simple syzygies, act universally upon the whole
Earth, and particularly with respect to each place, and they are
such that transits through the aspects of their determination initiate
or dispose the effects, but the syzygies perfect them; or the transits
may effect them, but the syzygies confirm or destroy them in ac-
cordance with the different virtue of the latter as well as the for-
mer. And this must be especially understood about the transits and
the similar syzygies of the synodic revolution of the Moon with the
Sun, in which the transits and syzygies are similar on the same day,
and they cannot differ by [more than] two days.
But in other synodic revolutions, such as that of the Sun and
Mars, in which the Sun or Mars, in which the Sun or Mars transits
through the sinister square of the place of the conjunction within 3
or 4 months, but the dexter square is scarcely completed in [less
than] 9 or 10 months; and although the effects of the transits and
the syzygies pertain to the same synodic Revolution, yet very of-
ten they differ among themselves, but are not connected, so that
the later one is sometimes the perfection or confirmation of the for-
mer one, but sometimes the other way around. And especially
when the ruler of the place in which the synod occurred, or the
ruler of that synodic constitution, has no power in the places of the
'This exception is for the Sun-Moon conjunctions and oppositions that occur in
the ecliptic, which, as he mentioned above, occur in the case of solar and lunar
eclipses.
48

=== Page 59 ===
syzygies, or no power of mlership or of exaltation in the constitu-
tion of the syzygy. Therefore, the aspects of the determination, and
the syzygies must be attended to in the same synodic revolution of
the two Planets.
Chapter 6. How the Figure of any Synod of the Sun
and the Moon, as well as the Figures of the
Monthly Quarters should be erected.
After what was said about the synodic revolutions of the planets
in Chapter 5, now it follows that we should discuss the synodic
Revolutions of the Moon with the Sun, both because they are
[more] important than the rest, and because only the true times of
these are known,1 at least closely, and finally because the effects of
the annual Revolution of the World, which was discussed in Chap-
ter 4, or its quarters may depend upon the immediately preceding
new Moon or full Moon as we observed in Chapters 4 and 5.
However, it is not our purpose here to show the method from the
fundamental tables by which the moment of mean time in which
the true synod of the Lights may be exactly found, both because
those tables would have to be put here beyond our purpose, and be-
cause they have not yet attained the desired precision. And so, un-
til the most accurate tables may be constructed in accordance with
the fundamentals given by us in our Astronomy Restored, it will be
sufficient to warn the Reader that from the most accurate
ephemerides that are available for the motion of the Sun and the
Moon, he should see at what mean time the new Moon occurs
whose figure he desires to erect, for that time is put on the page of
syzygies.2
Then in those same ephemerides on the left side of the page,
having taken the true places of the Planets for the degree of the true
'Morin recognized that the exact times of the planetary synods could be deter-
mined with less accuracy than those of the Sun and the Moon.
2Many ephemerides both then and now have a table showing the times of the lu-
nar phases.
49

=== Page 60 ===
place of the Sun, he should reduce that mean time into apparent
time according to our Table of the Equation of Days,1 and thus
there will be had the true time2 of the new Moon for the meridian
of the ephemerides; and after that he should reduce that [time] to
the meridian of the place for which the figure is to be erected, as is
usually done; and finally, for that time last reduced, he should
erect the figure of the new Moon, as is customary for every sort of
figure for the latitude of the place.
For example. The mean time of the new Moon immediately pre-
ceding the Ingress of the Sun into the beginning of Aries in this
year 1646 is put by Origanus from Tycho's [solar theory] on the
day of 16 March at 20:21 on the meridian of Frankfurt an der Oder,
for which Origanus's ephemerides are constructed. Therefore,3 for
that time, let the tme places of the Sun and Moon be taken from
those ephemerides [made] according to Tycho's calculations, and
the Sun will be found to be in 26057,19" H, and the Moon in
26057'43" H; and consequently, that is the [place of] the new
Moon, not however in the ecliptic, because at that time the Moon's
latitude is more than 3° South,4 and therefore more than three times
greater than both the semi-diameters of the Sun and the Moon
taken together.5
And because the Sun is in the 27th degree of [Pisces, and] the
'Now called, The Equation of Time.
2That is, the Local Apparent Time (LAT).
Probably his Novae Motuum Caelestium Ephemerides Brandenhurgicae
Annorum LX incipientes ab anno 1595 et desinentes in annum 1655... 'The New
Brandenburg Ephemerides of the Celestial Motions for 60 years, beginning in
1595 and ending in 1655...' (Frankfurt: Johann Eichom, 1609).
4The LMT (for Frankfurt an der Oder) and the true positions of the Sun and Moon
from modem astronomical data are as follows: Time 20:54, Sun 356o50'17",and
Moon 356o50,18". The Moon's latitude was 3S48. Note the discrepancy in the
Sun's longitude, which is mainly due to the incorrect value of the solar eccentric-
ity deduced by Tycho as 0.01800 instead of the true value for 1646, namely
0.01687.
5ActuaIIy, nearly seven times as great, since the sum of the mean semi-diameters
is nearly 0o32'. But Morin was probably thinking of the sum of the diameters
rather than the sum of the semi-diameters.
50

=== Page 61 ===
Moon's latitude was 3S48, therefore in our Table of the Equation
of Time, shown in our abbreviated Rudolphine Tables, 9 minutes
must subtracted from that mean time of 20:21, and there will re-
main 20:12 for the true time at Frankfurt, which, since from
Origanus's Table of Places, Paris is East by 0:54, therefore, with
that subtracted from 20:12, there will remain 19:18 for the true
time at Paris.1 For which [time] a figure such as that which follows
is erected, in which however the other Planets are put according to
the opinion of Kepler, who has their places more accurately than
Origanus from the Prutenic Tables? Moreover, as for the time of
the new Moon, Kepler puts it only two minutes later than Tycho.
Plainly, the celestial charts for the squares and the opposition
syzygies of the Lights, must be erected in the same manner, the
mean times of which are also put in the ephemerides; but the charts
of the transits of the Moon through the places of the squares and
the opposition of the determination of the new Moon will be
erected in exactly the same manner as we have taught in Book 23,
Chapter 9, that a figure should be constructed for the Moon,
namely taking the places of the squares and the opposition to the
place of the new Moon, as if they would be the places of the radical
Moon, to which the Moon itself would have revolved.
As in the figure below, the conjunction of the Sun and the Moon
was made in 26°51' K, the sinister square of which place is 26°51'
K, to which the Moon came on the 23rd day of March; and it must
be known at what hour [that occurred] at Paris. And operating as
'in this calculation, Morin subtracted the Equation of Time, which was +9 min-
utes, from 20:21 to get 20:12 LAT at Frankfurt an der Oder, then he used
Origanus's time difference of 0:54 to get a Paris time of 19:18 LAT (=7:18 AM
LAT on the next morning). The geographic longitude of Paris is 2E20 and the
longitude of Frankfurt an der Oder is 14E33, a difference of 12013', which is
equivalent to 0:49 in time, not 0:54. (The Rudolphine Tables put Paris at 0:40 W
of Uraniborg and Frankfurt an der Oder at 0:08 E, which is a difference of 0:48,
closer to the true difference of 0:49.) From modem figures, the true time of the lu-
nation at Paris was 7:56 AM LAT with ASC 20 0. The error in Morin's calcu-
lated time was therefore 38 minutes.
Erasmus Reinhold (151 1-1553), Prutenicae tabulae coelestium motuum 'The
Prutenic Tables of the Celestial Motions' (Wittenberg: Matthew Welack, 1585).
51

=== Page 62 ===
instructed in that same chapter according to Tycho's calculation as
[given] in Origanus, you will find 6:56 mean time on the meridian
of Frankfurt, but 5:55 true apparent time at Paris, namely [by the
calculation] made with our Table and with reduction to the merid-
ian of Paris. And the method is the same for the dexter square and
the opposition.
The celestial charts for the syzygies of the Lights—the squares,
and the opposition—should be erected in the same manner; their
mean times are also put in the ephemerides. But that the charts of
the transits of the Moon through the places of the squares and the
opposition of the determination of the new Moon should be
erected in exactly the same manner as the figure of the Revolution
of the Moon is constructed, we have taught in Book 23, Chapter 9,
'in this figure, Mars is incorrectly shown in 30 Aquarius; it was actually in 1 Pis-
ces. Mercury was in 2 Pisces instead of 1 Pisces, and Venus was in 10 Taurus in-
stead of 8 Taurus. The Mars error is significant because it changes the rulership of
Mars's dispositor from Saturn to Jupiter.
*86. 43
The New Moon Preceding the Aries Ingress.
Paris, France
17 March 1646 7:18 AM LAT1
52

=== Page 63 ===
namely including the places of the squares and the opposition of
the new Moon, just as if they were places of the radical Moon to
which the Moon itself would be revolved.
As in the figure placed above, the conjunction of the Sun and
the Moon was made in 26057' K, the sinister square of which place
is in 26057, K, to which the Moon came on the 23rd day of March,
and it must be known at which hour [that occurred] at Paris. And
operating as instructed in that same chapter according to Tycho's
calculation as [given] in Origanus, you will find 6:56 meantime on
the meridian of Frankfurt, but 5:55 [P.M.] true apparent time at
Paris, namely [by the calculation] made with our Table and with
reduction to the meridian of Paris. And the method is the same for
the dexter square and the opposition.
Chapter 7. The Eclipses of the Lights and what
should be particularly observed about them.
Although the eclipses of the Lights are only special parts of the
revolution of the Moon with the Sun, certainly an eclipse of the
Sun at new Moon and an eclipse of the Moon at full Moon is dis-
cussed in Chapter 6. Nevertheless, because in the case of eclipses
something peculiar happens that should be noted—not something
common—as in the rest of the lunations. And moreover, the whole
of antiquity along with Ptolemy himself, and those following
Cardan and others, have thought that eclipses are the first and most
powerful universal causes [operating] on these inferior things; and
therefore, they have labored very studiously in handing down their
doctrine.1
Before we pass on to other things that must be said by us about
universal constitutions, it seems to be opportune to explain our
opinion about eclipses briefly here, and to show how much the old
[astrologers] were deluded about them, and along with them al-
most all the modem writers have been deluded still.
'The Babylonians were convinced of this, and they established definite rules for
assaying the effects of eclipses and the duration of those effects.
53

=== Page 64 ===
Therefore, I say that men unskilled in the celestial motions,
were not entirely without reason terrified from the beginning to
see the light of the Sun to fail by day, and the light of the Moon
also to totally fail by night, and the day to become night. Indeed,
this portent in Nature incurred no little terror in those ignorant of
its causes. And the forest-dwelling Canadians1 still think so; then,
[they assumed that] either the declining light was affected by a no-
table debility, or a great danger was threatening it, and from that
the whole inferior World [was threatened]. And so, if anything no-
table should happen afterward, such as a plague, a war, famine, a
flood, and something similar, men would commonly think it to be
such a portent as should be ascribed to it.
But those who undertook the perfection of astronomy from the
beginning uncovered the causes of those phenomena by a marvel-
ous sagacity—that is, the interposition of the Moon between the
Sun and us in the case of an eclipse of the Sun, and the interposi-
tion of the Earth between the Sun and the Moon in the case of an
eclipse of the Moon; but about the notable change of sublunar
things from eclipses as causes, they retained the commonly re-
ceived opinion that they were the most powerful of all
[causes]—thinking with all the old philosophers, and indeed with
the modems down to my own time, that the Sun, the Moon, and the
rest of the Planets and fixed stars accomplish by their own light
whatever they do to these sublunar things.
For, having made that hypothesis, it necessarily followed that
from a diminution [of light] in partial [eclipses], or from a total in-
terruption [of it] in total [eclipses], i.e. by the action of the declin-
ing light, these sublunar things are strongly affected and changed;
that is because the Sun and the Moon are the primary celestial
causes of sublunar effects. But because in Book 11 it is more
clearly shown that the light only illuminates and doesn't do any-
thing else, and in Book 12, [it is also shown that] there is inherent
in the Sun, besides its light, an actual heat, but that in all the stars
'The Canadian Indians.
54

=== Page 65 ===
their own individual influences penetrate the body of the Earth,
and they scarcely affect it less from subterranean places than from
places above the Earth.
We must now philosophize about eclipses in a different way, by
having looked at things in Nature, rather than things seen in the
books of authors.
But the reader must be warned in advance that they are studi-
ously mistaken who think that astrologers only look at the eclipses
of the Lights as a deprivation of their light on these sublunar
things, since they only look at those eclipses as conjunctions or
oppositions of the Lights, through which the Sun and the Moon
pour out their own influences more strongly than through any of
their other syzygies.
And so, astronomers and astrologers observe the same moment
of time of the middle of the eclipse—the former so that they may
see whether their Tables of the Motions are accurate; but the latter
so that from a celestial figure erected at that moment they may see
what effects on these inferior things the eclipse is going to pro-
duce—not by reason of the declining light, about which learned
astrologers are uninterested, but by reason of their influence. And
so, having noted these things in advance....
I say first. In those eclipses that happen above the earth, we are
indeed deprived of the light and heat of the Sun, totally in fact if
the eclipse is total, but partially if it is a partial one. And this lasts
as long as the eclipse; but we are not at all deprived of the influence
of the Sun, or at least no more than when the Sun is under the
Earth, which every night makes for us a total eclipse of the Sun
with a space of time of many hours. For just as the influence of the
subterranean Sun penetrates the Earth, as is established from the
figures of those bom at night, so the influence of the Sun in eclipse
above the Earth penetrates the dense and opaque body of the
Moon, which neither the light nor the heat of the Sun is able to
penetrate.
55

=== Page 66 ===
For the Moon is discerned by the telescope under the disc of the
Sun to be blacker than black, as I have learned to the detriment of
my eyes; but in the case of subterranean eclipses of the Sun, at least
total ones, the upper hemisphere of the Earth is more affected by
the eclipse than by one that occurs above the Earth. The reason is
because the influence of the Sun is not of infinite virtue; and there-
fore, if it can penetrate the globe of the Earth, it cannot except
more weakly cross the globes of the Earth and the Moon at the
same time. Therefore, in those eclipses, at least the total ones, we
experience unchanged the influence of the Sun on us.
And that is perhaps why for about 30 years so many wars and all
kinds of evils are taking place in this hemisphere of the Earth that
Europe lies in the middle of. For during that time very many total
or almost total eclipses of the Sun occurred in the opposite hemi-
sphere, as can be seen in Origanus, who studiously noted and cal-
culated the ones above the Earth and below the Earth, when how-
ever scarcely two notable ones occurred in this hemisphere.1
I say secondly. In the case of the eclipses of the Moon, we are
indeed deprived of the light and heat of the Sun reflected by the
Moon—of all of it, if the eclipse is total, but of part of it if the
[eclipse] is partial—and only while the eclipse lasts. But we are no
more deprived of the influence and elemental powers of the Moon
than if we were not experiencing an eclipse; indeed, because be-
tween it and us nothing is interposed that would be able to blunt its
elemental or influential powers. And this is true (at least for the in-
fluences) both for the subterranean eclipses of the Moon and for
those above the Earth. Whence it is established that sublunar Na-
ture is more affected by solar eclipses than by lunar eclipses on ac-
count of the diminished influence of the former on us. And in all
lA reference to the widespread devastation caused by the Thirty Years War
1618-1648, which was still in progress at the time when Morin wrote this (1646).
A convenient resource for eclipses is Theodor Ritter von Oppolzer's Canon of
Eclipses, translated by Owen Gingrich (New York; Dover Publications, 1962),
which has diagrams of the shadow paths of the eclipses. I note eclipse paths be-
low the equator in 1618, 1619, 1621, 1622, 1625, 1626, 1629, 1636, and 1637;
but only two in the northern hemisphere, in 1621 and 1630.
56

=== Page 67 ===
the eclipses, the influx of the Moon prevails over the influx of the
Sun, more indeed in the case of lunar eclipses.
I say thirdly. From what has been said, it is plain that the old
[astrologers] were much deceived, thinking that in the case of
eclipses the Light that is being eclipsed stops its action on these in-
ferior things—namely, because they were thinking that the Lights
act by their light alone; and therefore, they were of the wrong opin-
ion; secondly, that from the minor Planets the ability to perform in
the world was from the Light being eclipsed.
More so than the others, Cardan erred in his Commentary [on
the Quadripartite] Book 2, Chapter 5, Text 26, when he concludes
that "the force of the eclipse consists of the failure of its light"; but
afterwards, considering the failure of its light to be only a removal
that cannot be an acting cause, he concludes in another way, but in
an equally false one," In eclipses, the light of the Sun or the Moon
is not taken away but changed, and affected in its external quality
to impair and change the sublunar things," and he says falsely that,
"the Moon of itself is bright and shiny, just as Venus can be seen
by itself; since (as I saw and said above), the Moon in a solar
eclipse appears blacker than black,1 which however the light of the
Sun would penetrate much more effectively than the light of
Venus.
I say fourthly. Therefore, by the eclipses of the Lights, the
Earth and its inhabitants are more strongly affected than by the
rest of the synods, or by an opposition of the Sun and the Moon,
'Cardan actually says this {op. cit., p. 193, col.l): Ergo dicendum est quod per
deliquia luminarum lumen ipsum quod ad nos transit (nam neque vnquam Luna,
vt dixi, ex toto priuatur lumine & multo minus Sol, sed in maximis deliquiis quod
corpus Lunae perspicuum sit adeo vt Venus per ipsam intueri possit, vt in physic is
declarauimus, lumen croceum ad nos deueniat) affectum externa qualitate
immutat et concutitpartes orbis loco in quo est, addictas. 'Therefore, it must be
said that during eclipses of the Lights, the light that passes along to us (for the
Moon is not ever, as I have said, totally deprived of light & much less the Sun, but
in the maxima of the eclipses that the body of the Moon is evident rather as Venus
can be seen by itself, as we have stated in Physics, a yellow light reaches us) af-
fected in its external quality, changes and impairs the affected parts in that place
in the World in which it is.'
57

=== Page 68 ===
because a united virtue is stronger. But in eclipses, the rays of the
Sun and the Moon are united in the same line (or at least approxi-
mately) that is directed by them onto the Earth. And in an eclipse
of the Sun, the Earth is found within the cone, which, derived from
both of the Lights as a base, grazes the Earth itself in its circumfer-
ence1; moreover, in an eclipse of the Moon it is found within the
column whose extremes are the discs of the Sun and the Moon.
Add that in every eclipse, both Lights are in the ecliptic, where
the virtue of the zodiac flourishes the most. But from that it follows
that the greater and longer in duration an eclipse is, the greater the
effects that it produces—that is, because in the major eclipses, the
central rays of the Sun and the Moon are more united into the same
line that penetrates the Earth,and they are united for a longer time.
I say fifthly. Ptolemy and the other old astrologers down to our
time were again greatly deluded about these things in two ways.
First, in defining the places on Earth to which the effects of any
particular eclipse pertain. For they would have them pertain to
those regions and provinces that are ruled by the sign in which the
eclipse occurred, or to others of the same triplicity, according to
the distribution made by Ptolemy of the [places] on Earth to the
twelve signs of the zodiac.
However, since we have shown in Book 20, Section 1, Chapter
2, that that distribution is a mere fiction, it is plain that they erred in
assigning the places on Earth in which the effects of eclipses oc-
cur. Which is more fully confirmed, because an eclipse, just as any
other lunation, is a universal cause, universally active for the
whole circle of the Earth; but particularly active in any place on
Earth according to the particular position of the eclipse, and of the
whole Caelum with respect to that place on Earth. But [this may
be] in a place where very frequently the eclipse would not be allot-
ted any effect according to the old [astrologers], because that place
would not be ruled by the sign in which the eclipse is, nor by others
"Here Morin is talking about the shadow cone that is cast by the Moon onto the
Earth.
58

=== Page 69 ===
that are of its triplicity. However, that illusion is intolerable, and
most alien to the principles of astrology.
You will say that Ptolemy [also] calls attention to the places of
the Lights and the angles of the celestial figure under which cities
themselves were founded, or to the MC of the nativities of the
Princes who rule those cities. And if those have any familiarity or
agreement with the places of the Lights and the angles in the figure
of the eclipse, the effects pertain to those cities.
But I reply. The celestial bodies do not influence artifacts, at
least per se, as we have proved in Book 20, Section 4, Chapter 8.
And consequently, that doctrine about cities collapses from the
fundamentals, although it would hold for the radical figures of cit-
ies, but scarcely any one of them is known. But as for what looks at
the MC's of Princes, indeed given the above said familiarity,
namely what may happen from an eclipse falling in the MC of the
natal figure of a Prince, or what [when it falls] in both the natal fig-
ure and the ecliptical figure; and the same thing in the case of the
MC—the eclipse will signify [something] about the actions and
the particular fate of the Prince. But what things will happen to the
citizens of that city, as well as to the land, the water, and the air,
such as plagues, sterilities, etc., will not be foreseen from that, un-
less perchance by accident, in so far as the Prince is passively or
actively determined to war; and from the similarity of the figures,
plagues, sterilities arising from those wars may be sought. But
those things confer nothing on the constitution of the air—at least,
on its heat, cold, moistness, and dryness.
The second thing in which the old [astrologers] erred was in
defining those things on which an eclipse might act most strongly
from the form and nature of the constellation in which the eclipse
might be. Saying that if the constellation was human, such as Gem-
ini, Virgo, or Aquarius, men would be affected; but if it was bes-
tial, such as Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Leo, etc., beasts called by simi-
lar names would be affected. For these names do not properly suit
the signs, which should properly only be called by the names of the
59

=== Page 70 ===
Planets that rule them, whose natures they refer to. But the starry
constellations, in so far as their name, form, and nature are concor-
dant with the name are only mere fictions and the subjects of fa-
bles, from which true astrology must be purged, not only in the
case of eclipses, but also in the case of other universal constitu-
tions, in which similar fictions are assumed to be real causes by the
unskilled.1
And these [considerations] about the eclipses of the Sun and the
Moon can also be applied to the eclipses of the other Planets, when
they are sometimes occulted by the Moon. Moreover, about the
rest of the things that are accustomed to be inquired about eclipses,
such as how should its ruler be chosen, when do they begin, and
how long will their effects last, and similar things; since these
[questions] are common to the rest of the universal constitutions,
we shall discuss these in general below in their own proper place.
And because in the year 1646, taken by us for an example of
things that must be said, a total eclipse of the Moon [occurred]
with a [lengthy] duration, and therefore of notable virtue. It pre-
ceded the Ingress of the Sun into the beginning of Aries; and it oc-
curred namely on the 30th day of January at 18:05 apparent time at
Paris according to the observation of Gassendi,2 the Regius Pro-
fessor of Mathematics and my colleague; and so I have been led to
put its celestial chart here.3
Here Morin disagrees with most astrologers, both ancient and modem, who ap-
ply the natures of the constellations to the signs that have the same names, regard-
less of the fact that most of the stars of a constellation may today be in an adjacent
sign. And yet, the common practice seems to work.
2Pierre Gassendi (1592-1655). He became Regius Professor of Mathematics at
the College Royale in Paris in 1645, and thus held a post similar to that held by
Morin, who from 1630 was the Regius Professor of Mathematics at the College
de France.
3The time and the chart are correct—a tribute to Gassendi's skill in calculation.
60

=== Page 71 ===
»r- *3
64fi.
Jinuarii
3n'4i«Sv IX-^L D. H. M.
H jo. i«. r. T. A
Piribif.
CT^
Total Eclipse of the Moon.
Paris, France
31 January 1646 6:05 AM LAT
Chapter 8. The Grand Conjunctions of Saturn,
Jupiter, and Mars and their Intervals.
The conjunctions of these Planets among themselves, are called
Grand Conjunctions on account of two most powerful rea-
sons—namely, because they occur more rarely than the conjunc-
tions of the other Planets, and because they produce greater effects
on these sublunar things. The first reason is certain to be sure, as is
established by the Tables of Motions. But the second, some astrol-
ogers try to prove from the histories of principal events of the
World, which they strive to apply to these conjunctions. And in-
deed, if we were to consider that Saturn and Jupiter also have their
own systems, or satellites, like the Sun, it cannot be denied that, at
least after the Sun, Saturn and Jupiter are more so than the rest of
[the Planets] of great virtue and authority in the World; and conse-
quently, their conjunctions, squares, and oppositions can arouse
great and also universal changes in sublunar things.
61

=== Page 72 ===
Therefore, since the conjunctions among themselves of these
three, Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, are famous among astrologers,
even though we cannot erect celestial charts for the moments of
these, on account of their slow diurnal motion,1 especially when
they are located around their stations2; nevertheless, we shall pro-
pose some things here that must be noted about those conjunc-
tions, which will also lead to establishing a more certain forecast
from them.
Therefore, of those mutual conjunctions, one is said to be a
Grand Conjunction in which those three planets are conjoined
with themselves, which very rarely happens.3 A Great Conjunc-
tion is one in which only Saturn and Jupiter [are conjoined]. A Me-
dium Conjunction is one in which only Mars and Jupiter [are con-
joined].4 But a Minimal Conjunction is one in which only Mars
and Saturn come together, for these are the most frequent of all.5
But according to others, the Grand Conjunction is called the one
in which Saturn and Jupiter are conjoined in a sign of absolutely
' Morin was aware that with a motion of only a few minutes of arc per day, it was
impossible to determine the exact moment of the conjunction. And the uncer-
tainty of the moment was even greater than he realized because in his day the cal-
culated longitudes were inexact by several minutes of longitude. Consequently,
the true time of a Jupiter-Saturn conjunction might be uncertain by a whole day or
more. But with the high precision positions available today, the true time can now
be accurately calculated.
2That is, when they are nearly SRx or SD and their daily motion is close to zero.
At those times, the very date of the conjunction might have been in doubt by a
week.
3These occur at irregular intervals of 20 or 40 years. The most recent occurrence
of the triple conjunction was in April 2000, when on the 11th Mars at 15 0 was
half-way between Jupiter at 12 0 and Saturn at 17 0. This was two months before
the partile Jupiter-Saturn conjunction on 28 May 2000 in 23 0. Before that, in
June of 1980 the three planets were in Virgo. Before that, in January 1940 they
were in Aries. Before that they were in Libra in November and December of
1921. And there was a close triple conjunction of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn on 15
December 1901 with Saturn, Mars and Jupiter at 16, 17, and 18 0 respectively.
Also, in Chapter 12 below Morin mentions the close triple conjunction that oc-
curred in February 1524.
4These occur at intervals of a little more than 2 years.
5They occur every other year, a little more often than the Mars-Jupiter conjunc-
tions.
62

=== Page 73 ===
contrary nature to the one in which the last preceding conjunction
[occurred]. As, if their preceding conjunction was in a water sign,
and the [conjunction] immediately following was in a fire sign,
that is said to be a Grand Conjunction.1 The Medium [Conjunc-
tion] is one in which Saturn and Jupiter are conjoined in a sign
partly of the same nature and partly of a nature contrary to the one
in which their last preceding conjunction occurred. As if the pre-
ceding conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter was in an air sign, and
immediately following the conjunction was made in a fire sign. Fi-
nally, the Minimal conjunction is one in which these same Planets
are conjoined in a sign of the same nature as the one in which there
last preceding conjunction occurred. As, if the preceding conjunc-
tion was in Sagittarius, and the one immediately following was in
Leo, which signs are of the same fiery nature.
Whence it is plain that those astrologers only look at Saturn and
Jupiter for the Grand Conjunctions. However, their Minimal Con-
junctions occur [on the average] in 19 years and around 319 days
according to the mean motions of those Planets, as Origanus chose
from the Prutenic Tables} The Medium Conjunctions in 198 years
and around 265 days.3 But the [very] Greatest Conjunction in 794
years and around 331 days.4 But even if both appellations should
be lacking in their own reasons; nevertheless, the previous one
seems to me to be more natural and truer. Both because in the latter
only Saturn and Jupiter are taken into account, with Mars ex-
cluded, for the greatest effects are with Jupiter or Saturn, or both of
them, very powerful. And because the first conjunction of Saturn
and Jupiter that occurred, either at the creation of the World or af-
ter that, could not be said to be the Greatest, the Medium, or the
Minimal by reason of the signs, since it was the first conjunction,
'Nowadays, that change of elements is called a Mutation. But it does not begin
definitively until a conjunction in the next element is followed by subsequent
conjunctions in that element.
2Modem figures would put the cycle at 19 years 313.7 days.
3Modem figures would put the cycle at 198 years and 215 days.
4Modem figures would put this great cycle at 794 years and 130 days. This is
sometimes called a Grand Mutation.
63

=== Page 74 ===
and since no other one preceded the first conjunction. And only
those that follow can be so called, by comparison with the one next
preceding.
Besides, about these Great Conjunctions, three things must be
noted from the outset. First, because the effects attributed to those
conjunctions are not produced by the mean conjunctions of those
Planets—that is by those calculated according to their mean mo-
tions—but only from their true conjunctions—that is those that are
completed according to their true motions.1 And because, as we
have already said elsewhere, the mean motions and the mean
places of the Planets are only fictitious things, and therefore of no
real and active virtue, but only one contrived by astronomers for
finding the true motions and the true places of the Planets in the
Primum Mobile with respect to us, whence they are perceived to
act upon us, and not from their mean [places] where they are not
[located] with respect to us.
And finally, not only in other universal constitutions but also in
the nativities of men, the mean places of the Planets are not noticed
for the causes of effects, but only the true places—both in direc-
tions and also in transits. For the mean places of the Planets are
only related to the center of the orbit of the Planet, in which the
Earth is not [located]. And hence no light error can happen—cer-
tainly, because the conjunction [calculated] according to the mean
motions is in one sign, and that according to the true motions may
be in another sign and under the rulership of another Planet. And in
this, many astrologers who attach the history of things done in the
World to those conjunctions were able to be deceived by having
only taken into account the mean [conjunctions], and not the true
ones.
Second. The conjunctions of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars among
themselves act on sublunar things in two ways: certainly, elemen-
'This and what follows is a slap at Albumasar (9th century), whose book, De
magnis conjunctionibus 'The Great Conjunctions' (Augsburg; Erhard Ratdolt,
1485) is based entirely on the mean conjunctions of the Planets.
64

=== Page 75 ===
tally, having taken into account the proper elemental natures of the
Planets that are conjoined and the sign in which the conjunction is
located; and influentially, having taken into account the proper in-
fluences of those Planets and the sign; and both of those natures
must be noted with regard to the elements, and any mixture, both
imperfect, such as meteors, and perfect—namely minerals,
vegetables, and animals.
Third. The conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter, the Planets with
satellites, are more effective nd produce greater effects, than the
conjunctions of Saturn and Mars, or Jupiter and Mars, especially
when they are made in signs of an absolutely contrary nature to
those in which the immediately preceding conjunctions of those
Planets were made.
Chapter 9. How the rulers of Universal Constitutions
should generally be chosen.
Since the effects of universal constitutions mainly depend upon
their rulers, that is upon the Planets ruling those constitutions or
powerful in them, it is evidently plain that in the prediction of their
effects, the greatest error will occur if some Planets are falsely as-
signed to the rulership of the constitution; and consequently, the
selection of the true ruler of a constitution is of great moment in
this doctrine. But before we unfold its method, it seems to us that
some things should be stated in advance.
First. In every universal constitution there is some principal
point of that constitution that should be noted before the rest. And
that is indeed easily distinguished if the constitution is the periodic
Return of a Planet to its radical place of creation, or the synodical
Revolution of two Planets. For in the latter there is given a single
such point that ought to be particularly looked at—namely, the
Planet that is making the Revolution and its place in the zodiac.
Also in syzygies, namely the opposition, squares, trines, etc. of the
two Planets, or in the transits through the determined places in the
universal constitution.
65

=== Page 76 ===
But it can be doubted whether both of the Planets or the place
should be noticed—[or] whether only one of them, and [if so]
which? For many will have, in the case of the syzygial opposition
of the Sun and Moon, that Planet to be especially looked at that is
under the Earth or in the ASC, and also that is square to that Planet
that is above the Earth. But if both of them should be above the
Earth, or both of them under the Earth, [it should be] the one that
occupies the most important house or an angle. Moreover, the
ASC is preferred to the MC, and that to the DSC, and that to the
IMC. Moreover, in the case where many Planets are contending
equally for the rulership, they prefer the one that rules in the
Moon's place, however, as another ally to it, and as less than the
principal rulership.
Moreover, I think that in the case of the syzygies, the lighter
Planet is the one that mainly should be looked at, whether it is
above the Earth or below the Earth, at least for influential effects;
and in transits, the transiting Planet. For both the lighter one, and
the transiting one—that is the one that is revolving, either periodi-
cally or synodically—and the effects of that one's revolution are
required. Therefore, that one must particularly be looked at, not
however with neglect of the other Planet with which it is making a
sygygy, or through whose place, determined by body or by aspect,
a transit is being made. Taking note of the fact that a Planet
transiting in a synodic revolution transits through the places deter-
mined by both of the Planets that made the synod, and therefore
that transit is more powerful.
Second. In the charts of universal constitutions, the four angles
must always be looked at, just as the rising, vigor, decline, and
death of sublunar things. But among those angles, the ones that
must be principally looked at are the ASC and the MC, but most of
all the ASC, for that is the one that gives the essence of the effects
emanating from that constitution, or it shoots out their seeds into
the womb of Nature, and more so than the rest, it rules the tempera-
ment of the air.
66

=== Page 77 ===
Third. All of the ancients will have it, that besides the primary
point in the constitution about which [we spoke] above, the angle
following according to the sequence of signs should be principally
noticed among the four angles of the figure. But since that primary
point i s always a Planet, if it is direct, the angle following would be
looked at, unless it would be joined at least platically to a preced-
ing Planet. The reason is that "angle" must not be understood [to
mean] the "space" of the angular house or of its cusp, but it must be
understood [to mean] "the degree occupying that cusp" to which
the Planet is moving, and to which it can come by direct motion,
but not the degree of the preceding cusp.
If however that Planet should also be joined platically to that
degree by separation, that angle would be prepollent over the one
following, on account of the presence of the conjoined Planet. But
[in the case of] a Planet in its retrograde state, as can happen in the
synods or periodical revolutions of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus,
or Mercury, the preceding angle would be more powerful than the
following angle on account of the same reason, unless the Planet
would be at leastjoined platically to the following angle. And not
only the degree of the cusp must be looked at, but also the part of
the Caelum occupying that angle and the Planets in it.
Fourth. The Planet that is the primary point of the constitution,
such as the Sun in its Mundane Revolution, the Sun and the Moon
in their synod, the Moon in its square syzygies with the Sun, or in
its transits through the determined places in the synod, must be
looked at considering its proper nature, the sign that it occupies,
the ruler to which it is subject, and both their celestial and terres-
trial states. But the angles of the figure, in so as far as they are such
a sign of such a Planet, and in such a state, both celestial and terres-
trial, should also be looked at, so that a judgment may be extracted
from all of these.
Fifth. A universal constitution is not distinguished by a signifi-
cation or effect for the whole circuit of the Earth by reason of the
primary point, its ruler, and both its celestial and terrestrial state,
67

=== Page 78 ===
but only by reason of the angles of the figure, or the position of the
primary point, and the position of the whole Caelum with respect
to the horizon, and by reason of the terrestrial state of the rulers of
the constitution. For the force and the effects of this are valid
through the whole circumference of the Earth; and therefore, for
each horizon those things must be especially looked at. For the pri-
mary point, its ruler, and its celestial state signify only universally
and without distinction for the whole Earth. But the rest determine
the universal constitution for the kinds of effects pertaining to the
houses of each horizon, and they produce differing effects accord-
ing to the diversity of the ASC's, in which the individual places on
Earth differ among themselves, even places under the same
meridian.
Having put [these thing] down, it must now be stated by what
reason any particular Planet may be allotted rulership. First, ac-
cording to Ptolemy, Cardan, and the old astrologers, but second
according to our own opinion. And so, from Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos,
Book 2, Chapter 7, with Cardan in his Commentary, the reason for
the rulership of a Planet over a universal constitution, such as an
eclipse, is taken from the conjunction of that Planet with the pri-
mary point of the constitution, or from an aspect to that point, or
from [having] power in that point by domicile, triplicity, exalta-
tion, and terms, and this is set forth in the order of [the strength of]
virtue, so that the conjunction is more powerful than an aspect, and
the aspect more powerful than a dignity.
Moreover, in the case of a conjunction and an aspect, the
[Planet] applying is preferred to the one separating; and among the
aspects, the opposition is stronger, then the square among the in-
imical aspects, and the trine among the friendly ones, and finally
the sextile and the antiscion. But among the powers, the domicile
claims primacy for itself, then the triplicity, then the exaltation;
moreover, the terms are inferior to the rest, [since] they also have
been shown elsewhere to be mere fictions.1
'See Book 15, Chapter 13.
68

=== Page 79 ===
And [all of] this was the opinion of the ancients about [choos-
ing] the ruler of the primary point of the constitution, which be-
sides that point is the Sun in its annual Revolution or an eclipse,
the Moon in its syzygies or in an eclipse, etc. They attributed no
force to the effects of the constitution, but the whole force to the
rulers of the constitution, which in eclipses they imagined to per-
form the functions of the eclipsed Light, and to receive its virtue,
especially by conjunction or aspect, and to pour it out upon
sublunar things, as if the Moon declining in light would also de-
cline in influence; and this would be nothing other than that light
accidentally received from the Sun, either such from an eclipse, or
from the subtraction of light, the influence of the Moon might
move into the body of the ruler of the constitution. But they said
that a combust Planet or one beneath the Earth is incapable of rul-
ership on account of its debility, as well as if it was in exile, de-
jected, or in a bad house of the figure, or in a cadent house.
And they would have only the stronger Planets in the figure to
be taking the rulership, which is however alien to reason. For in a
Revolution of the Sun, or in a synod of the Sun and the Moon, the
Sun and the Moon act in accordance with the nature and state of
their own rulers, whether good or evil; and no other Planet can be
substituted for this, but another Planet that is the strongest in the
constitution does not prevent this, even though it may produce no-
table effects as a less important part of its constitution.
And as for the angles, Ptolemy takes the Planet that was in the
angle following the primary point, or the one ruling it, and a bright
fixed star that is adjacent to the preceding angle, and from those he
judges. But Cardan in his Commentary gives a reason for that
choice—[namely], that the Planets are moved from their setting to
their rising, that is into the following [places]; but a fixed star in the
preceding angle is oriental to the Sun, which is no reason! For a
fixed star also moves from its setting to its rising, but a Planet in
the preceding angle is oriental to the Sun in its annual revolution or
in its eclipse. Therefore, the reasoning about those angles that we
have put above seems to be more credible.
69

=== Page 80 ===
But from the principles of astrology that we have put down, we
may judge that it ought to be determined in quite another way. For we
ascribe the cause of the effects to the primary point of the constitution,
and not to the Light that is losing its light and also its virtue in those
eclipses and its effect on these inferior things; and [rather than that]
we have asserted that another [Planet] performs its function on ac-
count of the reasons expounded in Chapter 7, but principally in Book
16, Section 3, where the discussion is about combust Planets.
Besides, although according to Book 20, Section 2, Chapter 2,
Planets endow themselves elementally, at least with heat or cold;
and the Moon heated by the Sun reflects upon us at the time of full
Moon something of the heat of the Sun, and yet this is not notice-
able; therefore, how much less will it be noticeable in the case of
the other planets heated by the Sun, as we have said in Chapter 3 of
that same Section? But the Planets do not act influentially on
themselves in turn according to the first Chapter of that same Sec-
tion; and consequently one of them does not receive influential
force from another, so that it can pour it out upon these sublunar
things; and in consequence, one does not take on the function of
another, either influentially, or elementally. And if one Planet was
able to perform the function of another elementally, that would es-
pecially be the Moon, the closest of all to us; which therefore in all
the Revolutions of the other Planets, it would have to be declared
to be the ruler—but wrongly, on account of what was said above
about the heat of the Sun reflected by the Moon.
And so, that Planet will be said to be the principal ruler of the
constitution, that in the place of the primary point and following it,
or in the preceding angle (just as was explained previously), will
be the one more powerful by domicile, by connection by body or
aspect, by exaltation and by triplicity. Moreover, among the con-
nections, those that are by body or conjunction will be preferred to
those that are by aspect, and those applying will be preferred to
those separating. And among the aspects, the stronger one is the
opposition, then the square in maleficent constitutions, and the
trine in beneficent ones.
70

=== Page 81 ===
Moreover, a Planet powerful by domicile is preferred by us over
one powerful by connection, against Cardan's opinion. Then, be-
cause his reason is false, "that rays are more according to Nature,
than power," which [power] seems to be in his opinion something
fictitious; then, because the diversity of effects emanating from the
same kind of universal constitutions, such as the synod of the Sun
and the Moon, is sought first and per se from the diversity of the
signs in which they occur, and from the signs of the Planets ruling
them and from their state. For can there not be a synod that is in an-
other sign and under another rulership? But there can be one with-
out connection with any other Planets by body and by aspects;
therefore, as far as specifying or determining [power] from a part
of the Caelum, it will depend primarily upon the sign and its ruler.
Therefore, the Sun and the Moon coming together in Pisces, act
indeed from themselves according to their proper nature, but they
act with the sign Pisces, but it acts only according to the nature and
state of its mler Jupiter, as was shown in detail elsewhere. And
consequently, to say that the Sun and the Moon act with Pisces is
the same thing as to say that they act according to the intrinsic na-
ture and state of Jupiter, or with Jupiter viewed thus, which thus
specifies and determines the proper effects of the coming together
of the Sun and the Moon. But if another Planet, such as Mars, is
conjoined to the Lights in Pisces, that one will indeed combine its
own forces with the forces proper to the Sun and the Moon, but as
the Sun and the Moon would act with Pisces—that is, in accor-
dance with the nature and state of Jupiter; and so, Jupiter would al-
ways be the Planet in that synod that should principally be looked
at for primarily determining the effects of that part of the Caelum.
If, however, the conjoined Planet would occupy another sign, its
ruler would become a partner in the rulership of the constitution,
but a weaker one than if it would be in Pisces, or in its own domi-
cile.1 And in addition, if it was not in the same house of the figure
with the primary point, its determination on the effects of the
'Morin is speaking of a case in which Mars is within orbs of the synod in Pisces
but is either in the latter part of Aquarius or in the first part of Aries.
71

=== Page 82 ===
synod would be still weaker and more obscure. Therefore, the di-
versity of the effects of the synod arising from the part of the
Caelum is primarily sought from the sign in which the synod is,
and from its ruler and its celestial state, and only secondarily from
the Planets connected with the principal point.
And the objection here will not be valid, because the presence
of a Planet is stronger than the rulership of an absent one. For this
is indeed true about a Planet looked at for the effects to which they
are determined by reason of their house, as was shown in Book 22,
Section 2, Chapter 4, but not in the case of a Planet with respect to
the primary point of a universal constitution, as its effect should
primarily be seen from the part of the Caelum. And in fact, the ef-
fects of the Planets are specified or determined in two ways; Cer-
tainly, from the part of the Caelum, and from the part of the Earth
[that they occupy].
By the first way, they are determined to accidents of the kind
that agree with the signs in which those planets are placed, and
with their rulers and their celestial state. As if [for example] the
Sun was in Sagittarius, the proper celestial effects of the Sun will
be determined to Sagittarius and Jupiter along with its celestial
state. By the second way, they are determined to accidents of the
kind that pertain to the houses of the figure in which those Planets
are found, or which they rule. As if the Sun was in Sagittarius and
in the 10th house, the force of the Sun will be primarily determined
to acting in a Jupiterean manner, or with Jupiter, and secondarily
to acting on actions, profession and honors, or dignities, and so
with the rest [of the combinations].
Moreover, because in the first category, that is the celestial one,
the effects of the universal constitution will be primarily specified
by the sign and its ruler, but not by the conjoined Planets. This may
also be proved thus—For if in a synod of the Sun and the Moon in
Gemini, the effects of that synod will not be specified celestially
by the Sun rather than by the Moon; indeed, if Mars is also at-
tached partilely to them, the effects of that synod will not even be
72

=== Page 83 ===
specified more by Mars than by the Sun of the Moon, for both
ways are equal.
Therefore, the effects of the conjunction of the Sun and the
Moon will be primarily specified celestially—only from the sign
and its ruler—but they will be qualified by the conjoined Mars,
with the nature and celestial state of Mars, especially if the Moon
applies immediately to Mars or to another conjoined Planet. And it
does not follow from this, that in the Mundane Revolutions of the
Sun they will always be of the same kind from the part of the
Caelum, because they are always in Aries under the rulership of
Mars, for in each individual year the celestial state of Mars with
which Mars acts is not the same.
And the rest of the Planets are not in the same celestial state
among themselves as is the case with the primary point of the con-
stitution. And the same thing must be thought about the Revolu-
tions of Nativities. Because if this logic is persuading about a con-
junct Planet, it will be much more persuasive about its aspects;
however, although Cardan will have it above from Ptolemy that a
Planet by its sextile to the primary point of the synod can have
more effects of the synod than by its rulership, that is manifestly
contrary to experience in nativities; namely, because if the ASC is
in Taurus and sextile Saturn, the native would be more Venerean
in his character than Satumian; and because his character of the
Venerean kind would only be colored and qualified by some influx
of Saturn.
But also from this, the opinion of those should be rejected who
will have the primary ruler of a constitution, such as the conjunc-
tions of the Sun and Moon, to be the [Planet] to which the Moon
first applies. Add that for the whole circuit of the Earth the ruler of
such a constitution would be the same, and consequently univer-
sal, but at the same time some particular [ruler] would be sought
for every place on Earth.
Furthermore, if the same Planet is the ruler of the primary point
73

=== Page 84 ===
and the following one, or the preceding angle, it will be very pow-
erful; but if in addition it is connected by body or by a strong ray to
that primary point or angle, it will be still more powerful. But it
will be most powerful if it is still in an angle with that primary
point, especially in the ASC or in the MC, which two angles are al-
ways powerful in every constitution.
But if the same Planet is not more powerful than the rest in both
places; namely, in the place of the primary point or in an angle, the
more powerful one will in fact be preferred in the primary point,
that is the ruler of the sign, but that Planet will be associated with it
that in both places is at the same time more powerful than the rest,
always having taken into account the rulers of the ASC and the
MC, which always have great power.
But with many Planets assuming the rulership for themselves
equally, on account of an equal regard to both places, either the
one that is more angular will be preferred, or the one with the
stronger celestial state, or the one that has the most suitable condi-
tion—either matutine to the Sun or vespertine to the Moon—in
their Revolutions or syzygies; but, with all of them being equal,
the one above the Earth will always be preferred to the one below
the Earth, because the force of the one below the Earth is hindered
by the interposition of the Earth.
In the case where two Planets would be rulers at the same time,
and would be in mutual dignities, or would be aspecting each other
with a strong ray, and at the same time aspecting the primary point,
or the principal angle, they would act strongly. See what we have
said about a similar situation in Book 23, The Revolutions of Nativ-
ities, Chapter 17.
Finally, aside from the Planets, two at least of the brighter fixed
stars will also take the rulership of the constitution, of which one
attends the preceding angle, but the other one the following princi-
pal point, not very distant from those angles, and which are to-
gether with the primary point in the MC, or together on the hori-
74

=== Page 85 ===
zon; or one of them is on the meridian and the other on the horizon;
otherwise, they will be weaker. And if the Planet that is ruler of the
constitution is also ruler of the fixed star by reason of its sign, and
if it aspects it with a strong ray according to its longitude, latitude,
or otherwise, it will be much stronger, especially if it is of the na-
ture of that ruling Planet. Moreover, whether they should be cho-
sen only in the zodiac, or whether they are also far distant [by lati-
tude], I do not see that it was definitely stated by the astrologers.
Moreover, even if I should think—speaking absolutely—that
those close to the ecliptic are more effective than the more distant
ones, especially if they were conjoined to Planets; nevertheless,
having taken into account the places that are vertical to the place of
the chart, or close, it does not seem to me that they should be put
behind the rest. For not without necessity God sowed the whole
Caelum with fixed stars; indeed, He placed brighter fixed stars
around the poles (where the force of the Planets acts more weakly),
so that these would in some way supply the functions of the Plan-
ets, especially when all of them are hidden under the horizon. But
if those fixed stars should be looked at in angles, therefore much
more should the Planets be looked at in the angles.
Chapter 10. The Application of what was just said,
and the Election of Rulers in the Figures shown above.
Although the figures placed above are particular to the place for
which they were erected, namely Paris, they are nevertheless uni-
versal, or common to all those living around the city itself to a dis-
tance that would retain the same signs on the angles of the figures
and the same rulers of the figures. For thus, that whole space of the
kingdom or the region would be subject to the same virtue of the
constitution; and the only diversity of effects in that space can arise
from the diverse proper constitution of the parts of that space.1
'in what follows, Morin explains how to choose the rulers of a universal constitu-
tion. Some of the charts that he discusses have errors in them; however, he is not
interpreting the charts, but only showing how to choose the rulers of the charts
drawn as you see them, so the errors in the charts (which are mentioned in the
notes below) do not invalidate his explanations.
75

=== Page 86 ===
And so, in the figure placed above of the annual Revolution of
the World, or the Ingress of the Sun into the beginning of Aries, the
Sun of a fiery nature enters a fire sign and its own exaltation and
triplicity in the 11th house of the figure; but Mars is the ruler of the
primary point, or the Sun, and it is in its own triplicity, oriental to
the Sun, and angular in the 10th. Mercury, however, is the ruler of
the following angle, namely the ASC, in its triplicity powerful in
the MC, also oriental and angular in the 10th; and they are both
conjoined in Pisces, a water sign; and their ruler Jupiter is in the
following angle; and in mutual reception by domicile with Mer-
cury, applying by square to the Sun and by trine to Mars and Mer-
cury1 ; therefore, Mars, Mercury, and Jupiter are strongly powerful
in this chart, but Mars claims the primacy for itself; and Mercury
prevails over Jupiter on account of its conjunction with Mars. For
if Mercury in Pisces is under the dominion of Jupiter and acts in
dependence on Jupiter, the latter in turn is under the dominion of
Mercury. But since Mars applies immediately and partilely to the
sextile of Saturn, which is powerful in the MC and the ASC that is
in its own triplicity, Saturn therefore will also exercise something
of power in this constitution. Finally, the Eye of Taurus, a bright
fixed star of the nature of Mars, partilely located on the ASC on ac-
count of its latitude, alone among the fixed stars will exercise ml-
ership.
In the figure of the Sun's Ingress into 0 S 00, the Sun near the
MC is entering into a water sign, which the Moon rules by domi-
cile and Jupiter rules by exaltation and triplicity, being above the
Earth by day; and it therefore rules both the Sun and the following
angle; and both [Jupiter and the Moon] are angular—namely, Jupi-
ter in the MC, the following angle, and the Moon in the ASC—and
they are also in square; and then both of them are with bright fixed
stars3; and finally, the Moon is in trine to Mercury, ruler of its
'Here Morin is describing the aspects that Jupiter will make after it has left Gem-
ini and moved into early Cancer.
2The star Aldebaran or a Tauri, which in 1646 was at 4 I 51 and 5 S 30, rose at
Paris with 14 K 54, which was within 5° of the ASC in 20 X.
3The stars are Cast. Pol. and canic, which I take to be Castor or a Geminoram,
76

=== Page 87 ===
triplicity; moreover, Jupiter is in sextile to Mars, Saturn, and Ve-
nus.
Both of them are therefore very strong in this figure; however,
Jupiter prevails in Cancer, because it is in its own exaltation,
which increases the powers of an exalted Planet, and in its own
triplicity, above the Earth by day. But that does not hinder its act-
ing with Cancer, and Cancer with the nature and state of the Moon;
and therefore much more does the Sun in Cancer act with the
Moon according to her nature and state. But Mercury and Arcturus
in the ASC by their own nature and state concur with the effects of
the Moon; but Mars [concurs] with Saturn and Venus and the stars
in the 10th with the virtue of Jupiter, which in this association
prevails over the Moon.
In the figure of the Sun's Ingress into 0 ^ 00, the Sun in the 2nd
house is entering into an air sign that Venus rules by domicile and
triplicity, by night under the Earth, and in the exaltation of Saturn
retrograde in Taurus in his own triplicity. Moreover, the Sun is in
mutual reception by domicile with Venus, applying by sextile to
Jupiter, which is powerful in the places of the Moon and Mars.1
But Mars in the domicile of the Moon rules the following angle,
and the Moon, from [her place in] the DSC in Pisces the domicile
of Jupiter, applies to Mars by trine.
Moreover, both Mars and the Moon in their own triplicity, by
night above the Earth, are applying by mutual sextile to the retro-
grade Saturn, which, separating from a square to Venus, immedi-
ately applies to a sextile to Mars; and Saturn and Mars are elevated
above the rest of the Planets. And so, from many considerations,
Saturn in this figure is superior to Venus, which is peregrine in Leo
and in the 12th house without any aspect to the Sun or to other
Planets, with the exception of Saturn, from whom she is separating
and Pollux or a Geminorum, and Sirius or a Canis Majoris. In 1646, Sirius was at
9 25 13, Castor at 15 S 19, Pollux at 18 25 20 and Arcturus at 19 ^ 18.
'The Moon is in Jupiter's domicile Pisces, and Mars is in Jupiter's exaltation
Cancer.
77

=== Page 88 ===
by square; [and so] she must be thought to be of little virtue in this
constitution; and consequently, Saturn and Mars applying to them-
selves mutually will prevail, along with the Heart of Hydra1 of the
nature of Saturn in the ASC, and the Pleiades2 with the MC and
Saturn.
In the figure of the Sun's Ingress into 0 00, the Sun is enter-
ing an earth sign in the 7th house; and Saturn rules the place of the
Sun and the following angle; then also the ASC3 with Mercury,
which Saturn also rules, and in addition it is also found in trine to
the Sun and Mercury and sextile the Moon, and to Jupiter, to which
it mutually applies4; but first and immediately Saturn squares
Mars. Moreover, the Sun immediately applies to the opposition of
the Moon in Cancer, and she is mutually conjoined to Jupiter.5
And Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars are retrograde. And Saturn is ele-
vated above all the Planets, if you make exception for Mercury.
And so Saturn is the principal ruler in this figure without any dis-
pute. Moreover, the Moon, to whom the Sun applies by opposi-
tion,6 will be allotted no small force in the effects, along with Mer-
cury, the diurnal ruler of the Sun's triplicity, and being above the
Earth in its own triplicity.
In the figure of the new Moon in Chapter 6 [above], Jupiter
rules the domicile and the triplicity by day of the place of the
synod, but it is in exile under the Earth. Moreover, Venus rules the
place of the synod by exaltation, and it also rules the following an-
1 Alphard or a Hydrae was in 22 51 22.
2The brightest star of the Pleiades is Alcyone or r| Tauri, which was in 25 0 03.
'Presumably, Morin means that Satum rules the triplicity of the ASC itself, which
it rules by domicile and triplicity.
4As noted above, the Moon was not in 4 Cancer (where it would have been in
sextile to Satum), but rather in 19 Gemini (without any aspect to Satum); and Ju-
piter was not in 7 Cancer but in 8 Leo, so Satum was square Jupiter.
'Again, both of these statements are wrong, because the Moon was in Gemini not
in Cancer, and Jupiter was in Leo conjunct Mars, not in Cancer and conjunct the
Moon.
6Not so, as explained in the preceding notes.
78

=== Page 89 ===
gle, which is the ASC itself, by domicile and triplicity. And Venus
is angular, joined to the ASC, in its own domicile. Therefore, Jupi-
ter and Venus rule this new Moon, with some participation by Sat-
urn, which is in the ASC. And the Moon applies partilely by square
to Jupiter her own ruler; so that consequently, Jupiter and Venus
are seen to compete with equal powers for the predominance; but it
seems to me that Venus prevails.
In the figure of the eclipse of the Moon in Chapter 7 [above], the
Sun is the ruler of the place of the Moon, with Mars the ruler of the
triplicity,1 and Saturn is ruler of the place of the Sun and the ASC
with the triplicity ruler Mercury; however, Mars rules the domicile
and the triplicity of the following angle, i.e. the MC; then it rules
the ASC by its exaltation in which it is found, applying by square
to its ruler Saturn. Therefore, Mars and Saturn rule this eclipse.
Being in mutual reception by domicile, and [in aspect] by square,
but Mars prevails.
But as for that which pertains to the Great Conjunctions, the lat-
est of which is the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter that was made
on 24 February 1643 in the 25th degree of Pisces according to the
Rudolphine Tables; the one that immediately preceded was in the
7th degree of Leo in the month of July in the year 16232; and there-
fore it is called a Grand Conjunction.3 The [exact] moment of the
conjunction being unknown, for which a figure could be erected
'Morin is referring to the fire triplicity in which the Moon is located. In his
scheme of triplicity rulers (see Book 15), Mars is the night ruler of the fire
triplicity.
Calculations from modem figures show that the 1643 conjunction occurred on
24 Febmary at about 11:25 pm LMT at Paris in 25 H 07; and the previous con-
junction occurred at Paris on 16 July 1623 at about 10:52 PM LMT in 6 ^36. The
Rudolphine Tables would have put the 1643 eclipse on 26 Febmary at about 3
PM LMT at Paris in 25 H 26 and the previous eclipse in 1623 on 17 July at about
2 PM LMT at Paris in 6 ^41.
3The 1623 conjunction in Leo was not a Grand Conjunction, i.e. what is now
called a Mutation, because the next conjunction in 1643 was in Pisces. The defin-
itive change from water signs to fire signs occurred subsequently at Paris on 17
October 1663 at about 0:00 AM LMT with the conjunction in 12 / 58. The next
Mutation (to the earth triplicity) occurred subsequently in 1842 with a conjunc-
tion in Capricorn.
79

=== Page 90 ===
determining its force for particular horizons, it can only be said
that Jupiter is its universal ruler for the whole circuit of the Earth,
and the most powerful [Planet] of all—that is, because that con-
junction occurs in a domicile of Jupiter in sextile to the Moon in
Taurus and to Mars in the beginning of Gemini; and Mars and the
Moon should be more powerful by triplicity in the place of the
conjunction.
Similarly, moreover, we must proceed in all other universal
constitutions to define their rulers. Besides, these things must be
understood about simple constitutions. For in connection with
composite constitutions, which are the Solar Ingresses into the
four cardinal points; for which Ptolemy, not unjustly will have it
that the new Moon or the full Moon immediately preceding the
Sun's Ingress should be considered; therefore, two figures are to
be noted for each quarter of the year.
It will have to be seen which Planet is more powerful in both
figures; or, if there were more than one, how they were related
among themselves in the individual figures, especially when the
new Moon or the full Moon is in the ecliptic, and therefore of
greater virtue, so that at least more properly the judgment may be
made on the principal [character] of the effects of that Ingress, as
was already said in Chapter 3. But if the Sun's Revolution or its
quarter has begun at the same time as the new Moon or the full
Moon, then it will be independent and very strong. And the proce-
dure is the same with the other universal constitutions.
Chapter 11. Which Places on Earth a Universal
Constitution may be acting upon.
Ptolemy, in [Tetrabiblos], Book 2, Chapter 4, says of universal
constitutions that nothing is more important and more effective on
sublunar things than eclipses of the Sun and the Moon, and the
state of the other Planets, especially Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, at
the time of the eclipse, with their stations or aspects and rulerships
over the place of the eclipse. Moreover, four things are inquired
80

=== Page 91 ===
into about those eclipses. First. What region or city does the
eclipse portend for. Second. When would its effects begin and
how long will they last. Third. Which effects of a [particular] kind
would it produce—namely, whether it would be famine, or war,
etc. Fourth. What will be the manner of the events—as in the sig-
nification of war, who would be the victor.
Therefore, with respect to these four things, it will be shown be-
low that Ptolemy's doctrine is erroneous. Even though Cardan in
the beginning of his Commentary on Chapter 4, says that that [doc-
trine] was most precisely handed down by Ptolemy, and with the
most exquisite and abstruse [reasons], but that by no one of the ex-
positors before Cardan himself was it understood. However, we
shall examine the first in this chapter, and the rest of them in the
following chapters.
Therefore, Ptolemy says, with Cardan in agreement, that an
eclipse portends for regions that are subject to the sign or the
triplicity in which the eclipse occurred, according to the distribu-
tion of the signs to all the places on Earth. But principally to those,
or to the metropolitan cities, that at the beginning of their construc-
tion had the eclipsed Light in that sign, or that sign in the ASC of
the figure of their construction; or if the time of the construction
and its figure were not known, those that are ruled by Princes or
lords in the figure of whose nativities or of their succession to rul-
ership or of their election to rulership, that ecliptical sign occupies
the ASC or the MC.
But that doctrine of the rulership of the signs over regions and
cities was already refuted by us in Chapter 7. And it only remains
for Cardan to be emended when he says in his Commentary.
"that where a city agrees with its constellation
(that is, with a universal constitution, such as the
chart of an eclipse), and the region does not agree
by triplicity at least by sign; nevertheless, the ef-
fect will occur. In the case of men, however, even
81

=== Page 92 ===
though a proper nativity would agree, and the city
in which the man is would not agree, there will be
nothing [by way of an effect]. And on account of
this, I believe (he says) that that eclipse1 [that oc-
curred] in Taurus in the degree of my ASC in the
year 1539 produced nothing, because it was not
agreeing with the City of Milan, where I was, or
was living, or nearby."
These things, however, are alien to the truth. Both, because that
agreement of the region or the city with an eclipse was already re-
jected above. And because, having conceded that a city is part of a
region or a kingdom, so is a man a part of a city; therefore, if an ef-
fect occurs in a city without the agreement with the region, so it oc-
curs in the case of a man without the agreement with the city.
Add that if besides the agreement of the eclipse with the nativity
of a man, and agreement with the city would also be necessary, as
Cardan will have it in his example; therefore, in a spreading
plague, the city [would have to agree] with all the nativities of men
who are attacked by the plague; which is very absurd to suppose,
for it cannot agree with individual cases, just as a ship in the figure
of its construction cannot agree with the individual [nativities] of
those who are drowned in it, but that is the way it is.
Individuals living in a city exposed to the plague by a bad celes-
tial universal constitution then in force, and not by reason of an
agreement of that constitution with the figure of the construction
of that city, are endangered by the plague through their being in
that city. And those particularly whom that constitution will also
affect; namely, if the eclipse occurs in their ASC, or in other
significators of life, and they have a direction, or a lethal or sickly
revolution in that same year.
1 This was the total eclipse of the Sun that occurred in T\ 1' Taurus on the after-
noon of 18 April 1539 as seen at Milan. The path of totality ran through the Medi-
terranean Sea south of Italy.
82

=== Page 93 ===
Less [affected] are those for whom only one of those happens;
but least of all those for whom neither happens; or, on the contrary,
those for whom some fortunate direction happens to the ASC,
along with a healthy revolution, as [happened] to Cardan himself,
to whom indeed the eclipse of the Sun occurred on the 8th degree
of Taurus, when he had the 7th degree in his ASC. But in that same
year his ASC was being directed to the trine of Venus, his ruler and
ruler of the eclipse's place, and there was a very healthy Revolu-
tion, as is plain from Book 23, Chapter 7. And those things saved
Cardan, who, while not aware of them, although they were very
evident, fixed the cause for himself as being the discordance of his
nativity with the figure of the construction of Milan that was
unknown to himself.
But the principal reasons why Ptolemy's doctrine was deviating
from the truth are: First. That every eclipse is only a lunation; and
every lunation is subordinated to the annual Mundane Revolution
of the Sun, from which it depends, as was shown in Chapter 4.
Therefore, the annual Mundane Revolution of the Sun is the first
and most efficacious universal constitution; but not an eclipse, un-
less it is part of that Revolution of the Sun.
Second. That from the figure of the universal constitution
erected for any particular place, such as Paris, it is completely ab-
surd to inquire and define [from it] what it might do in China or
America. Since a celestial constitution acts by means of its univer-
sal influx only according as it is determined locally by an erected
figure, as was shown in detail in Book 21, Section 2. And so, from
a figure erected for the horizon of Paris, it should only be asked
what that would do at Paris or thereabouts, so long as the rulership
of the figure does not change, but remains the same. But not in
China, where the effects of the same constitution will be defined
similarly by a celestial chart erected for a place in China; for with-
out that chart, neither the particular rulers of the constitution, nor
by consequence its particular effects can be known in any possible
place, as is plain from Chapter 10.
83

=== Page 94 ===
Third. That from common lunations, namely those in which no
eclipse occurs, and from the figures erected for them, neither Ptol-
emy, nor any one of the old astrologers tried to get what effects
those lunations would produce in foreign regions and those far dis-
tant from the place for which the figure was erected, but only those
effects that would be produced in that very place, either in ele-
ments, or in plants, or in animals, or in men. But what is an eclipse
of the Sun other than a new Moon? And what is an eclipse of the
Moon other than a full Moon in the ecliptic, or without a latitude
that exceeds the semi-diameters of the Sun and the Moon?
Or, therefore, must it be said that lunations with no latitude or
with that latitude will signify for foreign regions, with greater [lati-
tude], however, only for the place of the figure? It would be differ-
ent, but it must only be said that lunations without latitude, or with
an eclipse, are more effective, and they produce more notable ef-
fects; but without an eclipse they are less effective everywhere by
reason of their own local determination by the horizontal chart of
the Caelum, or a figure erected for the horizon of the place. And
this is indeed common to all the Planets wandering away from the
ecliptic, as the closer they are to the ecliptic, the more effective
they are, and in the ecliptic itself they are the most effective. And
from that [fact] has arisen the fictitious virtues of the Head and Tail
of the Dragon of the Moon, by which indeed the more remote they
are from the ecliptic, the weaker they are.
Nevertheless, in all universal constitutions—namely in annual
Revolutions, eclipses, etc.—whose figures can be erected, we will
be able to know for which nations that constitution will principally
signify in this way. In the case of eclipses, see what nations or cit-
ies in particular have the Light being eclipsed, or the ruler of its
ecliptical place, in the ASC, the MC, or the DSC; for the constitu-
tion of the Caelum principally signifies for those, by reason of the
significators being angular. And to know this will not be useless to
Kings, when great eclipses portend great effects; that is by erecting
a figure for those locations.
84

=== Page 95 ===
In this case, if the constitution has signified wars, on account of
the rulership of Mars in the primary point, see what nation may
have, either the Light being eclipsed or Mars, determined for wars
in the 7th, which is [the house] of wars, or in the 10th, which is
[the house] of actions. For with those [positions] wars are actively
or more certainly passively signified than in other [positions]. For
those in which it was in the 12th, it portends illnesses or exiles; for
those in which it was in the 8th, plagues and mortality; and so with
the other [houses].. And this is from the arcana of the science. For
the Planets act everywhere in accordance with their own determi-
nation, and not otherwise; but let this suffice for all of this. But see
Book 15, Chapter 8.
Chapter 12. The Times of the Events that will occur
from the Universal Constitutions.
Concerning these times, we must make four inquiries. First.
How long will the effects of the universal constitution, such as the
annual Revolution of the Sun, an eclipse, etc. last? Second. When
will they begin? Third. When will they intensify or decline?
Fourth. When will they end, or when will that constitution cease
to act per se?
Ptolemy, along with Cardan, in Tetrabiblos, Book 1, Chapter 6,
and the other old [astrologers] judge thus about these [questions]
for eclipses, which he has principally speculated about.
First. The celestial figure is erected for the apparent time of the
middle of the eclipse, that is the time of the true conjunction or op-
position of the Lights.
Second. He calculates how many equinoctial hours the [period
of] complete obscuration will last. For he says that that many years
will the effects of the eclipse of the Sun last, and that many months
will the effects of an eclipse of the Moon last.
Third. He considers the location of the place of an eclipse of the
Sun with respect to the angles of the figure; and he says that if the
85

=== Page 96 ===
place is in the ASC, the effects will begin in the first four months
after the eclipse, and they will be more powerful in the first third of
the total duration. Moreover, if the place [of the eclipse] is in the
MC, the effects will begin in the second [period of] four months,
and they will be more intense in the second third of the [total] dura-
tion. Finally, if the place [of the eclipse] is in the DSC angle, the ef-
fects will begin in the third [period of] four months, and they will
be stronger in the last third of the total duration of the effects.
Moreover, the particular intensifications and remissions will be in-
dicated by the conjunctions and aspects of the Planets ruling the
eclipse, when they have fallen onto the place of the eclipse, or the
angles of the figure, especially when those Planets are in their own
matutine or vespertine rising, or in their own stations. And that is
Ptolemy's opinion.
But since the place of the eclipse rarely falls in those angles, so by
the distance of that place from the ASC, they want to find precisely
the time of the beginning of the effects of an eclipse of the Sun. First,
the quantity of the day may be had from a common Table of the
quantity of days. Second, it may be seen how many hours are
counted from the angle of the east down to mid-eclipse in this way.
If mid-eclipse is after the time of Sun rise, subtract the time of the
beginning of the day from the time of mid-eclipse; but if
mid-eclipse precedes the time of the rising of the eclipsed Sun, in a
contrary way, subtract the hours and minutes of mid-eclipse from
the [time of] the beginning of the day, or the night, and there will
be left the time between mid-eclipse and Sun rise, which you put as
the third number in the Golden Rule, or [rule of] proportion. For
the second [number you put] the 365 days of the year, and for the
first the quantity of the day, and there will emerge the number of
days after the eclipse that its effects will begin. These will be stron-
ger around the beginning of the middle, or the end of their dura-
tion, according as mid-eclipse is nearer to the east or the west of
the MC. And similarly in the case of an eclipse of the Moon, it
must be worked by the quantity of the night, having subtracted the
time of the beginning of the night from the time of mid-eclipse as
86

=== Page 97 ===
the third number above; but the first number will be the quantity of
the night, and the second 365 as above.
In the first place, however, it must be shown that this doctrine of
Ptolemy is alien to the truth for the following reasons. First. What
he looks at for the duration of the effects. An astrologer ought only
to agree with reason, or with experience, which never lacks a
proper reason, although it is sometimes unknown to us or obscure.
But Ptolemy and the other old [astrologers] display neither reason
nor experience by which it might be proved that the hours of the
duration of an eclipse of the Sun signify years, but for an eclipse of
the Moon they signify months. Therefore, it seems to me that that
doctrine ought to be rejected. Moreover, how much it may be alien
to reason will be plain from this—for any Mundane Revolution of
the Sun will complete its own effects within that very revolution,
also according to Ptolemy's doctrine.
Therefore, the same thing should be understood about all Revo-
lutions, both the periodic ones and the synodic ones of the other
Planets. Then, if we were to suppose that an eclipse of the Sun in
the DSC would last for 3 hours, and therefore its actual efficacy
would last for 3 years beyond the delay of its effects when it is in
the DSC. Therefore, since in several years more eclipses could be
made, both of the Sun and of the Moon, no little confusion would
occur in connection with the forces and effects of all the eclipses
that would occur in 3 years, when many would be acting at the
same time, which could not avoid occurring; nor would any intel-
lect, at least any human one, be able to discern what effect would
be due to the first, third, fourth, fifth one, etc.; and therefore, no
[particular] force and effect could be clearly recognized for any
event. In that confusion, all astrological knowledge of eclipses
would vanish; and so it will be absurd to declare anything about
their virtues and effects—that no astrologer would concede.
And it must be declared similarly about the total eclipses of the
Moon, especially about those occurring around the DSC. More-
over, every eclipse would be subordinated in action to the Mun-
87

=== Page 98 ===
dane Revolution of the Sun as a partial cause of the total, or a less
universal one to the more universal one. But a revolution of the
Sun completes its effects in a single year. Therefore, the effects of
an eclipse are not extended past the Mundane Revolution of the
Sun in which the eclipse itself occurs, unless the lunation ends
within the following Revolution of the Sun.
Besides, if the hours of the duration of a solar eclipse are equiv-
alent to years, and in the case of the Moon only to months, why
does Ptolemy determine the beginnings of the effects at the same
time, and why does he not accelerate more quickly the effects of
the eclipse of the Moon than those of the eclipse of the Sun, when
the latter and the former are eclipsed in the DSC? That is, if in the
case of an eclipse of the Sun, he attributes the quantity of a day to a
year, why in the case of an eclipse of the Moon does he not attrib-
ute the quantity of a night to a month, so that an equality might be
preserved for both of them? Are not the effects of the Moon
quicker than those of the Sun?
But as for that which pertains to the time of the beginning of the
effects, it is certain that where the Sun and the Moon do not set
within a 24 hour [period], Ptolemy's method collapses for defining
the time in which the effects of the eclipse will begin. That method
is therefore not universal and common to the whole circle of the
lands [of the Earth], but it is only local, and consequently not sci-
entific. In addition, in the case of the Mundane Revolution of the
Sun and lunations that are not eclipses, the time of the beginning of
the effects is not determined by Ptolemy by the distance of the
Light from the ASC explained above. Why, therefore, should that
be done in the case of eclipses, which are nothing else than
lunations? Besides, it is absurd and contrary to the doctrine of
Ptolemy himself to deny that any effects of an eclipse occur, when
the eclipsed Light and the ruler of the eclipse come to themselves
by body or by aspect, or when they come to the place of the eclipse
or to the principal angles of the figure, which can happen immedi-
ately after the eclipse. Therefore, the beginnings of the effects are
not only from that distance.
88

=== Page 99 ===
Finally, should the eclipse of the Moon be made in the DSC, its
effects will begin only around the end of the year that has elapsed
from it. But meanwhile another eclipse of the Moon can be made
that is not in the rising; therefore, the later effect will precede the
prior effect, against the order of the times by which that same
eclipsed Moon is the cause of different effects. Or the intellect will
be confounded by confusing the effects of those eclipses, when it
happens (as can often be the case) that their effects begin and end
at the same time. But much more when a total eclipse of the Sun is
made in the DSC, whose effectiveness will only leave off in the
fourth year after the eclipse; since in four years, more than 12
eclipses can occur, either of the Sun or of the Moon, and either
above or below the Earth (even those that Ptolemy had wrongly
declared to be ineffective), of which the greater part will act at the
same time on these sublunar things. Which is certainly evidently
convincing that there is either no knowledge about the effects of
eclipses, or else it is other than Ptolemy's doctrine.
And so, we say first. The efficacy of any universal constitution
flourishes and lasts until the closest following one of the same
kind. And therefore, the efficacy of the Mundane Revolution of
the Sun flourishes until the next following Revolution, or Ingress
into 0o00' of Aries. And this is not disputed by that astrologer; and
the efficacy of each synod of the Planets, whether they are both
Lights, or one of them with other Planets, or of other Planets
among themselves, lasts until the similar synod immediately fol-
lowing, and is not extended beyond [that time] at least per se; and
this can be proved by many reasons.
The first one is. That if it should be conceded that the effective
force of one new Moon lasts through one or more years, just as
Ptolemy will have it in the case of a new Moon occurring in the
ecliptic around the DSC, the greatest confusion will be introduced
in connection with the forces and the effects of all the possible new
Moons. And it will not be possible to define anything certain about
them, unless having examined and distinguished the forces of the
preceding and following new Moons, which would be impossible
89

=== Page 100 ===
for the human intellect. But that confusion is not admitted by Ptol-
emy or the other astrologers, who do not even judge about one new
Moon from the one preceding and the one following. Since, how-
ever, they judge about the Mundane Revolution of the Sun and its
quarters from the next preceding new Moon or full Moon, since its
force will not have ceased before the Sun's Ingress into the cardi-
nal points. Therefore, the force and efficacy of any new Moon lasts
only up to the [time of] the next new Moon, and it is not combined
with that one's efficacy; otherwise, in the aforesaid Revolution of
the Sun, the following new Moon would also have to be noticed.
The Second one is. Because in the synod of the Sun and the
Moon, their forces, which are the principal celestial ones, are espe-
cially united, but particularly when [the synod] is in the ecliptic;
therefore, at that moment they act very strongly upon these
sublunar things, circulating the influx of their own conjunction by
a common ray, which is the instigator of the effects that are going
to happen from that synod. For what philosopher or astrologer,
having supposed the force of the stars on these inferior things, will
deny that from the Sun and the Moon conjoined they produce their
influx so long as they are conjoined, since from the elements of as-
trology, those that are conjoined do one thing, [but they do] some-
thing else when they are in square, and something else when they
are in opposition, or that that same influx [the conjunction], the
most powerful of all, does nothing? For who would restrain the
efflux of that influence onto these inferior things, since nothing in
the Caelum is given to be more powerful than the Sun and the
Moon conjoined, especially centrally, as Ptolemy himself states;
but on the Earth it is not found, except as a passive force with
respect to the celestial bodies?
Therefore, a new Moon, and especially an ecliptical new Moon,
acts upon these sublunar things, from the very moment of that new
Moon, and their effects on the sublunar World are not retained
through many months or even through a year. And since about in-
dividual new Moons that are also non-ecliptical the same thing
must be said; then without doubt either a confusion must be al-
90

=== Page 101 ===
lowed with regard to the forces and effects of new Moons, and
judgment will have to be made about anyone of the preceding and
following ones, contrary to the practice of all astrologers, or it will
have to be asserted that the efficacy of one synod lasts only until
the next following synod, although nothing would forbid its ef-
fects to be continued by a following synod of similar virtue, as
they can be restrained by a synod of contrary virtue; but each
synod always acts during its own period with its own efficacy.
The third is. Because in other universal constitutions, namely
the annual Revolutions of the World and their quarters, then in
new Moons or full Moons that are not ecliptical, etc., Ptolemy nei-
ther retards nor prolongs their effect within the times of similar
constitutions that follow; but in Chapters 10,11, and 12 it is shown
how judgment should be made about the effects of the individual
ones during the period of each. Therefore, he has introduced the
above said retardation and prolongation in the case of eclipses
without any reason, since they would only be lunations without
latitude, which because they ought to be more effective than the
rest, and on the contrary ought to produce their own effects more
quickly.
Add to these [reasons] that in the case of eclipses of the Sun,
nothing that is different or new happens from the rest of the new
Moons than what happens from the removal of the light and heat of
the Sun with respect to the Earth for some hours [during the night].
Moreover, in the case of eclipses of the Moon, we are only de-
prived of the light from that same Sun reflected by the Moon; but
besides that, the light of itself does nothing more than illuminate;
both that subtraction of the light and the heat cannot of itself pro-
duce for us effects that are greater than their subtraction, when
those Lights lying hidden under the Earth are eclipsed for us by the
interposition of the Earth, When, nevertheless, to those daily
eclipses and to those of many more hours—indeed of days in the
polar regions—no particular effects are attributed.
And from this, the source of the error of the old [astrologers] is
91

=== Page 102 ===
plain, namely that they thought with Aristotle that whatever the ce-
lestial bodies do to these sublunar things, they do through their
light. For having taken this as a fundamental fact, it would then
follow that eclipses of the Sun and the Moon are of very much dif-
ferent virtue from the rest of the new Moons or full Moons, in
which the light of the Sun and the Moon does not fail, and there-
fore judgment must be made otherwise about them. But it is false
that they are of different virtue on account of the deprivation of
light, although those characteristics are greater on account of both
of the Lights being in the ecliptic and on account of their central
union.
And from that, I deduce that the whole influential force of an
eclipse, insofar as it is an eclipse, that is the force of an eclipse is
greater than that of another lunation, consists only of the coming
together or the opposition of the Sun and the Moon in the ecliptic.
And therefore, that eclipses taking place under the Earth are
scarcely less effective with respect to us than those that take place
above the Earth that we have already noted in Chapter 7. There-
fore, it is not on account of the deprivation of light in eclipses that
their effects are of a different kind and duration than the effects of
the other lunations, and they are neither retarded or prolonged, ei-
ther in many months or years; although some great effect started or
produced by some eclipse can last for many months, indeed for
years, no more by an act concurrent with the efficacy or virtue of
that past eclipse, unless we would want to admit the confusion of
the virtue of the lunations too that are not going to be made
ecliptical at the same place on Earth.
And the things that have been said hitherto are to be understood
not only about lunations, but also about the annual Revolutions of
the World, Great Conjunctions, etc.; but it must be noted that an
eclipse of the Sun is of greater virtue than an eclipse of the Moon.
Not because in the latter we are only deprived of the accidental
light of the Moon, and in the former of the Sun's own light; but be-
cause a conjunction of two Planets is more effective than an oppo-
sition of those same Planets. And besides that, the efficacy of an
92

=== Page 103 ===
eclipse of the Sun lasts [only] one month; that is, until the next fol-
lowing new Moon. But the efficacy of an eclipse of the Moon lasts
only half a month; that is, also until the next following new Moon;
namely, because an opposition is only effective for the effects of a
half period of each whole synodic Revolution.
We say secondly. The effects of universal constitutions begin
at the moment when the constitutions are made. For then their in-
flux, or seed, is ejaculated into the sublunar womb, which con-
ceives effects conformable to those celestial causes, and produces
them at suitable times. For having established the celestial cause
most powerfully active, the passive power of the sublunar things,
and the application due to both of them, the acting cause of the ef-
fects cannot naturally be hindered.
We say thirdly. Also, according to Ptolemy's opinion, that
those effects arise and break forth when applications and conjunc-
tions are made by the Planets ruling the constitution to its primary
point, or to its opposition or square, either in the same triplicity or
in the following angle and the ASC, or when the Lights come to
those points with an aspect of the rulers of the constitution, or
when they apply by body or by aspect to those rulers, or when they
rise or set together with them or with the primary point of the con-
stitution. And especially when the rulers of the annual Revolution
of the Sun and its quarters, by body or by a conformable and strong
aspect, come to the rulers of the subordinated lunations. Then in
fact they bring forth, or reduce, or intensify the effects.
But in addition, they burst forth from the directions of the
Lights or of the angles, especially of the ASC, to conformable
promittors, then too of the rulers of the universal constitution.
Moreover, the directions of the Mundane Revolution of the Sun
should be set up completely, as [is done] in the case of the Revolu-
tions of the Sun for nativities in accordance with Book 23, Chapter
15, and by that same Table. But the directions of the synodic revo-
lutions of the Moon should be set up with the following Tables
corresponding to the mean synodic month of the Moon—in short,
93

=== Page 104 ===
in the same manner as the directions for the periodic Revolutions
of the Moon, by the Tables put with the above said Book 23,
Chapter 15,
First
Second or Converse
Dio < dnJ- M.n. ; S«j 1 1 i J 1 l- Hi "3 1 14 54 3 J6 n
4 48 45 "Ts
5 60 >7 Xi
<> 7i & 4» 7 Si so 9 1 ■ - imrnmim S 97 31 16
9 top -If -4 JO 111 54 30 SO 243 49 Ol
iGrvt | Dim Mont 1 Sin JJJJ n X 0 X JB 2 0 3 56
3 0 i 54
4 0 7 5»
5 0 10 50 6 0 11 44
7' 0 4<> *• 0 IS 44
91 17 4* to| 0 19 -1° 20 1 is 2C
3° 1 ti O 1
40 3 6 40
50 4 1 ZO
60 4 21 O
70 5 17 40 ■ ■ ■ ■■ ■ -m »o 6 • 3 SO
90 7 9 O
100 8 4 40 zoo 16 9 SO
500 *4 14 O 360 79 IS 0
Third for Hours
Hcib jCinO. i-lm. ice.
I O 30 n
a 1 0 54 3 I 3* 21 '
4 2 1 43
i a J1 Ji 6 3 s 4»
JL 3 3 5
8 4 3 36
9 4 ,34 3 ■ IO ) 4 1 30 SO IO 9 1 0
Table of Directions for Synodic Revolutions of the Moon.
[Note: in the Table above, the Latin column headings are: Dies
(Days), Grad (Degrees), Home (Hours), Min (Minutes), and Sec
(Seconds).]
But if the figure of a new Moon is considered with the places in
it determined as instructed in Chapter 5, the directions should be
made as they would be for the periodic Revolutions of the Moon.
We say finally that to define the actual action of any universal
constitution at the moment in which another similar thing begins,
and not extended beyond its own limits; although an effect begun
94

=== Page 105 ===
under one constitution is continued by a similar one immediately
following, it can be extended and perfected on account of the con-
formity of those constitutions in their virtue and signification. And
that is frequently evident in the particular constitutions of nativi-
ties; namely, because if a sickly Revolution of the Sun succeeds a
sickly one, the sickness that started in the first one will kill in the
later one. But that is from the later revoluttion, which if it would
have been healthy, the sickness started in the first one would have
ended in health.
And the reasoning is the same with other accidents, such as
riches, matrimony, dignities, etc. And therefore the same thing is
also [the case] in universal constitutions. For the stars act uni-
formly in the latter constitutions as they do in the former ones; for
otherwise a universal effect could neither be deduced nor con-
cluded from particular effects; and so there would be no astrologi-
cal science. And therefore, for war, plague, or inclemency of the
atmosphere, the Mundane Revolution of the Sun should be in-
spected, or an eclipse immediately preceding the beginning of that
accident, but the following ones for the intensification, slackening,
or ending, after having compared these with the preceding
[indications].
It can be objected. That if Saturn or Mars is the principal ruler
of the universal constitution, such as an eclipse, its effects will
only begin when that ruler by its own motion comes by body or by
aspect to the place of the eclipse or to the following angle. More-
over, since the motion of Saturn is the slowest, then that of Jupiter
and Mars, especially around their stations, if it is by body or by as-
pect a long ways distant from the place of the eclipse or from the
following angle, the effects will not even begin in that lunation,
but perhaps after two or three lunations.
I reply. Whether the above said things are posited or not pos-
ited, it is not necessary that the effects of an eclipse should begin
from an application of Saturn or Jupiter to the place of the eclipse
or to the following angle by their own motion, since they should
95

=== Page 106 ===
begin on the very day of the eclipse, as was said above, and power-
fully and very strongly if the ruler of the eclipse aspects the place
of the eclipse or the following angle, or if it is conjoined to either
of those. But those effects will emerge from the sublunar womb, or
they will be increased, either by the above said directions or by the
above said application if it can be done in that same lunation; if
not, it will suffice to have an application of the Sun or the Moon to
the place of the eclipse, to the following angle, [or] to the principal
ruler of the eclipse, whichever one it is, which applications the
Moon by her very rapid motion most quickly completes. And the
same thing must be said about the other universal constitutions.
He who objects will more sharply object that Cardan in his Lit-
tle Book on Interrogations expounds an eclipse of the Moon that
occurred in 110H' Pisces in the year 1523 on the 25th of August at
15:15 PM at Milan with 15 Leo rising1 and the Moon and Saturn
conjoined in the 8th house; in which the Moon was distant from
the ASC by 8:48; and the night then was 11:06. And from this.
Cardan wants to deduce 9 months for the retardation of the effects
of that eclipse, which, counted from the day of the eclipse, would
fall at the beginning of May 1524, at which time a very fierce
plague had arisen in Milan; and in that whole Duchy; in Milan
[alone] it killed 30,000 people; moreover, in the Duchy as a whole
it killed 100,000, and it lasted VA months—just as the eclipse
lasted VA hours; although, however, no other place in Italy was
then suffering from the plague. Therefore, Ptolemy's doctrine on
the beginning and duration of the effects of eclipses is hue by a
noteworthy experience, but ours is false.
I reply first. Cardan is wrong in his calculation. For if the noc-
turnal time of 11:06 is equivalent to 365 days, then 8:48, the dis-
1 These numbers are approximately correct. Calculation from modem data puts
the eclipse at 11018' Pisces, the time of mid eclipse at approximately 15:35 LMT
(from preceding noon) or 15:36 LAT at Milan, with 20 Leo rising. If Cardan cal-
culated the time when the Moon's ecliptical position at the time of the eclipse
would have arisen, then the time interval was about 8:50, close to the 8:48 that he
calculated; and the length of the night was just about 11:00 if we equate it to the
Sun's nocturnal arc.
96

=== Page 107 ===
tance [in time] of the Moon from the ASC will be the equivalent of
289 days, which is 9 months and 19 days, which, counted from the
day of the eclipse, fall on the day 11 June, and not on the beginning
of May.
I reply secondly. It is far more probable that since Jupiter was
the ruler of the eclipse in mutual reception by domicile with Sat-
urn, which, conjunct the Moon, Mars was aspecting by trine from
Scorpio, on the day on which a Grand Conjunction of Saturn, Jupi-
ter, and Mars, and of the Moon itself in the 11th degree of Pisces
was made, where the eclipse of the Moon itself had occurred,
namely on 5 February 1524,' then the seeds of the plague would be
ejaculated that would have begun to germinate on the 19th of Feb-
ruary, when there was a synod of the Sun and Saturn on the very
place of the Grand Conjunction; and on that same day, the Moon
was opposed to Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, all of
which were in Pisces. But the deep roots would have resulted from
the Revolution of the Sun in that same year 1524, for which here
are the places from Schoner,2 but the time and the figure from our
own abbreviated Rudolphine Tables, because in Schoner's time
the Sun's motion would not have been rightly known.3
"This was the date of the famous stellium in Pisces in 1524. There were actually
five planets in Pisces, their longitudes being Venus 6, Saturn 10, Moon 11, Mars
11, and Jupiter 11. And if the astrologers of the time had known it, Neptune was
in 8 Pisces, which would have put six planets in close conjunction in Pisces. Since
Pisces is a water sign, many astrologers of the time predicted a great flood. But
Morin, writing a century later to contradict Cardan, ignores that and concentrates
on the indications of plague.
2Johann Schoner (1477-1547), German mathematician, astronomer, and astrolo-
ger. Morin's reference is possibly to his Tabulae astronomicae... 'Astronomical
Tables...' (Niimberg: JohannPetreius, 1536).
3But here again the Rudolphine Tables led Morin astray. From them he calculated
the time of the Aries Ingress as 8:15 PM LAT; but calculation from modem data
puts it at 11:15 PM LAT. At that time the ASC was 30 Scorpio, most of the house
positions are different, Venus was no longer the ruler of the ASC and the 8th, but
rather ruler of the 6th and the 11th, and both the 6th and the 12th houses were
empty.
97

=== Page 108 ===
"3- 45
$
iy»4.
Martii
D. H. M
xo. 8. xy. T.A.
Mediolanu
A?
<P
G
vVn? 0-
Aries Ingress
Milan, Italy
10 August 1524 8:15 PM LAT
In which figure the Sun, noticeably crowded, is in the 6th house
applying to Mars; Venus, ruler of the ASC and at the same time of
the 8th is also found in the 6th in exile and conjoined to Mercury,
ruler of the Moon in the 8th. All of this, moreover, was proclaim-
ing a sickly year in the region of the figure. And finally of course,
the fruit of the plague erupted from the direction of the Sun in that
Revolution to the 11th degree of Gemini, in partile square to the
place in which the greatest conjunction itself was made, to which
the Moon itself was applying by square in that same figure, which
direction was completed at the beginning of May; moreover, the
plague was ended in the middle of August, at which time, the Sun
by direction had come to the 11th degree of Virgo, namely in
partile opposition to the greatest conjunction.
98

=== Page 109 ===
Therefore, with all of these located thus, why should we seek
for any causes of the plague other than the above said greatest con-
junction of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars and the other [configura-
tions] that followed that have already been explained, since for
such an effect they would have been most sufficient, and indeed
most evident by the directions of the Sun for the beginning and du-
ration of the plague? Therefore, since Cardan brings forth this sole
experience of his and Ptolemy's doctrine, which was also crippled
by [being in error] more than one month in the time of the begin-
ning of the plague; and to which doctrine however the reasons put
forth by us above are strongly contrary, it seems that it should
rather be said that it was by accident that it happened that Ptol-
emy's doctrine however agreed with ours supported by the best
reasons, and with perfect finish of experience as far as it was
concordant for the beginning and end the plague.
Moreover, it does not seem that it ought to be sought why that
plague should have raged in only the Duchy of Milan from the
ASC sign, or from an eclipse, or from a Great Conjunction, or from
the Sun's annual revolution. For that sign could have been com-
mon to many other places in France and Italy, and Planets could
have been in the same houses; also, it does not seem that it ought to
be sought from the sign in which there is a universal constitution,
or in which there is an eclipse, or a Great Conjunction, or an annual
Revolution, as Cardan thinks along with Ptolemy.
Those signs ought at least to be carefully inspected, but it seems
that it ought to be sought from a particular temperature and consti-
tution of the place in which the effect is produced, by reason of
which constitution, that place particularly harmonizes with the
sign itself or with its ruler, as was said by us in book 20, Chapter 4,
[since it] was disposed to their effects more so than others, since
the celestial bodies, just as other physical causes, always act in ac-
cordance with the disposition of the subjects.
99

=== Page 110 ===
Chapter 13. The Quantity of Effects emanating
from Universal Constitutions.
In the case of eclipses, this must be chiefly determined by the
magnitude of the eclipse, from which Ptolemy deduced the dura-
tion of the efficacy of the eclipse. For the greater the eclipse was,
the more it portends major effects; not on account of the depriva-
tion of light, as was said previously. But because the synod of the
Sun and the Moon or their opposition are closer to the ecliptic, in
which a greater force of the Planets exists.
But in general, the ruler of the primary point of any constitution,
or the following angle, conjoined to them or coupled by a strong
ray, in a strong celestial state, and angular in the figure, promises
great effects and that they will appear quickly; but affected in a
contrary manner, bad effects; and midway, medium effects.
If a single Planet is ruler of the constitution, or two Planets of
the same signification and of a benefic or malefic nature, espe-
cially when they are strong, greater and more evident effects are
signified than if there are many [rulers] of a diverse nature and sig-
nification. For with each one acting according to its own nature
and determination, one hinders or reduces the effects of the other,
and a force that is united is stronger than one that is dispersed.
The ruler of a constitution above the Earth, diurnal by day, noc-
turnal by night, and strong, and oriental to the Sun and occidental
to the Moon, promises notable effects; but lesser ones when it is
under the Earth.
Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars rulers of a constitution, with other
things being equal, produce greater effects than Venus or Mercury
because their virtue is greater. But the greatest effects of all are
made if the Sun or the Moon is ruler of the constitution and notably
well or badly disposed. For the forces of the Sun and the Moon are
the greatest forces of the Planets.
The fixed stars of the first magnitude in the angles, the ASC, the
100

=== Page 111 ===
MC, and the DSC, presage great effects, and especially if they are
vertical to the region and they occupy the angle next following the
primary point of the constitution.
Universal constitutions that occur in cardinal signs, other things
being equal, prevail over the rest by the magnitude of their effects, be-
cause those signs are the principal sources of changes in the first
physical cause, and they are also the exaltations of the principal Plan-
ets; and those that are in the ASC or the MC or in those places have
their own mlers. These give great effects in a house of the figure.
Chapter 14. The Quality of the Effects produced
by Universal Constitutions in general.
In this chapter, nothing else will be looked into other than
whether a universal constitution is favorable or unfavorable.
Moreover, that can be defined from [the information in] many
chapters.
For first, the malefic Planets ruling the primary point of the
constitution and badly afflicted in their celestial state portend evils
everywhere, but more serious ones in those places in which they
also rule the principal angles of the figure or are in them. But the
most serious evils of all when they are in those places, in which, in
addition to their own site and rulership in the figure, they will be
determined to evils, as if they would be in houses 4, 6, 7, 8, or 12.
But on the contrary, benefic Planets ruling the primary point of the
constitution and well disposed in their celestial state, presage good
things everywhere; but greater things in those [places] in which
they also rule the principal angles of the figure; but greatest of all
in those [places] in addition to which, by their own site and ruler-
ship in the figure, they will be determined to good things, as if they
were in houses 1, 2, 5, 7, 9, 10, or 11. But if the total rulership of
the constitution belongs to two Planets, one of which is of a
benefic nature, but the other of a malefic nature, from the nature of
both, their celestial state, their determination and strength, there
will be a mixed quality of the events.
101

=== Page 112 ===
Second. Universal constitutions in which violent fixed stars are
dominant, such as the Eye of Taurus, the Heart of Scorpio, the
Head of Medusa,1 etc., are malignant. But those in which bright
benefic fixed stars rule, such as Spica Virginis, Arcturus, Castor &
Pollux,2 etc., presage future good things.
Third. If the Lights or the rulers of the constitution apply first
to Planets that are benefic and well disposed and determined to
good, they signify good things. [But] if they apply to malefics
badly disposed and determined to evil, they portend evils accord-
ing to the nature of the Planet to which the application is made, and
according to its determination.
Fourth. The synod of the Planets is threefold by reason of their
nature. Namely, benefics with a benefic, malefics with a malefic,
and benefics with a malefic. The first of these is good, the second
is evil, and the third is middling. But the celestial and terrestrial
state of those Planets must be considered.
Fifth. Both the goodness and the malice of a conjunction of two
Planets is threefold by reason of the sign. The first of these is of
goodness, when one of the Planets is fortunate in the sign of the
conjunction, but the other is unfortunate, such as a conjunction of
Jupiter and Mercury in Pisces. The second is when one is fortu-
nate, but the other is peregrine, such as a conjunction of Saturn and
Jupiter in Pisces. The third is when both of the Planets are fortu-
nate in the sign, as when there is a conjunction of the Sun and Mars
in Aries, or the Moon and Jupiter in Cancer.
The first of the evil ones is when both Planets are peregrine in
the sign of the conjunction, such as a conjunction of Jupiter and the
Moon in Libra. The second is when one of the Planets is unfortu-
nate, but the other is peregrine, such as a conjunction of the Sun
'These are the stars Aldebaran or a Tauri at 4054' Gemini, Antares or a Scorpii at
4053' Sagittarius, Algol or a Persei at 21018' Taurus in the year 1650.
2These are the stars Spica or a Virginis at 18058' Libra, Arcturus or d Bootis at
19021' Libra, Castor or a Geminorum at 15022 Cancer, and Pollux or a
Geminorum at 18023' Cancer in 1650.
102

=== Page 113 ===
and the Moon in Aquarius. The third is when both of the Planets
are unfortunate in the sign of the conjunction, such as the conjunc-
tion of the Sun and Mars in Libra, or Saturn and Mars in Cancer.
However, in these [combinations] there is found the relationship
of enmity, amity, sympathy, or antipathy of the Planets. For the
conjunction of the Sun and Mars in Libra is very bad, because the
Sun and Mars are enemies, and both of them are badly disposed in
Libra. And the same thing must be said about the conjunction of
Saturn and Venus in Aries.
And the same consideration can be applied to the oppositions of
the Planets, in which the two signs must be looked at. Namely by
seeing whether both [Planets] are fortunate or unfortunate in the
signs that they occupy. Or whether one is fortunate and the other
unfortunate; or finally, whether both of them are peregrine. More-
over, a notable doubt can arise about oppositions; for example,
whether it would be worse for the opposition of the Sun and Mars
to be with the Sun in Aries and Mars in Libra, than it would be with
the Sun in Libra and Mars in Aries. Moreover, I think that the latter
would be worse; for the bad influx of Mars is strengthened too
much in Aries, and the benefic Sun is too much debilitated in Li-
bra; the contrary of which is better. But in the opposition of the
Sun and Saturn from Leo to Aquarius, it is better for the Sun to be
in Leo and Saturn in Aquarius. For the nature of Saturn is miti-
gated in Aquarius, but in Leo it would be too much corrupted.
Besides, when every Planet is in its own domicile, it is benefic
to the World; therefore, it is better for Planets to be in opposition
from their own domiciles than the other way around; and there-
fore, in the case of the oppositions of Mars and Venus from their
own signs, it is better for Venus to be in Taurus or in Libra than in
Scorpio or in Aries, where experience proves that the nature of Ve-
nus is too much corrupted. And the logic is the same for the rest of
the Planets and for the square and trine aspects, where the two
signs in which they occur must be considered.
Sixth. In a conjunction of the Planets, it must be seen which of
103

=== Page 114 ===
them may prevail. But they can prevail by nature, by celestial state,
and by terrestrial state. By nature the Sun prevails over its own sat-
ellites and the Moon; but the latter prevails over the satellites of the
Sun. By celestial state, if Saturn and Venus are conjoined in
Taurus, Venus will prevail; and the one who is bom then will be
shamefully lustful. But in the case of terrestrial state, if the Sun and
Saturn are conjoined in the 10th house, the Sun will prevail for
honors on account of its analogy with them; but if they are con-
joined in the 8th or the 12th, Saturn will prevail on account of its
analogy with death and illness; and so the good or the evil quality
of the effect may become known. And the logic is the same with
the rest. And because the hour of the conjunction of the Moon with
all the Planets can now be known; therefore, if at the times of those
conjunctions the figures are considered, there can be prognostica-
tions deduced from them that should not be scorned, both univer-
sal and particular ones for any particular place; and this should be
noted as a secret!
Seventh. If Saturn or Mars were rulers of the constitutions and
in perigee, they will be less bad than in apogee. For the closer they
will be to the Earth, the worse they act on it. However, think the
contrary about the perigees of Jupiter and Venus; namely that they
would be more beneficent and more effective in generating good.
Eighth. If the [principal] Planet of a universal constitution,
such as the Sun in a Mundane Revolution, is the ruler of the ASC
or the MC, in that year or at least in a quarter of that year, it will act
very strongly in accordance with its own nature; [a consideration],
however, to which the old [astrologers] paid no attention, but only
to the rulers of the Sun and the principal angles, by which they cer-
tainly made no small mistake. For since all the Planets differ
among themselves in their nature and virtue of acting, and each of
them always acts in accordance with its own nature and force of
acting; is it [then] erroneous in a Revolution of the Sun not to take
note of what the Sun [does] by its nature and its own virtue, and so
with the rest [of the Planets]?
104

=== Page 115 ===
Chapter 15. Some things that should be particularly
noted about the Natures and Actions of the Planets
in both Universal and Particular Constitutions.
The Planets are influentially hot, cold, moist, dry from the ce-
lestial material of which they are composed, which since it is
unique in them, there is also given to each of them an equality of
those influential qualities with the part of the celestial matter. But
besides that, [they] were also composed unequally of the elements;
and in the Sun, fire prevails; in Saturn, earth; etc., as was explained
in Book 9, Section 2. Since there are also individual Planets pre-
vailing in each influential nature, such as the Sun in heat and dry-
ness; the Moon in cold and moistness, etc.; and both the elemental
and celestial material is given to a Planet conformably and propor-
tionally according to its own substantial form, which in them is the
first principle of acting both elementally and influentially, each
one of them is known by its elemental nature, more evidently con-
trary to its influential [nature], and prevailing over that influential
[nature] similar to itself. Moreover, having said those things, the
following can be inquired into.
First. Why in the case of the Planets, supposing a particular ele-
mental nature from the predominance of the elemental mate-
rial—as in the case of Saturn, cold and dryness from the predomi-
nance of earth—does that nature that prevails in Saturn not impede
or hinder the effect of the contrary influence?
I reply. Contraries, properly said, are engaged in [things of] the
same kind. But a hot elemental nature and a frigid influential or el-
emental nature, are not of the same kind; therefore, they are not
formally contrary to themselves; and consequently, they are com-
patible in producing effects and acting. Nevertheless, because two
[natures] are more powerful than one, therefore the active force of
the Planet, consisting of an elemental nature and a similar influen-
tial nature, will prevail over another simple nature or a solitary in-
fluential one. And so, Saturn, seen as itself, at least cools and dries
more than it heats and moistens. And therefore, in both universal
105

=== Page 116 ===
and particular constitutions, the elemental nature of Saturn must
be more attended to than the influential nature contrary to it, which
by me is saying that its influential nature is less prominent, but the
other elemental1 nature is said to be more prominent, on account of
the similar element being joined, by which is indicated the
principal influential nature of each Planet.
Second. With Saturn posited in a sign of fire, air, water, or
earth, what will it do?
I reply. In earth, determined to its elemental nature—cold and
dry—it will chill and dry greatly, and especially in Capricorn,
which is determined to the nature of Saturn. For then, the con-
course of the cold and dry nature would be twofold, in addition to
the elementals, Saturn and Capricorn—that is, the elemental Sat-
urn and the determination of the sign. However, [when placed] in
air, the determinative nature of the sign will not prevail over the
elemental [nature] of Saturn, but it will only moderate it consider-
ably. And in a fire sign, Saturn will dry [things] more intensely,
but it will chill more mildly. But in a water sign, it will chill in-
tensely, but it will dry more mildly; that is, in summer, vapors
causing more intense cold by accident will humidify, and will
meanwhile cause long-continued rains.
And yet it must be noted that if Mars, for example, should be
posited in Cancer, from their combination more heat and dryness
will emanate than cold and moistness; for the signs are only hot,
cold, moist, or dry by determination; but the Planets are like that
formally; and therefore Mars is hotter and dryer than Cancer is
cold and moist. And from that it is also deduced that Mars imparts
its own nature and influence more than Aries or Scorpio. And the
logic is the same with the others.
Third. How do both the elemental and the influential natures
act at the same time in the individual Planets?
'Reading altera verb elementalis instead of altera verb influentialis.
106

=== Page 117 ===
I reply. The influential [nature] only acts influentially, that is
by reason of its site, rulership, and aspects in the houses of the fig-
ure; but the elemental [nature] acts not only elementally per
se—that is, in accordance with the verticality or obliquity of its
rays falling upon the horizon—but also, influentially by accident,
since the elemental nature in Planets is subordinated to their own
substantial form, and it complies with them in acting both elemen-
tally and influentially. And Mars under the Earth can heat influen-
tially above the Earth by reason of its rulership in the ASC or in the
place of the universal constitution.
Moreover, although both natures act differently as much as they
can; yet, the effect of the elemental [nature] acting alone per se
does not make a strong and constant impression on sublunar Na-
ture; but the effect of the influential nature, either solitary or subor-
dinating the elemental [nature] to itself is long lasting and fixed;
both in the particulars of nativities, and in universal constitutions.
And therefore its only astrological effect is usually seen to be in
predicting the future.
Fourth. Which one of these natures is allotted its own effects
more surely?
I reply. That the effects of the elemental nature both on the con-
stitutions of the air and on the temperaments of natives depend
more on particular sublunar causes, that is on the situation of the
place, the quarter of the year, the proper constitution of the seed,
etc., than on the elemental nature of the Planets; and therefore, pre-
diction about these effects is less certain. But the effects of the in-
fluential nature, such as that someone is going to be fortunate in
riches, honors, marriage partner, etc.; or that he may perish by a vi-
olent death, and similar things—because these do not depend upon
the above said sublunar causes, since they occur at any time or
place, and to men of any condition—can therefore be more quickly
predicted and are accustomed to be.
Fifth. Why do the Planets imprint fixed qualities and tempera-
107

=== Page 118 ===
ments on the nativities of those bom on a particular day that last for
their whole life? But why do they not do so for the air or for [condi-
tions in] a whole region?
I reply. Because one bom with his own radical celestial consti-
tution does not change from one nature into another, but he is only
the kind that he is. And for this, some particular arrangement of the
Caelum is sufficient. But for the air or a region to be changed from
one state to another, a greater force of the Caelum is required; and
consequently, this can only be done by a universal constitution
that pours forth the seeds of change on sublunar things.
Sixth. Why does Saturn cool and dry more with Capricorn than
it heats and humidifies with Aquarius or in Aquarius, since Aquar-
ius does not refer its hot and humid nature any less to Saturn from
the celestial material of which Saturn itself is composed, than Cap-
ricorn refers a frigid and dry [nature]?
I reply. That is because Saturn is in addition cold and dry like
Capricorn, but not hot and humid like Aquarius; and that elemental
cold and dry nature agrees especially with its substantial form,
which is the principal cause of Saturn's actions. Therefore, in Cap-
ricorn it acts with a doubled force, but not in Aquarius.
Section II.
Chapter 1. In which some important things are mentioned
first about the kinds of Effects emanating from Universal
Constitutions, or are taught about the Kinds of Prediction.
So much confusion is found among astrologers about predic-
tion; and so much of a hotch-potch of aphorisms and opinions con-
flicting with each other, that one without natural light and an intel-
ligence bom for philosophy will have entered into a labyrinth that
is truly inexplicable. Not withstanding any amount of study, he
will remain for his whole life entangled in the obscurities of igno-
rance. And this should not seem remarkable to anyone, since this
part of astrology is far different from that which is contemplated
108

=== Page 119 ===
for the nativities and fates of men. For in this part, the influential
qualities of the stars are almost solely or at least principally looked
at, insofar as they are determined by the essential significations of
the houses or the spaces of the figure with regard to that man being
bom; according to which determination the stars act according to
rule, as is observed in nativities.
But in the other part of astrology, almost solely or at least prin-
cipally the elemental qualities of the stars and the signs are looked
at, insofar as they affect some whole region in its air, water, land,
plants, animals, and men. And the force of the celestial bodies, at
least for their elemental effects in this part of astrology is deter-
mined in another way for a region than for a native. For, only the
first house is noticed for the temperament of a native, namely the
signs and the Planets in it, its mler, and the aspects to it. But for the
temperature of the air or its condition, there are principally noted
in which house of the figure the primary place of the constitution is
situated, then the mler of that place (both of which are common to
the whole Earth), as well as the rulers of the preceding angles, but
especially of the one following that primary place, all of which de-
termine that constitution elementally to a [particular] region.
Whence, it is that from these rulers and their state astrologers
unanimously pronounce about the future elemental effects in that
region, about heat, cold, moistness, dryness, winds, sterility, fe-
cundity, mortality, etc., although these things depend no little on
the nature of the region and its situation, as well as upon the quar-
ter of the year, so that the doctrine of the universal constitutions is
far more difficult and uncertain than the doctrine of nativities.
Add that the latter is worked by everyone for the sake of profit
or pleasure, but the former by very few, who judge only by blind
acceptance and by chance from the decrees of the old [astrologers]
especially in fact from those of the Arabs, that the individual mas-
ters of astrology have brought down to us by the Cabala, no one
having been found hitherto, who will have tried to put that old doc-
trine to the [test] of reason and experience, as it is proper to recover
109

=== Page 120 ===
and illustrate it. Since this task, undertaken by us, is no small one,
namely to expound it. And indeed those things that were placed by
us in the first Section seem especially to agree with correct reason.
But so that those things that follow in this Section, should be better
perceived, some must be stated in advance by us in this chapter.
First. Three methods have been seen by me for predicting the
state of the air—from which many [procedures] follow for the
land, water, plants, brute animals, and men.
The first is that of Jofrancus Offusius the German1 by the alti-
tudes of the Planets and the [length of time of] their stays above the
horizon, and some other observations, which we discussed in
Book 13, Chapters 2 & 3, and then in Book 16, Chapter 2; and we
have already shown the use and the imperfection of the method
noted also by that same Offusius.
The second is [the method] of Kepler, who has supposed the
Earth to be a sort of animal, not only endowed with sensation, but
also with a sort of intelligence, so that whatever things the
syzygies of the Planets do in the Caelum, it perceives them in itself
immediately, having been stimulated by them. It is excited by each
stimulus, and it moves itself to the excretion of the vapors and ex-
halations that are contained in itself, which are the common mate-
rial of all the meteors that are appearing in the air.2
And therefore, in his Ephemerides from the Year 1621 to 1630,
in reporting the causes of changes in the air, he has no reference to
universal constitutions, nor to celestial charts erected for them, nor to
the diverse nature of the signs, the Planets, or the fixed stars; but
whatever he advances for changes in the air, he attributes to a syzygy
of the Planets, then to whatever beginning it is, and of whichever ones
of the Planets, or to several of them occurring at the same time. And
'JoFrancus Offusius (c.1500-c.1565), M.D., De divina astrorum facilitate in
larvatam astrologiam 'On die Divine Power of the Stars against a Bewitched As-
trology' (Paris; J. Royer, 1570).
2 In Kepler's day, and in fact until the early part of the 19th century, it was gener-
ally believed that meteors were atmospheric phenomena.
110

=== Page 121 ===
indeed that method is worthwhile for this [reason], since every day
there is some syzygy, either of the Moon with the other Planets, or of
the Planets among themselves; and therefore no one is so ignorant, for
whom this method at first glance is not very easy in practice.
But since the changes in the air are very varied and contrary
among themselves, it is certain that from a future syzygy, Kepler
did not predict by his method what sort of change would have fol-
lowed. As is plain from this, that in the year 1623, from the con-
junction of the Sun and Saturn in the 9th degree of Leo, he will
have it that there was caused a dryness and great heat. In the year
1624, from the conjunction of the Sun and Saturn in the 22nd de-
gree of Leo, thunder, lightning, and heavy rains. In the year 1625,
from the conjunction of the Sun and Saturn in the 6th degree of
Virgo, heat, thunder, lightning, and the very heaviest rains. In the
year 1626, from the conjunction of the Sun and Saturn in the 19th
degree of Virgo, serene weather, etc. Where to the same syzygies,
in the same sign, and in the same quarter of the year, contrary
states of the air are attributed.
Therefore, Kepler's method for predicting the state of the air
cannot be said to be scientific or useful. Moreover, this is con-
firmed by two reasons. The first is that if any particular syzygy
does nothing else than stimulate, and it suffices that the Earth is
stimulated by any syzygy, so that of itself it is excited and dis-
charges what must be discharged, it is plain that the diversity of fu-
ture changes [in the air] will not be looked for from the syzygies,
but rather from the various intrinsic dispositions of the Earth that
are unknown, and so it will not have been possible for any predic-
tion of what sort of changes there would be to be made by means of
the syzygies.
Second. Since very certain experience is established by means
of nativities, and then from Book 19, that the natures of the Planets
are diverse among themselves, just as the nature of the aspects are
also diverse; therefore, a different syzygy of different Planets will
not stimulate the Earth in the same manner, and consequently it
111

=== Page 122 ===
will not produce the same kind of effects. And in general a differ-
ent syzygy of different Planets will not cause the same change [in
the air], but each one of them will act on the same subject—that is,
on the Earth—according to the nature and proper virtue of the
Planets and the aspects; and so they individually produce diverse
effects, also from the same disposition of the Earth, which who-
ever denies it will divulge his own ignorance of physics.
Add that if any constitution of the air that has arisen only de-
pends objectively on a particular syzygy, why does that constitu-
tion happen in one [particular] place on earth, rather than in an-
other above or below the horizon, since that syzygy is common to
the whole Earth? If anyone says that a future effect [will occur] at a
disposed place on Earth and where there is something that must be
discharged; then, since that place is unknown, no prediction will
therefore be possible for that particular place. Besides, what syz-
ygy will make serenity and tranquility of the air, since then it could
not be said that the Earth discharges anything that would produce
serenity and tranquility of the air? Those things that we have said
against that opinion of Kepler's may be seen in Book 21, Section
1, Chapters 4-7, then in Book 22, Section 3, Chapter 2.
Finally, the third method is that of Ptolemy and the other old as-
trologers by universal constitutions and their rulers, which we
therefore adhere to, because the true astrology became known to
the first men, and it remained to posterity through the Cabala, but
indiscriminately depraved by the arts of the Devil and the ridicu-
lous fictions of men, as we have made known in the doctrine of na-
tivities. And therefore, by correcting what must be corrected, that
method should be preferred to the opinions of Offusius and Kep-
ler—men ignorant of the true astrology (as we have said else-
where) and also disagreeing among themselves.
Second. The confusion and contrariety in the decrees of the old
[astrologers] was introduced by this, that the twelfths1 of the Pri-
'That is, the signs of the zodiac. Morin means the tropical signs.
112

=== Page 123 ===
mum Mobile were not known to them before Ptolemy's time; but
they thought that the constellations of the zodiac were the true
signs that are said to be the domiciles of the planets and to be sub-
ject to their rulership. Whence, it resulted that with the constella-
tions lurking about under the twelfths, and with the strengths of
both of them fighting among themselves, they would have pro-
duced contrary decrees,1 when one astrologer attributed to a
twelfth what was due to a constellation or stellar sign, and vice
versa; and so contrary opinions are found about the same Planet in
the same sign.
Third. The old astrologers judged very confusedly about the
constitutions of the air. Since for the heat and cold of the air, for
hail, rains, dryness, and, following from these on the Earth, steril-
ity, plague, wars, etc., they judge about those individual things
from the great conjunctions, the annual Revolutions, eclipses,
lunations, and their quarters, [but] differently and in different
ways, as if it ought to be judged one way about one constitution
and another way about another, so that here and there to see it is in
an English sum.2
Moreover, since one should predict in the same way from the
individual universal constitutions (except in the case of their sub-
ordination); namely, because the stars act uniformly in all the uni-
versal conjunctions—of course, through the rulers of the constitu-
tion according to their nature and state—for the purpose of pre-
dicting whether there will be rain or fine weather, there is no need
to define it by individual constitutions, but it is only needful to
know what sort of effects the first of all the universal constitutions
presages—that is, the Mundane Revolution of the Sun, and
whether the later ones agree with it or are contrary, and which one
would rule; and from that, judgment should be made, taking note
of the fact that the year has three quarters subordinated to the prime
'Morin has condemned the attribution of the presumed characteristics of a con-
stellation to the sign of the same name.
2An 'English sum' is evidently a slang term for 'a state of confusion'.
113

=== Page 124 ===
one or the Ingress of the Sun into C^OO' Aries, and which quarter has
more lunations subordinated to the quarters but especially to the
prime one; and each lunation has 4 quarters, of which the last 3 are
subordinated to the [preceding] synod of the Sun and the Moon.
Fourth. It is generally admitted by all the old [astrologers] that
the Planets in the signs, i.e. in the twelfths, act universally, that is
through the whole circuit of the Earth according to their own na-
ture and that of the sign in which they are located, both elementally
and influentially. Therefore, in a fire sign the formal heat and dry-
ness of Mars is strongly increased; in a water sign, they are very re-
duced; in an air sign, its dryness is moderated; and in an earth sign,
its heat is moderated, but its dryness is increased. And similarly,
Satum in an air sign is mostly temperate; in an earth sign, its cold
and dryness are increased; in a fire sign, its dryness is increased,
and its cold is reduced; and in a water sign, its cold is increased,
and its dryness is reduced; and thus with the rest [of the Planets].
However, it must not be understood from this, that a Planet re-
ceives anything from a sign, or a sign receives anything from a
Planet; but rather that from the concourse of a hot Planet with a fire
sign, it produces a great heat on these inferior things, [but] from
the concourse of a hot Planet with a cold sign, there is a mildness in
heat; and thus with the rest [of the Planets and signs], as we have
said in Book 20, Section 3, Chapter 5. And the same thing is done
in temperaments.
And so in every universal constitution, it must be seen how the
natures of the Planets, and the signs, and their rulers agree or dis-
agree. For of whatever kind the concourse, or the celestial cause,
will be, of that same kind will be its universal influx on all these
sublunar things. However, the effects of which influx are diverse ac-
cording to the diverse site and nature of the places, and the diverse
part of the year. For the same heat liquefies wax and hardens clay1;
'This is Morin's favorite saying to illustrate the fact that the same cause may have
entirely different effects on different kinds of subjects. It appears in Origen (3rd
cent.), The First Principles, I, I, 13.
114

=== Page 125 ===
and the Sun causes heavy rains somewhere by elevating more va-
pors by its heat than it can resolve in its stay above the horizon,1
when elsewhere it causes fine weather by dissipating everything
that it elevates by its own heat.
For the Earth is the vessel of Nature, into which as a womb the
individual elements, altered and set in motion by the celestial bod-
ies, ejaculate their own seed. Moreover, the Sun is of the nature of
a vivifying fire, which heating the womb of the Earth, and foster-
ing the first generations on Earth—namely it produces the vapor
and the exhalation and copious amounts in accordance with the in-
tensity of the heat and the nature of the land. Moreover, from the
vapor and the exhalation, or, as is pleasing to the chemists, from
mercury and sulfur the remaining things are generated.
And consequently, what is asserted by many is false, [namely,
that] conjunctions of any planets made in fire signs heat and dry;
[and] in water signs, they cool and humidify. For thus the planets
would not act in accordance with their own nature, but only in ac-
cordance with the sign in which they are posited, which is abso-
lutely alien to nature, reason, and experience. Nevertheless, it
sometimes happens that a hot celestial cause would cool, as when
the Sun makes summer in the torrid zone; for because there it ele-
vates the most copious vapors by its own ardent heat, which by
their own brief stay above the horizon cannot be dissipated; and
therefore, throughout the summer, rains are almost continuous in
that zone, and the summer is cooler than the remaining parts of the
year; but that cold is only accidentally from the Sun and not from
the Sun per se. And similarly, the intense cold of Saturn or the
Moon in the winter constricts the pores of the face of the Earth; and
that cause is by accident, because the first region of the earth is
made hotter and more humid.
And the logic is the same with the rest of the things that must be
looked at for prediction—namely, having taken into account the
'Reading super horizon tem 'above the horizon' instead of semper horizontem 'al-
ways the horizon'.
115

=== Page 126 ===
place and the quarter of the year for at least the elemental effects.
For, in the case of the influential [effects], since they are deter-
mined to the significations of the houses, no notice must be taken
of the place or the quarter of the year, nor by accident do effects
appear that are contrary to the forces of the celestial bodies deter-
mined in that way, for Saturn in the 12th always and everywhere
threatens illnesses.
Fifth. It is not sufficient to perceive that the primary point of a
constitution, or a particular Planet, is in a fire sign or a water sign;
but in addition it must be noted in which Planet's domicile it is pos-
ited. Then, because a Planet does one thing in Cancer, another in
Scorpio, and still another in Pisces—namely, always acting in con-
nection with the nature of its ruler—but then, because the effects of
a universal constitution chiefly follow the nature of the ruler of the
primary point, by the common consensus of astrologers.
Sixth. The proper natures of the Planets are helped or hindered
by other extrinsic causes besides the signs and syzygies, namely
by their position with respect to the Sun or the Moon, by a con-
formable or non-conformable situation resulting from their loca-
tion above or below the horizon, by the length of their stay above
it, as well as by their distance from the Earth, which was fully
discussed in Book 13.
Seventh. From the same universal constitution, such as the In-
gress of the Sun into Aries, or a new Moon, or a conjunction of Sat-
urn and Jupiter, either in this or that sign, or under [the rulership]
of this or that Planet, or in that way disposed by rulership; that is by
the same universal constitution seen only celestially, the celestial
influx of course produces the same thing for the whole circle of the
Earth, but it provides different effects, both for a different site and
nature of the parts of the terrestrial globe, and for the different po-
sition of the primary point of the constitution in the celestial fig-
ure—that is, above or below the horizon, in the angles, or outside
of the angles, and with different rulers, both of the angles and of
the primary point.
116

=== Page 127 ===
For by these, that universal constitution is determined to indi-
vidual horizons, so that it can provide special effects conformable
to the natures and state of the rulers, to the position of the primary
point with respect to the horizon, to the nature of the place and the
quarter of the year, all of which must be taken into account for the
prediction. Whence it is plain how fallacious the judgment of a
universal constitution would be when viewed only from its celes-
tial state, or from solely the celestial state of the Planets, without
any consideration of the horizon, as is often found here and there
in the aphorisms of the old astrologers.
Eighth. A celestial constitution signifying humidity or rains is
good in one place on Earth, namely in a sandy place, bad in an-
other, namely in a marshy place; likewise, it is good in one quarter
of the year, namely in the summer unless it overflows, but bad in
the winter; likewise, it is good for some crops of the Earth, but bad
for some that it does not suit. Moreover, all of these things must be
distinguished by careful sagacity and with attention given to the
[type of] agriculture.
Ninth. In any universal constitution, many Planets in fire signs
presage spells of dryness; in water signs, waters; in air signs,
winds; and in earth signs, hail, or snow storms and hail. However,
attention must be paid to the Planets ruling those signs—namely,
whether in their elemental nature they agree or disagree with the
signs; for, when they are agreeing, their signification is intensified,
and when they are disagreeing, it is reduced; then similarly, atten-
tion must be paid to the nature of the place and the quarter of the
year, as has been very often stated.
Tenth. For predicting from a universal constitution, it must be
known which Planet is the principal ruler of the year, which one is
the ruler of the quarter of the year, which one is the ruler of the
month or of the lunation; then, what is the nature, both elemental
and influential, of these individual rulers, and what is the nature of
the signs in which they are placed, and the nature of the ruling
fixed stars, and how all of these are determined in the figures. And
117

=== Page 128 ===
having made a mixture of all of these, one will have to judge ac-
cording to the prevailing virtue about the future elemental and in-
fluential effects, taking into account the [nature] of the place and
the quarter of the year, at least for the elemental effects, as was said
above. And the knowledge [of the effects] depends upon all this!
Eleventh. Other things being equal, that Planet must be chosen
for the primary ruler of a universal constitution that more agrees
with the quarter of the year, such as Mars for the summer, or Saturn
for the winter. And Saturn portending cold for the winter quarter
will make that cold in the air, especially in the more northern places
on Earth. And the logic is the same with the rest [of the planets].
Twelfth. In [judging] universal constitutions, not only must it
be foreseen whether the future air will be serene, disturbed, mild,
or hot, cold, humid, dry, or healthy or unhealthy, and for what liv-
ing things; but especially, what sort of winds will there be, for the
temperature of the air principally depends upon the winds. For
those that blow from the colder parts of the Earth, such as the sub-
polar parts, chill; those from the hotter parts, such as from the
equator, heat; those that are from the sea, carry clouds and waters;
those from a distant tract of the Earth, such as Tartary1 is from us,
dry up and clear up [the atmosphere].
Moreover, a wind lasting for some days is a motion of the air
following the rarefaction of the air itself in the hotter places, and
which occasionally increases the motions by the rarefaction and
dissipation of clouds, or vapors and exhalations, which the dis-
turbed air itself drives; this is evident from the perpetual wind in
the torrid zone, from the east to the west, which is nothing other
than a motion of the air caused by the daily motion of the Primum
Caelum, as we have said elsewhere.
Moreover, a wind that lasts an hour or is momentary, which is
the sort that precedes a rain storm, is only from the dissolution of
clouds and rains falling in close order, as if from a gust. Further-
'Roughly, Russia and the countries to the south of it that are east of Europe.
118

=== Page 129 ===
more, it is very difficult to predict which wind ought to last; that is,
because when the air is rarefied, or vapors are elevated into the air
(from which, to produce this and to be moved it is necessary for the
parts to be weaker in their rarity). Mostly, it would depend upon
sublunar causes prevalent in the place, from which is the begin-
ning of its motion. Whence, it is no wonder if meteorological
prediction often fails!
Thirteenth. The Planets that are rulers of the universal consti-
tution, and of its primary point, then the rest of the Planets in that
constitution, act influentially upon these sublunar things accord-
ing to the characteristics of the houses with their own determina-
tion in the figure; however, with this difference from [their signifi-
cations] in the figures of nativities; namely, because the first house
in the figure of a native would only signify about the particular life
and health of the native; but in the figure of a universal constitution
it would signify about the life and health of all living things in the
region of the figure.
The 7th house in the figure of a native is [the house] of mar-
riages and the particular contentions of the native; but in the figure
of a universal constitution it is [the house] of the marriages of that
region in general, and then of the contentions and wars common to
that whole region. And so with the other [houses]—namely, taking
in general in universal constitutions what is taken only particularly
in nativities, or with respect to the native alone. For the character-
istics of the houses are the same; that is, the essential significations
of the houses are the same in general figures and in particular fig-
ures; but in the latter, the constitution is only particular, and there-
fore signifying particularly; but in the former, the constitution is
general, and therefore signifying generally.
And similarly, it will have to be seen which houses of the figure
the Planet that is ruler of the sign rules, and which one it will aspect
by a stronger ray, and from those it must be judged by a universal
method. See what we will have said about these things at the end of
Chapter 5, Section 2, Book 21.
119

=== Page 130 ===
Fourteenth. Hence it is deduced that those natives are more
readily and strongly affected by a universal constitution, whose
natal figures agree more in the significations of the houses with the
figures of the universal constitutions; and they are affected by the
things signified by the corresponding houses. As if the 10th house
of a universal constitution agrees with the 10th house of a natal fig-
ure or the Revolution of a natal figure, the native will be affected in
that year or month in those things signified by the 10th, according
to the nature and the influx common to the same figure.
Fifteenth. Since for us the southern winds are hot, the northern
ones cold, the eastern ones dry, and the western ones humid, from
their appearance there mostly follows heat, cold, dryness, and
rains in the air. Therefore, if it could be known in advance which
wind would be going to blow, the future constitution of the air
would also be known—at least most of the time; however, al-
though we have said in Article 12 [above], that it would be very
difficult to know on account of the sublunar causes on which it of-
ten depends; nevertheless, it is certain that if a universal constitu-
tion will have signified cold and dryness for us northerners, south-
em winds will not blow from that constitution; if it will have signi-
fied heat and humidity, the northern winds will not blow, etc.
And therefore, from universal constitutions it can thus be
known in advance which winds will blow; but from that same uni-
versal constitution it can also be known in advance whether the fu-
ture will be windy or not, and what kind of wind it presages; there-
fore, by comparing among themselves the elemental qualities and
those of the winds that that universal constitution presages, the fu-
ture constitution of the air, in heat, cold, rains, fine weather, and
wind, will be more precisely determined.
Sixteenth. From universal causes, some future effects can be
predicted with certainty; namely, those that cannot be prevented
by any natural or artificial force, such as eclipses; but others can
only be predicted conjecturally, such as winds, rains, etc. Because
even those are necessarily produced by their own causes, we how-
120

=== Page 131 ===
ever do not know the combinations of those causes either of the ac-
tive or the passive ones, and whether they are going to take place
and how; nor do we know whether other causes may act to hinder
them by their own concourse and combination with the previous
ones.
And therefore, only conjectural predictions can be made about
them—even more uncertain than predictions based on the figures
of nativities. From which it is not surprising that Tycho Brahe will
have worked more at natal astrology, but he did not deride its
worthlessness, as Gassendi falsely imputed to him in his biogra-
phy; and Tycho only bewails that the art itself had not yet been
rightly established in his own time.
Chapter 2. The Difference between the Periodic
and the Synodic Revolutions of the Planets as regards
their Efficiency.
At the beginning of the World, the Sun and the state of the
whole Caelum affected the whole Earth, but in various ways in ac-
cordance with the diverse respect of the state of the Caelum itself
toward the individual places on Earth, or in accordance with the di-
verse determination of the Caelum in the charts of the Caelum
erected for individual places on Earth. And in each place on Earth,
the chart of the Caelum signified universally whatever can happen
both elementally and influentially for that place from the motion
of the Caelum and the Earth.
And therefore, in the annual Revolution of the World for any
place on Earth, the Sun by itself, and by the figure of its Revolu-
tion, renews that universal signification by acting both elementally
on the air, water, and land, and the various sublunar things, and in-
fluentially on all the things signified by the houses of the figure,
with respect to the radical figure of the said place, and especially
with respect to the house held by the Sun in that figure; and this is
understood [to be in effect] during the year of that Revolution. And
similarly, it must be judged about the periodic Revolution of the
121

=== Page 132 ===
Moon to its own radical place at the beginning of the World during
the month of its Revolution, and yet also with respect to the current
Revolution of the Sun.
Moreover, all these things were shown by us to be true in the pe-
riodical Revolutions of the Sun and the Moon for the nativity of a
man, who is the microcosm, on which in the great World the Plan-
ets act uniformly. And it seems that it should not be thought other-
wise in the case of the periodical Revolutions of the other Planets
to their own radical places at the beginning of the World. But be-
cause the radical places of the planets are unknown, with the ex-
ception of the Sun, there only remains for us, therefore, their syn-
odic revolutions to take note of.
And so, what concerns the synodic Revolutions of the Sun and
the Moon, the primary Planets of the World, these too, and the
state of the whole Caelum at the moment of the Revolution, affects
the whole Earth universally, by reason of those Planets coming to-
gether, and of the sign in which the synod is, and the rest of the ce-
lestial state, but in different ways in accordance with the diverse
determination of the Caelum at the individual places on Earth, tak-
ing account of the radical determination, especially of the Sun and
the Moon, and then of the other Planets at the beginning of the
World, or at the moment when all the planets were established and
the Earth was exposed to their forces, which determination is un-
known, on account of the unknown chart of the Caelum, then of
the time for the individual places on Earth.
Then too, [there must be] taken into account the celestial figure
at the beginning of the current annual Revolution, which is known,
and that for the duration of the synodic month. Moreover, what I
have already said about the synodic Revolutions of the Sun and the
Moon among themselves, must also be understood about their syn-
odic Revolutions with the rest of the Planets, and their Revolutions
among themselves; always having observed the subordination of
the universal constitutions, which was discussed [above] in
Section I, Chapter 3.
122

=== Page 133 ===
But now, the nativities of men are subject to the effectiveness or
the influx of universal constitutions; that is, of their periodic and
synodic Revolutions, as we have spoken elsewhere—in which it
must particularly be looked at [to see] how the primary point of the
constitution affects the figure of the nativity and of its current Rev-
olution during [the time of] that constitution. But, having made
these advance statements, we now come to the special effects of
universal constitutions.
Chapter 3. The Kinds or Types of Effects emanating
from Universal Constitutions. And first, the
Effects of the Mundane Revolution of the Sun.
Those who have truly philosophized about these things have
proposed paying attention to only 4 causes or universal constitu-
tions—namely, the great conjunctions, the eclipses of the Lights,
the Mundane Revolution of the Sun, and the synods of the Sun and
the Moon—wishing the magnitude of the causes to be retained
therein in the order of their rarity. Since, however, the Mundane
Revolution of the Sun is rarer than the eclipses, which happen sev-
eral times in one year, either above or below the horizon; and, by
reason of their virtue and dignity, preference should be given to
the great conjunctions, although not by reason of their own dura-
tion, as was said in Section I, Chapter 3.
And consequently, we acknowledge only two primary univer-
sal constitutions—namely, the Mundane Revolution of the Sun,
and the synodic Revolutions of the Sun and the Moon, of which
the more effective ones are those in the ecliptic.1 For that which
pertains to the great conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter, and the
rest of the synodic Revolutions of the other planets, both among
themselves and with the Lights; these should only be viewed as
parts of the Mundane or Annual Revolution of the Sun, and then of
the monthly Revolution of the Sun and the Moon, on account of
the reasons set forth at the end of Section I, chapter 3.Concerning
'The synodic revolutions in the ecliptic are of course the eclipses of the Sun and
the Moon.
123

=== Page 134 ===
which, however, we shall discuss separately in its own place; but it
seems to us that we ought to begin with the Mundane Revolution
of the Sun.
And so, First. The figure of the annual revolution of the World
for the proposed location should be erected in accordance with
Section I, Chapter 4.
Second. The rulers of the year should be chosen in accordance
with Section I, Chapters 9 & 10. And indeed if Mars is in Aries
with the Sun, or in Scorpio, especially if it is in an angle, it will be
the most powerful ruler of the year; and the effects of the year will
be solar in kind, on account of the Sun itself which is making the
Revolution, but the effects are strongly determined to Mars; and
consequently, they are for the greater part martial in their type. But
if Mars is not in those signs, but for example in Sagittarius, since
the Sun in Aries acts with Mars, and Mars in Sagittarius acts with
its own ruler Jupiter; Jupiter will therefore be the ruler of the year
in that Revolution of the Sun, but it must be especially looked at
along with Mars for detecting the type of the principal effects of
the Sun in that year.
And if Jupiter is in Aries or Scorpio, Mars will then be made the
more powerful ruler, and it will prevail over Jupiter in the effects
of the annual Revolution or over those determined to the Sun itself,
because as Mars acts in accordance with the nature and state of Ju-
piter, or with Jupiter in such a state, so in turn Jupiter acts in accor-
dance with the nature and state of Mars, which in addition rules the
Sun but not Jupiter. Both of them will, however, be very strong on
account of their reciprocally united rulership,1 which is not
otherwise distracted.
But if another Planet not ruling Mars is conjunct the Sun in
Aries, that one is inferior to Mars as far as the rulership, because it
acts in accordance with the nature of Mars or is dependent on
Mars. But nevertheless, it will affect the future effects of that year
'Mars in Sagittarius and Jupiter in Aries are in mutual reception by domicile.
124

=== Page 135 ===
by its own qualities, as was already mentioned about a similar case
in Section I, Chapter 9. And these things [relate] to the rulership of
the primary point of the Revolution of the Sun.
But as for what pertains to the rulership of the angles, let the
choice of the ruler be made as it was done for the [rulership of] the
primary point, and as was shown in the above said Chapter 9. And
similarly for the fixed stars ruling the constitution, the doctrine set
forth in that same chapter should be observed; namely, in which all
the things that are required for choosing the rulers of the constitu-
tion are sufficiently set forth. And it must be noted that in the case
of a Mundane Revolution of the Sun (for example), it will make
known no little, not only to know which Planet is the principal
ruler of each quarter of the year, but also which one will princi-
pally rule all the quarters at the same time, for the effects of that
one will appear in the whole year, and especially in that quarter of
the year in which it will prevail; but the effects of the other [Plan-
ets] will be conspicuous in those quarters which they principally
rule.
Having explained these things, we shall now teach how to make
a judgment on the effects of a Mundane Revolution of the Sun
(which we are taking as an example of all universal constitutions).
And first let us say that it must be judged both elementally and in-
fluentially; that is, it produces a certain kind of temperature in the
air, universally communicable to the water and the land, which are
not mixed bodies; then it produces certain kinds of influential ef-
fects in men according to the things signified by the houses.
The temperature of the air is sought either at present, at the be-
ginning of the Revolution, or in the future during the course of that
revolution. The present condition can be known and determined
by means of Offusius's [method], which is discussed in Book 13,
Section I; for the stars act extrinsically by their own elemental vir-
tue according to that method—at least by reason of their altitude
and their stay above the horizon—and therefore, the proper ele-
mental virtue of the individual Planets must be considered, even if
125

=== Page 136 ===
they are not rulers of the year, as was shown in that method of
Offusius that was corrected by us; but principally the virtue of
those [Planets] that would have been angular in the figure and
above the Earth. Also, not having omitted the brighter fixed stars
in the angles, and especially those with the Sun and the Moon, or
rising and setting with the rulers of the constitution; for by these,
the present condition of the air can be caused, but not for many
days.
But the future temperature of the air, during the revolution itself
or its quarter, depends upon the influx of the stars. For the celestial
bodies produce not only elemental qualities according to their own
inclination of ray and their perpendicularity to the horizon, as [is
explained] above in Offusius's method, but also by their influen-
tial virtue, as we have stated elsewhere; namely when in the figure
of a universal constitution they are allotted the rulership or some
[notable] force. For notable and long-lasting changes in the air and
in sublunar things are not made by planets on individual days, but
only by universal constitutions that are more powerful and that
happen more rarely.
Therefore, either for the state of the air during a Revolution of
the Sun, or for the general fates of men according to the things sig-
nified by the houses, judgment should be made from the rulers of
that Mundane Revolution of the Sun. In which three things always
occur that must be noticed—namely, the proper nature of the rul-
ers, their celestial state, and their terrestrial state, which will be
discussed individually in what follows.
Chapter 4. The special Effects of the Planets that are
Rulers of the Year, resulting from their Nature.
For that which refers to the nature of a Planet, from which its
own effects emanate, one must consult the Tables of the Universal
Rulership of the Planets that is appended to Book 13, Section II,
Chapter 3. From which it will be plain what any particular Planet
rules over in the individual kinds of things from its own nature, or
126

=== Page 137 ===
what it rules over by analogy to them. Or, one must follow Ptol-
emy, who in Tetrabiblos, Book 2, Chapter 8, before the rest of the
astrologers, learnedly and in conformity sets forth the effects of
the individual Planets, when acting alone and not mixed with oth-
ers, they rule a universal constitution; and the Table mentioned
above corresponds very closely to his doctrine. And therefore, it
seems that those words of Ptolemy ought to be put here, to which
also some truer things should be added by us from Haly, Cardan,
and other astrologers.
Saturn, therefore (says Ptolemy), when he is the sole ruler, is
generally the cause of corruption from cold, and properly in the
bodies of men he makes long-lasting illnesses, wasting away, con-
sumption that arises from catarrhs, disturbance of the humors,
fluxes, quartan fevers, exiles, poverty, straitened circumstances,
mourning, panics, deaths especially of old people; and the ani-
mals' that are left he afflicts with illnesses, so that indeed the con-
tagion spreads to the men who use them.
In the air it excites a cold that is fearful, icy, misty, and pestilen-
tial. Disturbances of the air, dense clouds, fogs, heavy snows, not
useful but harmful, and from which serpents are bom that will be
harmful to men. In rivers and in the sea, savage tempests and ship-
wrecks, difficult courses, scarcity and death of fish. And in the sea
particularly the ebb of water leaving the sea bed and flowing back;
but in rivers, overflows and the corruption of waters; on the land,
high prices for fruits, scarcity and devastation, especially of the
necessities of life, by withering [of plants] and locusts, or by
floods and rain storms, or by hail, so that men ultimately perish by
famine and similar evils.
However, consideration must be given to the sign in which it is
placed, to the quarter of the year, to the climate, and to the temper-
"ihe Latin text has simply eas 'those', but both the Greek original {alogon zoion
'dumb animals') and Cardan's Latin version {Bmta 'brutes') have a word mean-
ing 'animals'. So perhaps the word animates was accidently shortened to eas by
the typesetter of the Astrologia Gallica.
127

=== Page 138 ===
ament of men. For in a cold sign, a colder quarter of the year, and a
cold climate, it will stir up a prodigious cold, and it will be very
harmful to frigid temperaments; but in a fire or air sign, in a hot
quarter of the year, and in a hotter climate, it will make the air tem-
perate, and it will be useful to hotter natures.
When Jupiter is the sole ruler, it generally makes growth. And
when the event pertains to men, it signifies glory, fertility, tran-
quility, and peace. It will enrich domestic things and foster good
things for the body and mind; it promises benefices and good
things from Kings, and it honors governors with glory; and in gen-
eral, it is the cause of good things. And in fact, it signifies an abun-
dance of those animals that serve the uses of men; and on the con-
trary, death for those that are harmful to men. Moreover, in the air
it signifies a good temperature, healthy, windy, humid, nourishing
the things being bom on Earth; it helps the courses of ships; it
makes moderate increases in [the flow] of rivers, and an abun-
dance of fruits, and things similar to these.
To these add that when it is moderately hot and dry, it is the au-
thor of fine weather, and it excites pleasant and healthy winds, es-
pecially northern ones, and it moderates excessive heat or cold.
But Mars having obtained the sole rulership, is generally the
cause of corruption on account of dryness. And when the events
pertain to men, it will stir up wars, internal seditions, captivities,
the fall of cities, tumult among the people, the anger of Princes,
and sudden murders on account of those causes. Moreover, it will
also cause tertian fevers, eruptions of blood, acute illnesses, vio-
lent illnesses, deaths of young people, violence, injuries, fires, ho-
micides, looting, armed robberies. And in the air, it will cause hot
spells, winds that are hot, pestilential, and withering, bolts of
lightning, whirlwinds, droughts.
And on the sea, sudden shipwrecks on account of turbulent con-
ditions, and lightning, and similar causes. And in rivers, it will ab-
sorb the waters, dry up springs, and corrupt the waters. It dimin-
128

=== Page 139 ===
ishes crops and things growing on the Earth, and either on account
of the heat that it brought in previously, or else it destroys things
brought in by fires.
Add to these, that since Mars is intensely hot and dry, if it is in a
fire sign, in the summer and in a hotter climate, it will harm more
seriously, and especially hotter natures, and it will make hot spells,
lightning flashes, thunder, bolts of lightning, and hail. And in wa-
ter signs, with watery or stormy stars, and especially with the
Pleiades, it will stir up rains and strong storms.
Venus, when it rules alone, generally does things similar to Ju-
piter, with a certain pleasantness. But in general it bestows on men
glory, honors, joy, abundance of years, happy marriages, and nu-
merous offspring, pleasure in friendships and associations, in-
creases in wealth, cleanliness in livelihood, affability, and rever-
ence for religion; and besides, good bodily condition, and familiar
association with Princes. And in the air, temperate winds, humid
and fertile conditions, good and serene weather, fertile rains, fortu-
nate and lucrative voyages, overflowing rivers, plenty of pack
horses, and an abundance of fruits of the Earth.
Add to these things, that since Venus is moderately hot and very
humid, it is not without cause said to be the "mother of rains," es-
pecially from [a position] in water signs, and then from [being] in
Aquarius,1 when no dry planet is aspecting it.
Mercury, when it rules alone, generally accommodates itself to
that star to which it is joined, but it signifies rapid motions. In hu-
man affairs, it signifies rapidity, diligence, and skill in those things
that are done. It is an instigator in armed robberies, thefts, and pi-
racy. It makes difficulties in breathing when joined to malefics,
and dry illnesses, and daily fevers, coughs, gasping for breath,
wasting; and changes in religious usage, in religions themselves,
'Despite Morin's protestations against assigning the natures of the constellations
to the signs with the same names, he here reverses himself and views the air sign
Aquarius as a sign signifying water, since the constellation is that of Aquarius
'The Waterman'.
129

=== Page 140 ===
in royal revenues, institutions and laws, according to the nature of
the star to which it is joined. In the air, since it is dry and quick and
revolves closely about the Sun, it is stirring up winds that are irreg-
ular, swift, and suddenly changeable, thunder, lightning, fissures,
earthquakes, and lightning bolts. And from these causes, it is occa-
sionally deadly to animals and plants. When it is occidental, it di-
minishes [the flow of] rivers; when it is oriental, it increases them.
It occurs [to me] that it ought to be added here that Ptolemy and
the rest of the astrologers make Mercury to be of a versatile nature
and one easily changeable into another nature, which it receives ei-
ther from the sign in which it is posited, or from some other Planet
to which it is connected by body or by aspect. But if it were [like
that], why did Ptolemy attribute particular effects to it that do not
suit any other Planet? And so, the same thing must be judged about
Mercury as about the other individual Planets—namely, that each
one of them has its own fixed and immutable nature, according to
which it acts individually, and that nature cannot be changed into
another nature, either from [the nature of] the sign, or from a Planet
connected to it; but Mercury does act with the sign in which it is
posited, and along with the Planets with which it is connected as
partner in its action, just as we have said about all the planets in
Book 20, Section 3.
Nevertheless, it can be said that its nature is such that it is con-
trary to no other one of the Planets in such a way that it would sup-
press their effects; but it accommodates itself to all of them, and it
aids all of them in their own actions, and it is aided by them in turn
in its own actions, which are swiftness, mobility, ingenuity, art,
science, skill, craftiness, etc.; so that, consequently it may be sup-
posed to change its nature from its own nature into that of others.
But after these things, Ptolemy added1:
"Such is the proper nature of each Planet as I
have said, that the planets by themselves but
1 Tetrabiblos II. 8, Section 88.
130

=== Page 141 ===
mixed with others according to the variety of the
signs, and aspects, and positions with respect to
the Sun, change their actions conformably, and
various qualities result from the communication
of natures. Moreover, since it would be impossi-
ble to set forth the qualities of the individual mix-
tures, and to recite all the configurations, of which
there is so great a variety, this consideration may
be left to the sagacity and prudence of individual
mathematicians."
and this squares with the first Aphorism of the Centiloquy.1
Besides, it would disturb no one that he did not propose the effects
of the Planets set down above for the annual Revolution of the World,
but rather for eclipses, which he judged wrongly to be the prime and
most effective universal cause of sublunar effects, [for which, see]
Tetrabiblos, Book 2, Chapter 4. For in Chapter 10, where the quarters
of the year are discussed, and in Chapter 12, where the months or the
common conjunctions of the Sun and the Moon are discussed, he
hands down a method of judging that is no different than that for
echpses, but he wants to erect celestial charts and select their rulers,
and from them to render judgment, just as for eclipses.
And the truth of the matter is that the rulers of the year do not act
otherwise than the rulers of eclipses or common lunations; but if
Mars (for example) is ruler of the year, an eclipse, or a common lu-
nation, it will make the same kind of thing in [all] these individual
constitutions if its celestial and terrestrial state is the same, and the
rest [of the indications] are in agreement; although it can produce
far greater and more intense effects of its own nature if in that same
'For a translation of that Aphorism, see James Herschel Holden, Five Medieval
Astrologers (Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2007): Ptolemy, Centiloquy, Aphorism 1.
"From you and from knowledge, for it is not possible for the one knowing to pro-
claim the particular forms of affairs; wherefore, the perception does not receive
the particular form of the perceptible thing, but something general. And the one
searching must guess at the affairs. For only those who are inspired predict the
particular things also."
131

=== Page 142 ===
year it is the ruler of the Mundane Revolution of the Sun, and if
most of the lunations are also in the ecliptic,1 especially
immediately following themselves.
A major difficulty appears in this—[namely,] that Ptolemy in
[his discussion of] universal constitutions excludes the Sun and the
Moon from rulership. And then Julius Firmicus Matemus, running
riot here and there in his astrology with the fictions and trifles of
the Arabs,2 excluded those same Lights from the rulership of a na-
tivity, "as if (says Pontano) they would scorn the particular duty
and descend to that slavery; and they therefore entrust that [task] to
a subordinate Planet, in whose terms or in the terms of the Sun they
are found by day, or [in those of] the Moon by night."
But this doctrine is absolutely false on account of the fictitious-
ness of the terms,3 and the similar [statements] of stupid opinion
by the old philosophers, who used to say that God does not con-
cern himself with sublunar things, but He had entrusted their gov-
ernance to intelligences and other causes inferior to Himself. But
other astrologers do admit the Sun and the Moon to the rulership of
universal constitutions; and Origanus reviews their effects in his
Introduction, Part 3, Chapter 3.4 But why they allow [this], and
'That is, if they are also eclipses.
2This statement seems to imply that Morin thought that Firmicus's book, the
Mathesis, contained astrological opinions from the Arabs, which is of course
false! Firmicus wrote in the 4th century, and the Arabs knew nothing about as-
trology until the 8th century. Perhaps, because Morin found statements in
Firmicus that agreed with statements in the much later books of the Arabian as-
trologers, he assumed that Firmicus had copied them from the Arabs. Actually,
the coincidence of opinions was due to the fact unknown to Morin—that both
Firmicus, and later the Arabs, had based their astrology on earlier Greek sources.
So if Morin did not like some of their statements, he was actually criticizing
Greek astrology, not Arabian astrology.
3Morin had concluded that the terms were worthless because he could not see any
astronomical basis for them. See his discussion in Book 15, Chapter 13, where he
even goes so far as to ascribe their invention to the Devil. Actually, unknown to
him, they were devised by the Alexandrian inventors of Horoscopic Astrology in
the 2nd century B.C., but since their early books are lost, we do not know what
their rationale was.
4Perhaps a reference to David Origanus, Astrologia naturalis... 'Natural astrol-
ogy ...' (Marseille: J. B. Senius, 1645).
132

=== Page 143 ===
[thereby] depart from Ptolemy's opinion, neither they, nor
Origanus offer any explanation. But from the principles and the
doctrine previously set forth by us, the difficulty will be elucidated
thus.
It is certain, and [the idea] is received by all astrologers, that the
Sun and the Moon have their own natures, domiciles, exaltations,
and triplicities, according to which they act, just as they are deter-
mined in every constitution, whether it is universal or particular,
even as the rest of the Planets; therefore, by whatever reason they
are admitted to the rulership of a constitution, the Sun and the
Moon by that same reason should also be admitted to that ruler-
ship, and this is all the more just because the Sun and the Moon are
the principal and primary Planets, as is also proven from Ptol-
emy's [statements] cited above, and is witnessed by astrology as a
whole, just as it has been alluded to by us in many places; and no
reason given above can be supposed to be more valid by which
they are excluded, and a Prince is [thus made] inferior to his own
satellites.
For if a comparison is offered to Kings, with which the Sun has
a manifest analogy, and the one who entrusts the administration of
his own kingdom to his own subordinates. I say that, with this
comparison also having been admitted between physical and polit-
ical things, a true King and one worthy of the name (namely, one
who has the knowledge and practice of ruling), entrusts not only
his own wars and battles to the commanders of his own army, his
own justice to the Senate, and secret things and of greater moment
to his own chancellor and to the Secret Council, but he even en-
trusts himself when things demand it in battles, to the senate and
the Council personally he is in between; and by his own majesty,
his experience in ruling, his magnanimity, his fairness and pru-
dence not only in commanding, but also in accomplishing, he does
more than any commander, or Senate, or the entire Council; and so
truly solemnly and gloriously he rules his own kingdom; not, how-
ever, solely by the mask of his name, as we have heard has hap-
pened with Kings who were lazy, ignorant, effeminate, and inca-
133

=== Page 144 ===
pable of acting, who, unable to perform by themselves the admin-
istration of the kingdom, abandon it to subjects; nor do they take
any interest in those things that they do [that lead to] the
destruction of the people and the ruination of the kingdom.
Similarly, therefore, when the Sun, the King of the Planets and
the sublunar World—both by itself and through its followers—is
the most powerful director, the most watchful and the fairest ap-
pointed by God; it will be prepollent in celestial charts; it itself by
its own virtue governs principally the effects of a constitution.
Moreover, when its followers are prepollent in rulership, the Sun
regulates the effects more through them than through itself. But
the followers of the Sun always respect its majesty and power in
acting, both because they receive their motion from it, and because
from their varied position with respect to the Sun or to the Moon,
they vary their own virtue of acting.
Moreover, the difference of the effects [arising] from the ruler-
ship of the Lights and their followers consists especially of this, af-
ter the diversity due to nature and virtue; because when the Sun
and the Moon have taken command, the effects are greater, more
illustrious, and more famous than when one of the other Planets
rules; and, among men, they mainly pertain to Popes, Emperors,
Kings, Queens, Princes, Magnates, Kingdoms, Republics, and
Universities.
Besides, something from Ptolemy must be noted here. First, by
the name Saturn, not only the Planet should be understood, but
also the saturnine nature in general, which is common to both Sat-
urn, and to the fixed stars and signs of the zodiac that are of the na-
ture of Saturn; and therefore, it must be noted whether the satur-
nine nature prevails by means of such bodies in a universal consti-
tution; and the same thing must be thought about Jupiter, Mars,
and the rest of the Planets.
Second. Mixtures of the rulers of universal constitutions must
be understood to be not only mixtures of other Planets, but also of
134

=== Page 145 ===
the fixed stars, and the signs in which the ruling Planets are pos-
ited, or with which they are conjoined.
Third. Ptolemy opined thus: "The Sun and the Moon in univer-
sal constitutions are the principal causes of events, and they con-
trol the rulerships of the stars and the powers of the rulers, either
strengthening or weakening them." And Cardan in his Commen-
tary explains this thus:
"Namely, because the Lights in eclipses (about
which Ptolemy is then talking) signify a disposi-
tion of that magnitude for the quantity of an
eclipse; and the Lights can be compared to the fire
in a lit furnace, which signifies nothing else ex-
cept that many things can be done by the aid of it.
And because if it is great, great things can be
done; but if it is little, [only] little things; how-
ever, not whether bricks should be baked, or glass
liquified, or silver refined, etc.; for these things
belong to the 5 Planets—namely, to define the
quality of the event."
However, that that is not a true explanation is proved thus. Be-
cause Cardan places no difference between the eclipses of the Sun
and those of the Moon, as far as their events or disposition; and he
seems to want the same disposition to be signified by either of the
Lights experiencing an eclipse, which only consists of this, that
many things can be done by the aid of a Light that is being
eclipsed—not saying whether either of them rules this or that,
since however the Sun and the Moon differ in nature between
themselves, which Cardan cannot deny; and therefore they always
differ in their effects, whether in an eclipse or not, and each of
them always acts for itself by its own virtue, even as a fire by its
own nature bakes bricks, or melts glass, or refines silver.
Besides, he does not put any particular difference for the Lights
between the things effectuated by their eclipses by conjunction
135

=== Page 146 ===
and the things effectuated by their eclipses by opposition, which
however is opposed to the nature of their syzygies; and the Sun
conjoined to the Moon does not do the same thing as when it is op-
posed to the Moon. Finally, because from that same fire, bricks are
baked, and glass is liquified, which are two contrary effects, the
reason for the contrariety cannot be sought from the action of the
fire, which is the same, but from the subjects experiencing [its
heat]. Therefore Cardan badly compares the 5 Planets to those sub-
jects, which, in the case of the effects of eclipses are not experienc-
ing causes but effecting causes, since they rule the eclipse.
And so, it seems to us that it should rather be said that from
Book 13, Section II, Chapter 2, and the Table of Universal Ruler-
ship of the Planets mentioned above, that the Sun and the Moon
have their own formal virtues and their own formal effects that are
different from the effects of the other 5 Planets; then, they have
their own kinds of things that they principally rule, either by nature
or by analogy, in addition to their universal rulership over these
sublunar things. So, the Sun and the Moon, in their periodic Revo-
lutions back to their own radical places at the beginning of the
World, renew their own force over all these sublunar things, and
they principally renew their own kinds of things for themselves,
but depending upon the other Planets when those Planets rule a
universal constitution of the Lights themselves.
And therefore the Sun of course actively determines its own ef-
fects [as affected by] the other five Planets; and due to that it is not
unreasonable that Ptolemy says that the Sun controls their ruler-
ships, and he increases or diminishes theirforces according to their
position with respect to the Sun; but the quality of their own effects
is not changed by those things, which is diverse in accordance with
the diversity of the ruling Planet. And the same thing must be said
about the Moon.
But in the conjunctions and oppositions of the Sun and the
Moon, when even without an eclipse, the kinds of things, or the
proper universal effects of the Sun and the Moon, are com-
136

=== Page 147 ===
bined—like husband and wife—to which combination the other
five Planets, having attained the rulership of the constitution, are
also determined, as if they were compelled to act on those kinds of
things and the whole sublunar empire of the Sun and the Moon, or
as if the Sun and the Moon would be joined together to control and
manage their own force and their own effects, because each Planet
accomplishes [something] according to its own nature, force, and
state, as is done between Kings and Dukes, or the commanders of
their own armies, of which some act well, others badly, but each
one acts according to his own force and inclination; or similarly,
between a master and his servants.
Which explanation is consistent with the mind of Ptolemy and
with experience, a thing which should be discussed more clearly.
And from this it is plainly evident that the Sun and the Moon in
universal constitutions are always the primary Planets, or the
Princes as Cardan says, and they act primarily according to their
own nature; but the rest [of the Planets] act only as satellites or sec-
ondary [Planets]; which is contradictory to the Copemican sys-
tem.1 And these things [are said] about the effects [resulting] from
the nature of the rulers of the year.
Chapter 5. The special Effects of the Rulers of the Year
[that result] from their own celestial State, and first,
by reason of the Sign in which they are posited.
There are 4 things to be especially looked at in the celestial
state. Namely, the sign in which [a Planet] is posited, its connec-
tion with the other Planets, its position with respect to the Sun and
the Moon, and also its motion.
With regard to the first of these, the old [astrologers] have
handed down to us a very vast forest of aphorisms on the effects of
the Planets in the individual signs, the greater part of which are not
to be trusted, and they do not agree with experiences; besides
which, some of them are contradictory to others. And this has
'Remember that Morin was opposed to the Copemican system.
137

=== Page 148 ===
arisen from this—that the starry signs1 were confounded with the
[true] signs that were unknown at that time; or effects were not as-
cribed to their own genuine causes, as is still the case here and
there in nativities, from which the true principles of astrology have
not yet been deduced.
However, it has been received by all astrologers, and it is cer-
tain that the qualities of the Planets, signs, and fixed stars should
be combined. And hence it must be judged that the latitude of the
place and the quarter of the year must be taken into account. And
this must be taken for a firm foundation, without which it does not
appear that anything else could be substituted, and it could not be
judged to be in any way scientific. Add that no small part of the
aphorisms received from the old [astrologers] chiefly squares with
that foundation. That is, the virtue of the signs surpassing the vir-
tue of the fixed stars, or the fixed stars following the nature of the
signs in acting, as is the case with all the Planets.
But truly in this place there occurs something that is most wor-
thy of note. Namely, that the division of the signs into fire, air, wa-
ter, and earth seems to have been unknown to Ptolemy.2 For even
though in Tetrabiblos, Book 1, Chapter 11, discussing the natural
properties of the 12 signs, he divides them into tropical, equinoc-
tial, fixed, and bicorporeal (which division is better explained by
mobile, fixed, and common signs); and Chapter 12 divides them
into masculine and feminine signs; and Book 2, Chapter 11, dis-
cusses the particular force and nature of the signs for varying the
constitutions of the air. And yet, neither in these places, nor in
Book 3, Chapter 11, where he discusses the form and temperament
of the body, nor anywhere else, does he make any mention of the
signs, as if they are inherently of this or that elemental nature; and
'That is, the constellations.
2This is true. Nor was this division mentioned by Dorotheus (1st century), Por-
phyry (end of the 3rd century), or Paul of Alexandria (4th century). However, it
was mentioned by Teucer of Babylon (1st century) and Firmicus Maternus (4th
century)—although only Aries and Pisces survive in the MSS of the
Mathesis- -dx\& by Rhetorius (beginning of the 6th century).
138

=== Page 149 ===
only in that Chapter 11 of Book 2, does he determine the natures of
the signs by the fixed stars that in his age or thereabouts were per-
ceived in the signs, whose essence had scarcely become known in
that age, but their proper natures had even much more escaped
notice.
Whence, it is not surprising that the astrologers of that time,
having perceived the very slow motion of the fixed stars into the
following [signs], should have thought it to be the signs that did
not have any action from themselves, and that their action was
from the fixed stars that they had in them; and to call anything
[done by] them according to what the Sun does in them, as
Firminus1 notes from Haly in his Repertory, Part 1, Chapter 1,
which is evidently to assert that those signs themselves are of no
virtue. But posterity discovered this to be false; and we have
shown its falsity here and there in the present work.
It is also no wonder that Ptolemy had followed his predecessor
astrologers, not otherwise for the nature of the signs, which he had
defined by the fixed stars that he had included within them, and
that each sign was not of the same nature [throughout its extent],
but he said that it was different in the beginning, the middle, and
the end2; and again he made the northern part of the sign to be dif-
ferent in virtue from the southern part, which cannot be said of the
true signs, each one of which is the same per se and of a single na-
ture throughout the whole expanse of the sign. But from this, an-
other evil follows—certainly, that by confounding the true signs
with the constellations slowly crawling along under them, they
were not able to know the proper virtues of either the constella-
tions or the true signs. And consequently, it is no wonder that from
that source of ignorance, an amazing hotch-potch of aphorisms
flowed, but of uncertain truth.
'Firmin de Beauval (fl. 1338), Repertohum de mutatione aeris 'A Treatise on
Changes in the Air' (Paris: lacobus Kerver, 1539. folio). Not Firmicus (4th cen-
tury), as Hieroz mistakenly translates the text.
2Perhaps because he had in mind that each sign contained three decans.
139

=== Page 150 ===
It was added to these, that after Ptolemy, the elemental nature of
the true signs having been detected, and with them divided into
triplicities of fire, air, water, and earth, as Albohazen Haly1 did in
Part 1, Chapter 1, Al-Kindi and the other Arabs divided the fixed
stars of the Zodiac into 28 equal spaces, each one of 12052', which
they call Mansions of the Moon,3 during its synodic Revolution
with the Sun, having made their beginning from the first star of
Aries,4 which in this year 1648 is found in 28° 18' of the sign Aries;
and they assign the proper nature to each mansion in imitation of
Ptolemy; and they have handed down a Table of the Mansions.
They will have it that when Planets, and especially the Moon,
are posited in one of those Mansions, they act upon these inferior
things in accordance with the elemental nature of that space of the
Mansion—that is, of the fixed stars occupying that Mansion. But
since Ptolemy had made the signs to be in a constant site, when he
said that some are tropical, and others equinoctial, from that it re-
sults that these Mansions of the Moon are ambulatory through the
signs of the zodiac according to the motion of the fixed stars.
But about that Table of the Mansions, which is held to be an ar-
cane thing, there is not lacking a cause to be distrustful.
First, because from many Tables of that sort that I have seen, no
mansion is hot or cold; but they are only put down as humid, dry,
or temperate; which, however, does not agree with Ptolemy, who
! Albohazen Haly is another name for Haly Abenragel or ""Alt ibn abi al-Rijal
(11th century). The reference is to his book, The Complete Book on the Judg-
ments of the Stars, where in the third paragraph of Book 1, Chapter 1, he says,
And these signs are fiery, earthy, airy, and watery.... And in the next paragraph
he identifies them, Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius are fiery, etc.
^a'qub al-Kindi (9th century), Iraqi astrological writer. Probably Morin's refer-
ence is to his book De nubibus etpluuiis... 'On Clouds and Rains...' in an omni-
bus volume of astrological tracts (Venice; Peter Liechtenstein, 1507.)
3See the Table in question at the end of Chapter 6 below.
^he star Sharatan or P Arietis, in 1648 was in 29 T 04. Morin states its longitude
as 28 T 18, which is close to its longitude 28 T 23 in Tycho's Catalogue as pre-
sented in Kepler's Rudolphine Tables. Morin perhaps forgot to add the preces-
sion from 1600 to 1648.
140

=== Page 151 ===
acknowledges many parts of the signs to be hot, though none to be
cold; and it cannot agree with the truth, since many of them are
firmly hot, humid, cold, dry, or of the nature of the individual Plan-
ets, some of which are hot and dry like the Sun and Mars; some are
hot and humid, like Venus; some are cold and dry, like Saturn and
Mercury; and others are cold and humid, like the Moon; with Ptol-
emy himself acknowledging that.
Second, because with the nature of the true signs unknown,
Ptolemy could not have known the natures of the constellations or
the fixed stars; and therefore the natures of the Mansions (which
cannot be said to be the Mansions of the Moon, rather than the
Mansions of some other Planet) taken from that, could not be true.
And if God, the Best and the Greatest, shall have given us life, for
expounding brief observations on the text of the Tetrabiblos,1 it
will be evidently plain what should be felt about such a book of
names, whose individual words Cardan has indeed faithfully hon-
ored, and whose principal fundamentals have already been justly
condemned by us many times.
But meanwhile, in such difficulties, what should we feel
obliged to do? Should we also pass down to posterity the particular
aphorisms about the universal effects of the Planets in the individ-
ual signs of the zodiac, along with the Table of the Mansions of the
Moon that have been handed down to us by the old [astrologers]?
Certainly, while it is alien to my intelligence to expound things
that are evidently uncertain, and I would prefer to make public a
defect in this part of astrology, so that what was not accomplished
by our predecessors, our successors might try to supply by their
own efforts and observations—namely, by observing the true and
proper natures of the fixed stars—[but] it seems safer to hand
down only general aphorisms regarding this matter, based on the
above said foundation. The truth of which no astrologer initiated in
the legitimate principles of the science can call into doubt or even
'This seems to imply that Morin had in mind to write a brief commentary on parts
of the Tetrabiblos.
141

=== Page 152 ===
overturn, if indeed those aphorisms also make known something
to disclose the natures of the fixed stars.
For, since the nature of a sign is the same in its beginning, mid-
dle, and end, when it happens that a Planet, especially the ruler of a
constitution, being posited for a long time in a sign, produces
something new on these inferior things, apart from a connection by
body or by aspect with another Planet agreeing with the effect, or
with another place in that constitution. It can safely be said that
that effect is from the fixed stars to which the first Planet is con-
joined, or with which it rises, culminates, or sets, especially if it
was one of the first or second magnitude. And therefore, we do not
advise a student astrologer against experimenting with the apho-
risms handed down by the old [astrologer], so that the truth that
they may contain may be discovered and observed, provided that
they may not be deterred by a labyrinth of confusion and the
frequent encounter with contrary aphorisms.
And so:
First. If the Planet that is ruler of the year is in its own sign, it
will act powerfully according to its own nature; but if the Planet
agrees by its own extrinsic nature with the sign, it will act more
powerfully elementally according to the nature of the sign; other-
wise, it will act more powerfully influentially according to the na-
ture of the sign. And therefore, Mars in Aries will heat more and
will dry elementally; but in Scorpio, it will chill more and humid-
ify influentially; with the nature of Mars itself flourishing and
common to both. But the Sun, a Planet of a single nature, when it is
in Leo, only heats and dries per se, both elementally and influen-
tially. And so with the rest [of the Planets].
Second. If the planet that is the ruler of the year is not in its own
sign, it will act with the nature of the sign in which it is posited, and
the ruler of that sign, which, if it is in that same sign, such as with
Saturn ruler of the year posited with Jupiter in Pisces, Jupiter will
powerfully concur per se and by its own sign with the future events
142

=== Page 153 ===
of that year. But if it is in an alien sign,' but one of the same
triplicity, as with Jupiter posited in Cancer or Scorpio, its con-
course will also still be powerful on account of the same nature of
the sign and the trine aspect of the Planets. But if it is in a sign that
is altogether of a diverse nature, but in its own domicile—as Jupi-
ter posited in Sagittarius—when Saturn ruler of the year is in Pis-
ces, it will still act strongly jointly, indeed it will prevail over Sat-
urn; but if it is peregrine in a sign of a diverse nature—as with Jupi-
ter posited in Taurus or Gemini—then the virtue of Jupiter on the
effects of the year will be weak, and therefore the effects of Saturn
would be less.
Third. When the planet that is the ruler of the year is in an alien
sign, not only must that sign be taken into account, but also its
ruler; for Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius do not do the same things,
even though they are of the same triplicity, because they belong to
3 different Planets. It must therefore be seen which Planet is the
ruler of that sign, and what its nature is, and what its state is, so that
it may be plain whether it supports the proper effects of the ruler of
the year, or whether it contradicts them.
Fourth. When the ruler of the year is in an alien sign, and its
ruler is similarly in an alien sign, and without any mutual recep-
tion, there must also be taken into account the ruler of that second
sign, but not its ruler; for the virtue of a ruler vanishes beyond the
second rulership, and it does not go around in a circle.
Fifth. Saturn in all the water signs does not give water, at least
not always, even though by its own nature it is disposed to rains on
account of its frigidity; but the state of the Moon, Mars, and Jupi-
ter, the rulers of Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, which by their own
nature and state either help or hinder, must be taken into account,
and especially if they aspect Saturn. And the rule is the same with
the rest of the Planets, at least in accordance with the rational laws
of judgments.
'That is, a sign which it does not rule.
143

=== Page 154 ===
Sixth. It sometimes happens that by accident Planets act in [a
manner] contrary to their own natures. For example, that the Sun in
Leo may cause rains in place of mild weather—namely, when it in-
cites more vapors than it can dissipate—either on account of its no-
ticeable heat with the briefer stay that it makes above the horizon,
or on account of a region that has too many vapors, all of which the
Sun cannot dispel, even with a longer stay above the horizon, or on
account of an aspect from a Planet that is rainy by nature or by its
celestial state.
Seventh. Any Planet, [posited] in signs agreeing extrinsically
with its own nature, acts in accordance with that nature. Such as
the Sun, Jupiter, and Mars in fire signs naturally bringing heat;
Saturn in water and earth signs bringing cold; the Moon in water
signs bringing moisture.
Eighth. It must be seen from the ruler of the year and its celes-
tial state what quality will rise up and what it may be able to do to
sublunar things, in the air, in the water, on Earth, and in kinds of
mixed and living things, having taken into account the place and
the quarter of the year.
Ninth. Those effects that do not agree with the above said
causes, and that will not be from syzygies or transits producing
them, must be thought to be made by the fixed stars with which the
rulers of the year are located, or with which they rise, culminate, or
set, or with which there are new Moons, eclipses, great conjunc-
tions, and other universal constitutions.
Chapter 6. The special Effects of the Planets
that are Rulers of the Year by reason of their
Connection -with other Planets or Fixed Stars.
That the Planets according to their diverse connection among
themselves by body or by aspect, produce diverse effects upon
these sublunar things, both universal in universal constitutions,
and particular ones in particular natal charts, was shown in Book
19 and elsewhere. And no astrologer can be in doubt about this,
144

=== Page 155 ===
nor indeed can any philosopher (except perhaps one who is truly
ignorant of celestial things) doubt it. For the terrestrial Globe of it-
self would always be the same and would not experience any
changes, except from extrinsic causes, namely those that would be
caused by the celestial bodies.
And if the Planets were to revolve only in a single annual mo-
tion, always at the same distance from each other, as the fixed stars
do; then in no way could a reason be given why the individual
parts of individual years would be different, but there would be a
plain cause why they should be equal. But since, therefore, in the
truth of the matter they are unequal, and no summer is entirely sim-
ilar to the one closely preceding or following it, and neither are the
years similar, it must necessarily be declared that their dissimilar-
ity is caused by the different motions and mutual combinations of
the planets. Therefore, having assumed this, we should now say
from [the writings] of the old astrologers what each one of them
connected with the others does, [and] in what thing they agree
among themselves, so that this doctrine may seem to have been
handed down minimally from our predecessors to our posterity.
But five things must be noted here in advance.
First. There are only seven different legitimate configurations
among the Planets, namely the conjunction, the semi-sextile, the
sextile, the square, the trine, the opposition, and the quincunx,
whose foundation in Nature has been shown by us in Book 16,
Section I, Chapter 4. Moreover, the rest of the aspects introduced
and approved by Kepler and others ignorant of astrology, are re-
jected by us as illegitimate.
Second. Although all these configurations are effective [in their
action] on these sublunar things, the old astrologers, however,
only expounded three of them in the matter of universal constitu-
tions—namely, the conjunction, the square, and the opposition.
And that is because those are more powerful than the rest of them,
for the reason that was stated by us previously—namely, because
145

=== Page 156 ===
when one of the configured Planets is in an angle of the chart, the
other is also found in an angle, which indeed increases the strength
of both Planets; and therefore the configuration of both of them
acts more strongly.
Third. The conjunction is the strongest and most effective one
of the configurations—not by reason of its light, as Magini1
thought in the Introduction to his Ephemerides—since the other
configurations are not lacking in the light of the configured Plan-
ets; but because a united force is stronger than a dispersed one; but
in the case of the conjunction, it is the greatest union of the Planets
that can be, for they are in the same line and in the same place in
the Caelum with respect to the Earth. In the case of the opposition,
they are in fact in the same line, but not in the same place in the
Caelum. In the case of the square and the rest [of the aspects], they
are neither in the same line, nor in the same place in the Caelum.
And consequently, after the conjunction, the opposition is the
stronger, then the square on account of the cause mentioned
previously.
Fourth. The old [astrologers], at least in universal constitu-
tions, attribute the same effects to those three configurations, the
conjunction, the square, and the opposition, which however is con-
trary to the elements of astrology. And although the conjunction,
square, or opposition of Saturn and Jupiter can affect the same
sublunar material; nevertheless, it is alien to reason that they
would affect it in the same manner or to the same extent, and that
Saturn would do the same thing or act in the same manner when
conjoined to Jupiter as when it is square or opposite Jupiter, espe-
cially in the case of human affairs, in which the square and the op-
position of the malefics are accustomed to stir up unfortunate
[conditions].
'Giovanni Antonio Magini (1555-1617), professor of astrology, astronomy, and
mathematics at the University of Bologna. The reference is to his Ephemerides
coelestium motuum...ab anno 1608 ad annum 1630... cum supplemento
isagogicamm ephemeridum... 'Ephemerides of the Celestial Motions... from
the Year 1608 to the Year 1630... with a Supplemental Introduction to the
Ephemerides...' (Frankfurt: Wolfgang Richter, 1610,).
146

=== Page 157 ===
Fifth. In the aphorisms that follow, note must always be taken
of the quarter of the year. Spring, moreover, is hot and humid;
Summer is hot and dry; Autumn is cold and dry; and Winter is cold
and humid. And therefore, some quarters of the year are more fa-
vorable to the causes of heat; others are more favorable to the
causes of cold; some are more favorable to the causes of rain; and
others are more favorable to the causes of dryness. But having
noted these things in advance, the opinions of the ancient [astrolo-
gers], collected by us from their aphorisms, are as follows.
Saturn and Jupiter in conjunction, square, and oppositions on
account of the slowness of their motion, for many days before and
after their [exact] connection stir up changes in the air according to
their own nature and that of the sign that they occupy. If indeed in
fire signs, they produce heat, but especially dryness. In water
signs, great rains and [outbreaks of] plague. In air signs, many
winds and storms. In earth signs, spells of cold weather, frost,
dense clouds and turbid air. In the spring, moreover, particularly
humid and turbulent air; in the summer, hail and thunder; in the au-
tumn, winds and heavy rains; in the winter, turbid weather, snows,
and frost.
But it must always be noted which Planet rules in the place of
the conjunction, not only by the dignity of rulership, exaltation, or
triplicity; but also by its nature, both elemental and influential. For
Saturn in earth signs, and especially in Capricorn, will prevail over
Jupiter; then too in air signs and especially in Aquarius. But in fire
signs, and especially in Sagittarius, Jupiter will prevail over Sat-
urn, then too in water signs, and especially in Pisces. Moreover, a
Planet that prevails in the place of a conjunction, will also prevail
over changes, whether they pertain to the air, the water, and the
earth, or to men. Moreover, in the case of the square and the oppo-
sition, it must be seen which [Planet] is stronger in the sign that it
occupies, then which one of them is above the earth and angular.
And for Jupiter to prevail is good, but for Saturn it is evil; and the
same thing must the judged about the other Planets.
147

=== Page 158 ===
Saturn and Mars in conjunction, square, and opposition act
similarly, taking into account [the nature] of the sign. And in fire
signs they generate great and destructive drynesses; in water signs,
rain showers, and heavy rains with hail; in air signs, strong winds,
storms, lightning, thunder, lightning flashes, and corruption of the
air; in earth signs, intense cold, icy cold, snows, and in Capricorn
thunderbolts. In particular, moreover, in the spring they cause
rains and thunder; in the summer thunder and hail storms; in the
autumn rains and turbid air; but in winter a reduction of cold.
Saturn and the Sun in conjunction, square, and opposition,
cools the air, especially in cold signs, and it provides rains and hail
storms; then in air signs, strong and corrupting winds, and espe-
cially in Aquarius and Libra. In particular, moreover, in the spring,
cold and rain; in the summer, hail storms and thunder with a reduc-
tion of heat; in the autumn, rain and cold; but in the winter, wet
weather, turbid, and snows.
Saturn and Venus in conjunction, square, and opposition, gen-
erates showers and cold spells, especially in water signs, where it
also causes hail storms, and in Virgo inundations. In particular,
moreover, in spring, rains and cold; in summer, sudden rains; in
autumn, cold rain; and in winter, rains and snows. And therefore,
almost always the connection of Saturn and Venus is rainy.
Saturn and Mercury in conjunction, square, and opposition,
in wet signs makes turbid air and rains; in fire signs, it produces
dryness; in air signs, strong winds; and in earth signs, cold, and icy
cold; so that in truth these configurations very often generate cold
spells that are harmful to the fruits of Earth. But in particular, in
spring, winds and rain; in summer, winds and hail storms; in fall,
strong winds; in winter, winds and snows. And therefore, always,
or at least most often, they generate winds.
Saturn and the Moon. It generates cold, clouds, rains, and now
and then hail storms, especially in water signs. In particular, more-
over, in spring, it makes the air turbid and humid; in summer, hu-
148

=== Page 159 ===
mid and cold, then too it makes hail storms; in autumn, foggy
weather; but in the winter, very cold, foggy, and snowy.
Jupiter and Mars in conjunction, square, and opposition, in
fire signs produce heat and excessive dryness; in water signs, rains
with lightning flashes, thunder, and thunderbolts; in air signs, fine
weather; in earth signs, dryness. In particular, moreover, in spring
and autumn, it makes turbid air, and windy weather; in the sum-
mer, heat, thunder, and tempests; but in winter, it reduces the cold.
But it must be seen which Planet prevails. For with Jupiter prevail-
ing, it is healthy and fertile; but with Mars prevailing, unhealthy
and corruptive.
Jupiter and the Sun in conjunction, square, and opposition. It
causes delightful and fine weather, temperate heat, and healthy
winds, especially in air signs; and in wet signs, fertilizing rains; in
fire signs, it increases the heat, especially in Leo; and in earth
signs, it dries up and clears up the weather. In particular, moreover,
in spring and autumn, it generates winds; in summer, thunder and
thunderbolts; but in winter, reduction of heat.
Jupiter and Venus in conjunction, square, and opposition,
makes delightful and fine weather and calm air. Moreover, in wa-
ter signs it makes clouds and healthy rains; and these configura-
tions are for the most part fertile, especially when occurring at a
suitable time; and they cause an abundance of fruits. And if Jupiter
prevails, fine weather is more likely produced; but if Venus pre-
vails, rains are more likely.
Jupiter and Mercury in conjunction, square, and opposition,
usually provokes dry spells, especially in fire or air signs, and this
[occurs] in any quarter of the year.
Jupiter and the Moon in conjunction, square, and opposition,
usually causes fine weather and mildness of the air in any time of
the year, and favorable winds; and some times it scatters white
clouds all over the sky.
149

=== Page 160 ===
Mars and the Sun in conjunction, square, and opposition, acts
in accordance with the nature of the signs, but usually with vehe-
mence. In water signs, it certainly stirs up rain showers, thunder,
lightning, hail storms—especially in summer—and with injury; in
fire signs it causes an excess of heat and dryness harmful to living
creatures; in air signs, burning winds; and in earth signs, it reduces
rains. In particular, moreover, in spring and autumn, it causes
winds and dryness; in summer, great heat, thunder, lightning, and
hail storms; and in winter, it causes a reduction of cold.
Mars and Venus in conjunction, square, and opposition, in wa-
ter signs produces much water; but in other signs it makes fine
weather and temperate conditions and few rains. In particular,
moreover, in spring and autumn, it bestows rains, also on the very
day if the conjunction is made in Scorpio1; in summer, fine
weather and few rain showers; in winter, a reduction of cold.
Mars and Mercury in conjunction, square, and opposition, in
fire signs, especially in Leo, it causes a harmful excess of heat and
dryness; in water signs, rain showers; in air signs, strong winds
changing direction with rapidity, because both Planets are impetu-
ous. In autumn, it makes hail storms and winds driving clouds. In
winter and spring, it causes snows; in summer, thunder, and hail
storms.
Mars and the Moon in conjunction, square, and opposition, in
water signs, it excites rain; in fire signs, almost always dryness, but
sometimes yellow and reddish clouds scattered over the sky,
sometimes rainy conditions; in air signs, lightning flashes, thun-
der, and hail storms, especially in the summer, and sometimes a
rainbow and rain.
The Sun and Venus in conjunction in water signs bestows
rains; and in spring, autumn, and winter, in fire and air signs, fine
weather.
'The conjunction in Scorpio can only happen in the late summer, autumn, or early
winter.
150

=== Page 161 ===
The Sun and Mercury in conjunction in air signs causes
winds; in water signs, rains; and in fire signs, dryness.
The Sun and the Moon in conjunction, square, and opposition,
acts with the nature of the signs and their rulers. And therefore, it
sometimes produces dry spells, sometimes winds, and sometimes
calm weather. Besides, the conjunction in the summer is judged to
be hot; in the winter, very cold; but the opposition acts in a con-
trary manner, unless Saturn confuses things.
Venus and Mercury in conjunction certainly acts according to
the nature of the signs, but it inclines more to rain showers; and it
produces inundations when it occurs at the time of a conjunction,
square, or opposition of the Sun and the Moon.
Venus and the Moon in conjunction, square, and opposition
inclines to gentle rains, rain showers, and snows; it produces
cloudy and foggy weather, and it reduces the heat.
Mercury and the Moon in conjunction, square, and opposition
acts according to the nature of the signs, but it inclines more to
winds; and it varies the weather quickly on account of the velocity
of their motion.
Besides, the above said configurations of the planets have a
greater force for the above said effects when the Moon also affects
other configured Planets by her own conjunction, square, or oppo-
sition. Moreover, when not just 2 but 3 or 4 Planets at the same
time are conjoined, squared, or opposed, greater effects are signi-
fied, and more commingled, which can nevertheless be conjec-
tured from the simple configuration given above, unless one
wishes to consult the English Summary,1 where one comes upon a
huge hotch-potch of aphorisms. And when many Planets are pos-
ited together in the same triplicity, they act powerfully according
to the nature of that triplicity. That is, in fire they produce an ex-
cess of heat and dryness, and from that, illnesses and sterility; in
'Probably a reference to some Latin astrological treatise by an English astrologer.
151

=== Page 162 ===
water, a harmful abundance of rains; and Mars and Saturn
especially cause that to be evil.
But since the Moon's power on these sublunar things is the
greatest on account of her distance from the Earth being the least
of the Planets, her applications to the other Planets must be care-
fully noted in her synods, especially those with the Sun immedi-
ately preceding the Sun's Ingress into the cardinal points. For ap-
plying to Saturn, she will advance his own effects upon the ele-
ments and upon mankind; and so with Jupiter, Mars, etc. Besides,
when she is increasing her light and applying to Planets that are di-
rect, she bestows fine weather, but if she is applying to retrograde
Planets, she bestows rains.
In addition, the configurations of the Planets must also be un-
derstood to be not only mutual configurations among themselves,
but also with the fixed stars, and especially with those that by their
own magnitude or nature, or by their particular association (such
as the Pleiades or Scorpio) are perceived to be more effective for
altering these sublunar things. For which, you will either consult
the following Table of the 28 Mansions of the Moon, constructed
according to the mind of Ptolemy1 and the other old astrologers,
and accommodated to this century; or your own particular experi-
ences made by careful judgment, which will perchance be safer.
Moreover, the first Mansion of the Moon, corresponding to the
experience of the old astrologers with the fixed stars, will begin in
the year 1660 according to Tycho at 28 T 28, where the first star
'Ptolemy knew nothing of the Mansions of the Moon. They were traditional
among the Arabs and first became known in the West during the Middle Ages.
Several books by Arabian astrologers mention them, and there were also some
tracts wrongly attributing them to Dorotheus and the Indians (due to confusion
with the Hindu nakshatras). The book by the famous twelfth-century translator
John of Seville, Epitome totius asirologiae (Niimberg: Montanus & Neuber,
1548), Book 4, Chapter 18, has a table of them with the name of the determinant
star, the longitude (measured at intervals of 12051' from the first star), the effect
on the weather (dry, humid, etc.), and whether the mansion is fortunate or unfor-
tunate. A convenient modem source is Vivian E. Robson, The Fixed Stars and
Constellations in Astrology (London, 1923. often reprinted).
152

=== Page 163 ===
of the constellation Aries is put, which is south in the preceding or
Right Horn.1 For Stoeffler [1452-1531], Gaurico [1476-1558],
Pitatus [fl. 1535-1568]2, and other astrologers agree that the first
Mansion begins with the stars that are in the Right Horn of Aries;
and those natures of the Mansions that they have related, we are
putting here, with the warning that the nature of each Mansion co-
incides with the one of the stars that it includes, as they will have it,
which you will nevertheless sometimes experience to be false!
And besides, that is a greater reason, why the Moon's motion
through these Mansions should be looked at, rather than the mo-
tions of the other Planets, the Sun, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus,
and Mercury; since the fixed stars agree with their actions, just as
they do with the actions of the Moon. But it must be feared that un-
til now the true nature of each Mansion is not known, on account
of the natures of the fixed stars that are not yet well known.
Finally, for the certainty and magnitude of the effects from the
configurations of the Planets shown above, both among them-
selves and with the fixed stars, the power of the configured Planets
in the signs of the configurations does much. For if they are con-
joined in a sign where each Planet has the power of its domicile or
exaltation, each Planet will act strongly, such as the Sun and Mars
conjoined in Aries, Saturn and Mars in Capricorn, or Jupiter and
the Moon in Cancer. If only one is powerful, that one will prevail
in the effects, especially if the other one is unfortunate in the place
of the conjunction, as when Saturn and Jupiter are conjoined in
Capricorn, or Saturn and Mars in Aries.
'Again, as mentioned in the Note to Chapter 5 above, Tycho's Catalogue, as re-
peated in Kepler's Rudolphine Tables, gives the longitude of the star as 28 T 23;
and the precession to 1660 would put it in 29 T 03. Modem figures would put it
at 29 T 14 in 1660. It is south of the other bright star Hamal or a Arietis, but both
stars have north latitude.
2Pietro Pitati of Verona. Morin apparently refers to his Almanack
Novum... Tract at us perbreves de electionibus revolutionibus annorum et
mutatione aeris... 'New Almanac. ..A Short Treatise on Elections, the Revolu-
tions of Years, and the Changing of the Air...' (Tubingen: Ulrich Mor., 1544).
See Lynn Thomdike, History of Magic and Experimental Science (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1923-1958. 8 vols.), Vol. 5, pp. 264-265. Parts of
Pitati's book are dedicated to Pope Paul III (1468-1549), a patron of astrology.
153

=== Page 164 ===
Table of the Mansions of the Moon.1
1 a little dry 28 T 28 15 wet 28 £2: 27
2 temperate 11 d 11 16 cold & wet 11 HI 11
3 wet 24 3 03 17 wet 24 03
4 cold & wet 6 K 55 18 dry 6/55
5 dry 19 K 47 19 wet 19/47
6 temperate 2 S 39 20 temperate 2^39
7 wet 15 S 31 21 wet 15 ^ 31
8 a little wet 28 S 23 22 temperate 28 ^ 23
9 dry ii n 15 23 wet 11 sz 15
10 wet 24 SI 07 24 a little cold 24^07
11 a little cold 7 1^00 25 dry 7X00
12 wet 19 HP 50 26 a little dry 19X50
13 temperate 2^43 27 wet 2 T 43
14 a little wet 15 £2:35 28 temperate 15 T 35
'As noted above, this table begins at 28 T 28 instead of 29 T 03. But aside from
that, nearly all the longitudes are slightly off. They should all be multiples of
1205 1 26" + 28028'. But they have an average error of 4 or 5 minutes, with a max-
imum error of 8 minutes and a minimum error of 1 minute. However, if the actual
extent of the asterisms that make up the Mansions of the Moon is wanted, then for
each Mansion the longitude of the marker star should be used. This table is for the
17th century. See Appendix 5 for a Table for the Year 2000.
154

=== Page 165 ===
Moreover, in the case of the square and the opposition, if both
planets are powerful in their own signs, both will act strongly; and
therefore, great effects must be expected from both Planets. As if
Jupiter is in Cancer, and Saturn is in Libra or Capricorn; but if only
one is powerful in its own sign, that one will prevail; and all the
much more if the other Planet is unfortunate in its sign, as if Jupiter
would be in Cancer, and Saturn in Aries; or the Sun in Aries, and
Mars in Cancer. But about these things, let what has been said
suffice.
Chapter 7. The special Effects of the Planets that are
Rulers of the Year, from their Position with
Relation to the Sun and the Moon.
From their position with relation to the Sun and the Moon, the
planets are called oriental and occidental, and in both positions
they may appear direct, stationary, and retrograde. Moreover,
Albumasar, in his Great Introduction? Book 4, Difference 7; then
al-Kindi in his Epistle? Chapter 1, along with many other old as-
trologers, will have it that neither the Planets, nor the fixed stars,
nor the signs are hot, cold, wet, or dry due to their own nature, nor
do they generate [these conditions] per se, nor do they corrupt [the
air]; but all these [conditions] are made by a planet's own motion
in its own epicycle, and not by its direction, station, and retrograde
[state], nor by its closeness to or elongation from the zenith. And
therefore, here and there among the astrologers, the greater part of
the sublunar effects is referred to the Planets, according as they are
ascending to the upper or lower part of their epicycle. And yet this
doctrine is plainly and evidently false on many counts!
First. Because the Sun itself is the true and hottest fire, and its
'Albumasar, Introductorius maior 'The Great Introduction' translated by
Hermann of Carinthia (Augsburg: Erhard Ratdolt, 1489; often reprinted).
Presumably, al-Kindi, De pluuiis 'On Rains' (Venice: Peter Liechtenstein,
1507). The full title of the edition is Liber Alkindi de nubibus et pluuiis et
tonitruis et fulgetris et uentis et accidentium suorum; Epistola Alkindi de aeribus
et pluuiis..."aUKindVs Book on Clouds and Rains and Thunder and Lightning
and Winds and their Occurences; The Epistle of al-Kindi on Airs and Rains...'
155

=== Page 166 ===
rays are pure flames, as can be seen by means of a concave mirror.
Second. Because now from a more accurate consideration of the
system of the World, there are no epicycles for the motion of Sat-
urn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, but only eccentric or sim-
ple elliptical orbits, in which they move. Third. Because motion is
not active of itself, but it is only distributive of the active virtue of
the Planets, as we have already said elsewhere. And if the effects
were not from the virtue of the Planets, but from their motion in
epicycles or orbits; and these effects would be at least of the same
kind from Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, then from Venus and Mer-
cury, because they have the same type of motions, even though
they are faster than the others.
Therefore, such an absurd opinion ought to be cast out from the
science of astrology, [as being] plainly contrary to experiences
with the planets and the signs, and then with their own natures as
set forth by us; and there should only be retained that which cannot
be denied—namely, that the closer the Planets are to the Earth, the
more effectively they act upon the Earth, and especially on those
places that they are directly above; and the more remote they are,
the more ineffectively they act. As was already proved by us else-
where, namely by their own virtue.
Besides, as for that which pertains to the oriental and occidental
state of the planets, it should be seen what we have stated in Book
13, Section I, Chapter 3, and then in Section II, Chapter 1'; since it
is conformable to the reason and the mode of acting of the Planets,
as they act differently when preceding the rising of the Sun from
what they do when following it; and as when they are first freed
from the solar rays, they operate more evidently, more powerfully
and more purely according to their own nature, than they do when
they are falling into those rays and being absorbed by them.
And at least, the immense elemental heat of the Sun restrains or
moderates the elemental cold of Saturn, Mercury, and the Moon;
"See my translation in Jean-Baptiste Morin, Astrologia Gallica, Booh Thirteen,
Fourteen. Fifteen, and Nineteen (Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2006).
156

=== Page 167 ===
but it increases the heat of Mars and Jupiter. And the astrologers
will have it that if all the ponderous Planets, namely Saturn, Jupi-
ter, and Mars, happen to be oriental, they produce much dryness;
but if they all happen to be occidental, they produce much humid-
ity and rains, especially in winter. The Moon acts similarly with
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, by increasing or de-
creasing [the intensity] of the effects from their own proper na-
tures. But what has been handed down to us about this state of the
Planets by the old [astrologers] and especially by Albumasar in his
book on The Great Conjunctions,1 we shall put here.
The Planets in Aries.
Saturn in Aries under the Sun beams2 makes dark air, and dense
clouds, and runny noses.3 But when oriental, it causes a good con-
stitution of the air; when occidental, cold winds; when static, thun-
der and lightning.
Jupiter in Aries under the Sun beams generates rains; when ori-
ental, fine weather; when occidental, dews and clouds; when
static, an abundance of fruit.
Mars in Aries under the Sun beams makes fine weather; when
oriental, it disturbs the air; when occidental, it causes rains; when
static, lightning and thunder.
Venus in Aries under the Sun beams produces humidity; when
oriental, thunder and rains; when occidental, winds; when static,
humidity.
xDe magnis coniunctionibus, translated from the Arabic by John of Seville and
edited by Johann Engel (Augsburg: Erhard Ratdolt, 1489). An extensive and very
detailed work on mundane astrology in eight books, dealing primarily with Jupi-
ter-Saturn conjunctions, but secondarily with other conjunctions and with Aries
Ingresses (Revolutions of the Years of die World). Another account of the effects
produced by the outer Planets in different phases is given in Albumasar's. The
Book of Flowers, Chapter 11. See my translation in Five Medieval Astrologers
(Tempe: A.F.A., Inc., 2008.
2The Latin has sub radiis Solis 'under the rays of the Sun', which could be trans-
lated as combust, but I prefer the older expression 'under the Sun beams'.
3The Latin has catarrhos ab humore frigido 'catarrh from a cold humor'.
157

=== Page 168 ===
Mercury in Aries under the Sun beams is stormy; when oriental,
fine weather; when occidental, well tempered weather, and almost
always windy, [when static, is not given]
The Planets in Taurus.
Saturn in Taurus under the Sun beams brings about mild air, but
it produces illness of the neck; when oriental, it brings healthy con-
ditions; when occidental, dryness; when static, thunder, distur-
bances in the air, dense clouds.
Jupiter in Taurus under the Sun beams, temperate conditions;
when oriental, an abundance of fruits and especially of figs; when
occidental, rain showers; when static, it makes fertile and healthy
conditions.
Mars in Taurus under the Sun beams makes the air tranquil;
when oriental, it sets winds in motion; when occidental, serene
conditions; when static, it dries things up.
Venus in Taurus under the Sun beams, lots of thunder; when
oriental, healthy and fertile conditions; when occidental, dry and
fine conditions; when static, moderate in all things.
Mercury in Taurus under the Sun beams, stormy; when oriental,
humid and unsettled; when occidental, temperate, [when static, is
not given]
The Planets in Gemini.
Saturn in Gemini under the Sun beams, dry; when oriental, a
good period; when occidental, dry; when static, sickly.
Jupiter in Gemini under the Sun beams, then too when oriental,
occidental, or static, conditions are temperate, healthy, and fertile.
Mars in Gemini under the Sun beams, illnesses; when oriental,
it brings about quarrels and lawsuits; when occidental and static, it
multiplies the heat and dryness.
158

=== Page 169 ===
Venus in Gemini under the Sun beams dries things up; when
oriental, temperate; when occidental, it blows; when static, it is
moderate.
Mercury in Gemini under the Sun beams excites, then also
when oriental; when occidental, it presages a good state of things;
when static, it is unstable.
The Planets in Cancer.
Saturn in Cancer under the Sun beams makes dark days, strong
winds, and storms at sea; when oriental conditions are temperate;
when occidental, it renders the seas suitable for voyages; when
static, it produces chronic illnesses.
Jupiter in Cancer under the Sun beams makes a tranquil sea;
when oriental, occidental, or static, conditions are temperate,
healthy, and fertile.
Mars in Cancer under the Sun beams bums things up; when ori-
ental, it stirs up lawsuits; when occidental, illnesses; when static, it
heats up and dries out things very much.
Venus in Cancer under the Sun beams makes the air tranquil;
when oriental, occidental, or static, it makes temperate and fertile
conditions.
Mercury in Cancer under the Sun beams causes winds and
storms at sea; when oriental, temperate and healthy conditions;
when occidental, tranquil conditions, [when static, is not given]
The Planets in Leo.
Saturn in Leo under the Sun beams causes dry winds and
catarrhs; when oriental, temperate conditions; when occidental, it
dries things up, and also when static.
Jupiter in Leo under the Sun beams causes healthy winds; when
oriental, it elevates people to honors or riches; when occidental, it
159

=== Page 170 ===
moderates everything; when static, it reduces illnesses and restores
health.
Mars in Leo under the sun beams portends illnesses for Mag-
nates; when oriental, the destruction of things; when occidental,
dryness; when static, illnesses
Venus in Leo under the Sun beams causes heat; when oriental,
temperate and fertile conditions; when occidental, illnesses among
cattle; when static, it harms women.
Mercury in Leo under the Sun beams is windy; when oriental, it
brings forward wise men and makes the air temperate; when occi-
dental, it is suffocating; when static, it stirs up illnesses.
The Planets in Virgo.
Saturn in Virgo under the Sunbeams is sickly and also when static;
when oriental, it dries things up; when occidental, it disturbs the air.
Jupiter in Virgo under the Sun beams and also oriental, occiden-
tal, or static, causes temperate conditions, plenty of everything,
health, and joy.
Mars in Virgo under the Sun beams is sickly; when oriental, it
produces lawsuits and wars; when occidental, it suffocates men;
when static, it dries things up.
Venus in Virgo under the Sun beams dries things up; when ori-
ental, it humidifies; when occidental, it makes temperate condi-
tions; when static, it hinders women.
Mercury in Virgo under the Sun beams is stormy; when orien-
tal, it is humid; when occidental, it is dry; when static, it is harmful
to men of a mercurial type.
The Planets in Libra.
Saturn in Libra under the Sun beams causes illnesses, especially
in the eyes; when oriental it causes cold, dry winds; when occiden-
160

=== Page 171 ===
tal, it disturbs the air; when static, it generates quartan fevers.
Jupiter in Libra under the Sun beams, as well as oriental, occi-
dental, or static, is temperate, healthy, and fertile.
Mars in Libra under the Sun beams dries things up; when orien-
tal, it disturbs the air and causes thunder; when occidental, rains;
when static, dryness.
Venus in Libra under the Sun beams is humid; when oriental,
[conditions are] unstable; when occidental, they are temperate;
when static, it is harmful to women.
Mercury in Libra under the Sun beams is windy and stormy;
when oriental, humid and fertile; when occidental, temperate;
when static, harmful.
The Planets in Scorpio.
Saturn in Scorpio under the Sun beams chills; when oriental, it
arouses northern winds; when occidental, it freezes; when static, it
makes turbid air.
Jupiter in Scorpio under the Sun beams is rainy; when oriental,
it is temperate and increases [the number of] fish; when occidental,
the weather is fine; when static, it makes the air tranquil.
Mars in Scorpio under the Sun beams is humid; when oriental, it
is windy; when occidental, it is tranquil; when static, much thun-
der and lightning.
Venus in Scorpio under the Sun beams, as well as when it is ori-
ental, occidental, or static, stirs up rains, but more so when it is ori-
ental. And when it is under the Sun beams or static in whatever
sign it must be thought to be mostly rainy.
Mercury in Scorpio under the Sun beams is tempestuous; when
oriental it is rainy; when occidental, dry; when static, variable con-
ditions.
161

=== Page 172 ===
The Planets in Sagittarius.
Saturn in Sagittarius under the Sun beams is rainy and cloudy;
when oriental, it is cold; when occidental, dry; when static, sickly.
Jupiter in Sagittarius under the Sun beams makes a good state of
things; when oriental, the weather is fine; when occidental, it
causes many rains; when static, it signifies favorable conditions
for men.
Mars in Sagittarius under the Sun beams dries things up; when
oriental, it starts wars; when occidental, many illnesses; when
static, it is harmful here and there.
Venus in Sagittarius under the Sun beams is rainy; when orien-
tal conditions are temperate; when occidental, windy and cold;
when static, moderate conditions.
Mercury in Sagittarius under the Sun beams is very watery;
when oriental, temperate; when occidental, dry; when static, harm-
ful to the learned.
The Planets in Capricorn.
Satum in Capricorn under the Sun beams stirs up southern
winds; when oriental, northern winds; when occidental, cold and
frost; when static, turbid air.
Jupiter in Capricorn under the Sun beams is humid; when orien-
tal, an agreeable state; when occidental, rains; when static, tranquil
conditions.
Mars in Capricorn under the Sun beams generates clouds; when
oriental, it dries things up; when occidental, it heats things up;
when static, it is temperate.
Venus in Capricorn under the Sun beams, cold spells; when ori-
ental, rainy; when occidental, cold spells; when static, it is temper-
ate.
162

=== Page 173 ===
Mercury in Capricorn under the Sun beams is rainy; when ori-
ental, it darkens the air; when occidental, it bestows rain; when
static, variable conditions.
The Planets in Aquarius.
Saturn in Aquarius under the Sun beams is cold; when oriental,
rainy; when occidental, dangerous on the sea and in waters; when
static, cloudy, snowy, and icy.
Jupiter in Aquarius under the Sun beams, an agreeable state of
things; when oriental, healthy conditions; when occidental, much
rain; when static, useful rains.
Mars in Aquarius under the Sun beams makes dryness; when
oriental or occidental, winds and storms; when static, dangers on
the sea.
Venus in Aquarius under the Sun beams is cloudy; when orien-
tal, rainy; when occidental, hot and windy; when static, humid.
Mercury in Aquarius under the Sun beams is snowy; when ori-
ental, rainy; when occidental, frosty and turbulent; when static, it
disturbs the air.
The Planets in Pisces.
Saturn in Pisces under the Sun beams is cloudy and snowy;
when oriental, a good condition; when occidental, rainy; when
static, variable conditions.
Jupiter in Pisces under the Sun beams, as well as oriental, occi-
dental, or static, bestows a good state of things, health, and an
abundance of fish.
Mars in Pisces under the Sun beams is harmful to fish; when
oriental, it lightens and thunders; when occidental, it dries things
up; when static, it makes illnesses.
Venus in Pisces under the Sun beams is cold and frosty; when
163

=== Page 174 ===
oriental, agreeably temperate; when occidental, watery, snowy,
and windy; when static, variable conditions.
Mercury in Pisces under the Sun beams is stormy and rainy;
when oriental or occidental, tranquil and agreeably temperate;
when static, it causes variability in the air.
In addition, to the aphorisms above, many will be found, whose
logic cannot be recovered, either by way of a mixture of the quali-
ties of the Sun and the Planet, or by way of the Table in Book 13,
Section I, Chapter 3. And so, experience should be consulted, with
respect to the quarter of the year, and carefully distinguishing the
effects of the Planets that are harmonizing with the latter per se,
and with the former by accident; for the Sun per se heats and dries
up the Earth, but by accident it irrigates by means of rains and it
cools, when it cannot dissolve all the vapors that it draws up on ac-
count of its short stay above the horizon, or being impeded by
other causes. And so with the rest [of the Planets].
Chapter 8. The Special effects of the Planets that are
Rulers of the Year from the Mode of their Motion.
The individual Planets arranged around the Sun are appre-
hended to move in different ways—namely, direct and retrograde;
between which, they appear to be static in two ways; and in both of
these ways they are seen to be moved some times swiftly, some-
times slowly, and at other times moderately. Moreover, by these
modes of their own motion, they act influentially and elementally.
And indeed they act influentially by analogy, as it was explained
by us in Book 13, Section III, Chapter 3. For when they are direct
and swift, they signify the progress of the human things to which
they were determined; and when they are swift, they signify swift
progress; and when they are slow, they signify slow progress; and
when they have middling speed, they signify moderate progress.
But when they are retrograde, they signify an interruption of the
progress of things, or a turning aside from them, or their destruc-
tion. And finally, when they are static, especially in fixed signs,
164

=== Page 175 ===
they signify firmness, constancy, and the endurance of those
things. But they act elementally principally in accordance with
their own distance from the Earth and through their own nature.
Moreover, it is certain. First, that when a Planet is static, it is
very active in accordance with its own nature and the place in the
Caelum where it stands—that is, the sign in which it is located and
the fixed stars among which it stands; for these by their own con-
junction particularly determine the virtue of a Planet to an associa-
tion of action—that is powerfully—on account of the length of
time of the static condition. And from that, the true nature of the
fixed stars can be discovered if it happens to be unknown; and take
note of this!
Second. That when a Planet in its first station1 begins to retro-
grade, then it inverts and disturbs its own past actions or effects
[arising] from the association of the sign and the fixed stars down
to the end of its retrogression; and when it again begins to be di-
rect, it renews and perfects them, always taking into account the
quarter of the year and the nearness of the Sun to the conjunction
or opposition.
Third. That in the middle of their retrogression, Saturn, Jupiter,
and Mars are opposed to the Sun as seen from the Earth, and they
approach each other mutually, as if they will be fighting in turn
from opposition, but, from the middle of the direct motion, the Sun
touches them by conjunction and passes over. However, Venus
and Mercury, in the middle of their direct motion and retrograde,
are conjoined to the Sun with respect to us, but in direct motion
they pass over the Sun, and they are passed over by the Sun when
they are retrograde.2
Fourth. That the hot Planets, Jupiter, Mars, and Venus, when
'That is, when it is Static Rx.
2That is to say, when Mercury or Venus is conjunct the Sun and direct, it is on the
far side of the Sun as seen from the Earth, but when it is conjunct the Sun and ret-
rograde it is on the near side of the Sun and closest to the Earth.
165

=== Page 176 ===
they are retrograde—because then they are closer to the Earth—do
therefore indeed raise up vapors by their own elemental heat; but
they cannot dissolve them by their own heat alone. Therefore, they
are justly said to be rainy, and particularly Venus, the least hot of
all and the most humid. Moreover, the cold Planets, Saturn and
Mercury, when they are retrograde—because then they are nearer
to the Earth—do more powerfully condense the vapors raised up
somewhere else, whence there are rains; and therefore they are
also deservedly said to be rainy.
But when the Sun is found with the Planets Venus and Mercury
retrograde, or when it is opposed to the others, Saturn, Jupiter, and
Mars, then they are dry and serene, rather than rainy. For the Sun
dissolves by its own heat that which cannot be dissolved by the
other [Planets], either during the day by Venus and Mercury, or at
night by Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, unless the Sun's stay above the
horizon is shorter than the mean and has blocked it; as occurs in the
summer in the torrid zone, and with us in the winter.
Having stated these things in advance, some aphorisms on the
Planets' direct and retrograde motion follow:
First. All the Planets are rainy per se when retrograde, espe-
cially in feminine signs, and most of all in water signs and in a hu-
mid Mansion, or with rainy fixed stars, and most of all with Venus
and Mercury. And that squares with what was already said above.
Second. The more Planets that are thus disposed, the more cer-
tainly rain can be predicted; and if three are found thus in Cancer,
Scorpio, and Pisces, applying to each other, a flood is portended.
Third. Many Planets retrograde in the northern part of the zo-
diac presage rains and winds in the northern part of the World; and
when retrograde in the southern part of the zodiac, rains and winds
in the southern part of the World. The reason is because Saturn, Ju-
piter, and Mars retrograde in the northern part of the zodiac have
the Sun in the southern part of the zodiac, which consequently will
have a short stay above the horizons of the northern people. And
166

=== Page 177 ===
when the Planets are retrograde in the southern part of the zodiac,
they have the Sun in the northern part of the zodiac, which makes
short days in the south.
Fourth. Planets that are direct make rather dry and serene con-
ditions. Because by nature the hot [Planets] raise up few vapors;
but the cold [Planets] are weaker in making vapors more dense on
account of their distance from the Earth. Nevertheless, they act as
much as they can in accordance with their own nature, the sign, the
[fixed] stars, and the quarter of the year.
Fifth. Planets that are retrograde in the southern part of the
Caelum at the time of summer in the north, make thunder, light-
ning, and much hail for those [in the north]; but in the time of au-
tumn, they make rains.
Sixth. In all of these [considerations], the position of the Planets
themselves with respect to the Sun must be taken into account. For
whether they are direct or retrograde, they are allotted some vari-
ety in their effects, according as they are oriental or occidental
with respect to the Sun, according to the Table in Book 13, Section
I, Chapter 3.
There are many other aphorisms in al-Kindi, Chapter 2, but
none of which have valid and self-consistent reasons, but indeed
they are contrary to astronomy. For those aphorisms must espe-
cially be understood of the Planets Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars when
they are retrograde. But al-Kindi puts them many times retrograde
in the same quadrant of the zodiac with the Sun, such as when he
says:
"When Planets are retrograding from the head
of Cancer to Libra, and the Sun is with them in the
same quarter." Then also, "when they are retro-
grade from Libra to Capricorn, and the Sun is
with them"
But since Saturn cannot begin to be retrograde until it is distant
167

=== Page 178 ===
from the Sun by more than a quadrant of the circle, and it should be
between a quadrant and a third; but Jupiter should be distant by a
third; and Mars by more than a third. And consequently none of
them could be retrograde in the same quadrant of the zodiac with
the Sun.
Chapter 9. The special Effects of the Planets that
are Rulers of the Year due to their Terrestrial State,
or their position with respect to the Horizon.
In the case of the Terrestrial State of the Planets that are Rulers
of the Year, these things must be taken note of. First, in what
house of the figure the Ruler of the Year is found, and under what
mode it is contained—whether it is in an angle, a succedent, or a
cadent house. Second. Which houses does it rule. Which houses
does it aspect more strongly, certainly by opposition or by square
aspect.
Haly, in Book 8, Chapter 7, discusses the First item at length,
and after him Origanus, in Part 3, Chapter 3, where it is described
what the individual Planets do as rulers of the year; but [they do
not discuss] the Second and Third items. But how judgment should
be made about the First, Second, and Third items—at least, for
their influential effects—has been sufficiently stated by us in
Book 21, Section II, then in Chapter 2 of that section; so that con-
sequently it would be altogether superfluous to repeat here again
in detail those things that were determined in general there; but it
must only be added or rather recalled that the Planets are more ef-
fective in angles for [doing] those things that they signify, pro-
vided that their celestial state is strong for good or evil, or for
whatever quality of the air—that is, other things being equal—but
in cadent houses, they are weaker; and in the succedent houses,
they are moderate, according to the commonly accepted opinion of
astrologers, which is especially perceived to be true for the
elemental effects.
For as regards the influential effects, Saturn in no house of the
168

=== Page 179 ===
figure signifies a bad, disgraceful, or difficult death more than
when it is posited in the 8th house, even though that house is not
angular. And Jupiter is more fortunate in the 9th for travels, piety,
and ecclesiastical dignities, than in any other house of the figure,
other things being equal, even though the 9th is cadent. And in the
2nd it is especially fortunate for riches. And the logic is the same
with the rest [of the houses].
Besides, for the elemental effects of a universal constitution,
and especially for the temperature that will prevail in the horizon
of the figure,1 during [the effective time] of that constitution, it
seems to agree with the reason, so that, just as in nativities judg-
ment about the temperament of the native is made from the 1st
house and its celestial state—that is, from the sign occupying it, its
ruler, and the planets and fixed stars in it by body or aspecting it;
just so in a universal constitution should judgment be made about
the temperature of a region by taking note of what sort of sign is as-
cending; for just as it is an air, water, or earth sign, airy, watery, or
earthy qualities will be principally produced, and air, water, or the
Earth will be principally affected in themselves, and in their fruits
and their inhabitants. And this method must not be rejected, since
in particular many of the old astrologers along with Haly would
have judged about the temperature of a whole region solely from
the ascending sign in the figure of a universal constitution.
Furthermore, here one must beware of the error of Cardan, who,
in his Commentary on Book 2, in Text 56, will have it indeed
rightly with Ptolemy that two figures must be inspected for the So-
lar Ingress into the 4 individual cardinal points of Aries, Cancer,
Libra, and Capricorn; namely, 4 for the Solar Ingresses, and 4 for
the new Moon or full Moon immediately preceding them. But by
his own opinion and without any authority from Ptolemy, he
thinks indeed that figures must be erected for those new Moons
and full Moons, since their time can be more accurately known.
But for the Solar Ingresses, a figure cannot be erected [accurately],
'That is, in the location on Earth for which the figure is set.
169

=== Page 180 ===
because their time cannot indeed be accurately known.
However, since the exact knowledge of the time of a lunation
principally depends upon an exact knowledge of the Sun's motion
at that time, the time of the Solar Ingress ought therefore to be
more exactly known than the time of a lunation.1 As for the figure
of the Solar Ingress into Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn, it
should be the principal one for making judgment on the year and
its quarters. See the end of Section I, Chapter 4, above.
In addition, in Text 58, Cardan attributes two effects to the con-
junction or opposition preceding the Solar Ingress into a cardinal
point; namely, a particular one, that only extends down to the [time
of] the solar Ingress, and a general one that begins from [the mo-
ment of] that Solar Ingress, e.g. into the beginning of Aries, down
to the next Ingress into Cancer; and so with the rest [of the Ingress-
es], but wrongly; for the virtue of a synodic Revolution of the Sun
and the Moon lasts down to the similar Revolution next following,
as we have taught elsewhere; and it does not cease for the Ingress
of the Sun into a cardinal point; otherwise, there would be no rea-
son for the Solar Ingress. For it only has a reason because the Solar
Ingress happens with lasting effects and the virtue of that synod, of
which the remains of the virtue or the effects pertain to the Ingress
itself, in so far as they agree with its virtue; but they leave off with
the next following synod; and they are not extended down to the
Ingress of the Sun into another cardinal point.
In addition, Cardan is mistaken in his above said Comment on
Book 2, in Text 56; when he will have it that if between the Ingress
'Not so! If there was an error of 7' in the Sun's position at the vernal equinox
(which was true of the Rudolphine Tables, although unknown to Morin), then the
error in determining the lime of the equinox was nearly 3 hours, while even
though the maximum error in the Moon's position at a lunation was about 14'
(again from the Rudolphine Tables), the calculated time of the lunation would
only be in error by \A \20W times 24 hours, or 28 minutes, and the average error
would be one half of that or 14 minutes, which is a much smaller error than the
nearly 3 whole hours error for the time of the Ingress! But since Morin thought
that the RudolphineTables gave the exact longitude of the Sun, he supposed that
the possible error in the time of the lunation was the more uncertain.quantity.
170

=== Page 181 ===
of the Sun into some cardinal point, e.g. the beginning of Aries,
and an immediately preceding eclipse there happens to be a con-
junction or opposition of the Sun and the Moon, since the figure of
the eclipse had also occurred many months earlier, it will have to
be looked at first, as being of the principal virtue in the quarter of
the year, "because," he says, "if it can be [effective] over the whole
year, much more can it be over the quarter of the year, to which it is
closer." But the next place in strength, he attributes to the figure of
the Solar Ingress, and finally the figure of the new Moon or the full
Moon more closely preceding the Solar Ingress. For since an
eclipse is only a lunation, its actual effectiveness will not be ex-
tended beyond its own period, as was said by us in Section I, Chap-
ter 7.1 And therefore the figure of the Ingress will have to be the
one primarily considered.
Chapter 10. The Ejfects of the Quarters of the Mundane
Revolution of the Sun.
Although the Mundane Revolution of the Sun2 is the general
and primary cause of the effects of the whole year; and the celestial
charts of the quarters only act as they are transits of the Sun
through the squares and opposition of the beginning of Aries, and
that is with respect to the chart of that Revolution itself; yet, be-
cause the constitution of the Caelum and the state of the
Sun—both celestial and terrestrial—at that transit more evidently
manifests the quality and the force of that transit for the part of the
year in which it falls for promoting or hindering the things signi-
fied by the Mundane Revolution of the Sun, or for undertaking
something new; and besides, the cardinal points of the zodiac are
in turn the beginnings of contrary changes or causes with respect
to sublunar things. Therefore, having erected the figures necessary
for each quarter of the year—namely, for the Ingress of the Sun
into the beginning of Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn; then for the
"This may have seemed logical to Morin, but it contradicts common astrological
opinion going all the way back to the Babylonians.
2That is, the Aries Ingress.
171

=== Page 182 ===
new Moon or flill Moon immediately preceding [each of them] in
accordance with Section I, Chapters 4 & 6, their rulers may be
found in accordance with Chapter 9.
And if the same Planet should be the ruler of both figures, that
one will be the most powerful in the whole quarter. But if different
Planets should rule in both figures, their forces resulting from their
own natures and their celestial and terrestrial states may be com-
bined; and it should be seen how they are mutually disposed in the
figure of the solar Ingress; then, whether by their own natures they
are mutual friends or enemies, so that from these [considerations]
it may be plain whether they help or hinder each other. And from
that, judgment may be made about the figure of the Mundane Rev-
olution of the Sun, while avoiding Cardan's errors that were ex-
posed in Chapter 9, then too in the one following.
For in fact, with Ptolemy he will have it that if an opposition of
the Sun and the Moon should have immediately preceded the In-
gress of the Sun into a cardinal point, all the months of that quarter
should begin from [the time of] the opposition of the Sun and the
Moon; but it is clear that this is absurd from this—that since years
are [reckoned] by the Sun, so months are [reckoned] from the syn-
odic revolution of the Moon with the Sun; and XhdX synod is its pri-
mary and independent beginning, not the opposition of the Sun
and the Moon, which [only] acts with respect to the celestial chart
of the preceding synod, and through the mode of a transit; if not
through the place of that conjunction of the Lights, at least through
the places of the other Planets and angles in that chart.
Add that according to Ptolemy's and Cardan's opinion, the or-
der and time of the months is many times mixed up in the year, and
[sometimes] only 15 days could be give to the months, which is an-
other absurdity, and [also] the force of one synod would not last
down to the next one following, which has nevertheless already
been proven many times.
And so, in every quarter of a Mundane Revolution, first of all
172

=== Page 183 ===
the new Moon immediately preceding it should be looked at; and
secondly, either the opposition or the square that will occur be-
tween the new Moon and the Ingress of the Sun into the cardinal
point; and if a square occurs between the opposition and the Solar
Ingress, the square must be preferred for the judgment of that quar-
ter of the year. For both the square and the opposition are certainly
subordinated per se to the independent conjunction; but the oppo-
sition is not subordinated per se to the first square, nor the second
square to the opposition; and they therefore act separately accord-
ing to their own force, since they are dependent on the conjunc-
tion. Therefore, the Sun's Ingress into a cardinal point will no less
depend upon an immediate square than upon an immediate opposi-
tion, in the reckoning of the principal disposers of sublunar things
to the effects or changes caused by that Ingress, although the
opposition is more powerful.
Besides, although the synod of the Lights may here be said to be
independent, this however is only understood to mean that it is in-
dependent of any [other] syzygy of the Lights in the synodic
month, but not that it is absolutely independent, since it primarily
depends upon the preceding Ingress of the Sun into the beginning
of Aries; for any synod of the Lights is a part of the whole year,
dispensing and accomplishing its own effects according to its
mode.
And therefore it will not follow that there is a progress into in-
finity, because the Solar Ingress would also depend upon [still] an-
other previous synod. For the synod immediately preceding the In-
gress of the Sun into Aries, since it is the final synod of the preced-
ing year, is of very little virtue for that year, which it terminates
and whose effects leave off, so that it should rather be thought to
pertain to the following year, which begins with its own effects;
and consequently, the progress into infinity would cease. Just as if
the Ingress of the Sun into Aries should happen on the last day of
the immediately preceding synodic Revolution of the Sun and the
Moon; since then the force of that Revolution is exhausted and
would cease, rather there will have to be taken into account the one
173

=== Page 184 ===
that begins with the Ingress of the Sun into Aries, or the one that
follows it by one or two days, especially since [both] Ptolemy and
experience testify that the effects of a new Moon begin around
three days before it; and the force of each house of the celestial fig-
ure is greatest at the cusp and continually decreases down to the
cusp of the following house, where it leaves off altogether.
Furthermore, it seems that the Rule of Eudoxus1 should not be
omitted here, which Pliny mentions at the end of Book 2, Chapter
48,2 of his Natural History, and which Origanus seems to approve
in Part 3, Chapter 4; namely, that every four years the same condi-
tions return, not only of the winds, but also of the storms for the
most part; namely because every four years the figures of the Solar
Ingresses into the cardinal points are very similar to each other for
each cardinal point; and consequently, with the Sun and the fixed
stars similarly posited with respect to the Earth the same effects
ought to recur from them.
But besides the fact that the celestial and terrestrial state of the
rest of the Planets is very varied, there also occurs a difference of
0:48 hours between two adjacent four-year periods,3 which
amounts to 12 equatorial degrees for the difference in right ascen-
sion of the two MC's or the oblique ascensions of the ASC's; from
which, the position of the Caelum is also sufficiently markedly
varied, and perhaps the rulership of the Planets over the angles of
the figure; whence, it is no wonder if in the next four-year period
there is perceived to be little likeness in the storms and the other ef-
fects in the individual quarters of the year.4 But it can be perceived
'Eudoxus of Cnidus, a Greek mathematician and astronomer who lived in the 4th
century B.C.
2Morin says "Chapter 47," but in the Loeb Classical Library edition it is Chapter
48 and Section 130. "Eudoxus however thinks that (if we choose to study the
minimal circuits) there is a regular reoccurrence of all phenomena - not only of
winds but largely of other sorts of bad weather as well - in four-yearly periods,
and that the period always begins in a leap-year at the rising of Sirius." (H.
Rackham's translation).
3Actually, it is a little less than that, or about 0:45.
4In his translation of this long sentence, Hieroz misses the point altogether.
174

=== Page 185 ===
more in 120-year periods,1 because then at least the same MC re-
turns, and consequently the same state of the fixed stars and the
Sun, which have the greatest power over these inferior things; but
the state of the rest of the planets will [still] differ greatly from that
of the first year, as is evident in the ephemerides.
Chapter 11. The Effects of the Synodic Revolution
of the Moon with the Sun and its Quarters.
If the true place of the Moon that it occupied at its own creation
could be known to us, its Revolution to that same place would be
the periodic and true lunar month for us; and the celestial chart of
the Revolution would be the principal and genuine cause of
monthly effects in general, as was similarly evident in the periodi-
cal Revolutions of the Moon for nativities. But about that place we
are not certain, even though we have supposed by a most probable
reason in Book 2, Chapter 10, that the Sun and the Moon by true
motion were centrally conjoined at the beginning of Aries on the
very day of their creation—having rejected the opinion of Kepler,
who in his Rudolphine Tables thinks that they were conjoined in
the 28th degree of Gemini.
And consequently, it is right for me to recommend that the peri-
odical Mundane Revolutions of the Moon to the beginning of
Aries should be looked at attentively, so that it might be observed
whether they have any general effects, even greater ones than
those of its synodic Revolution; however, because we are left with
those synodic Revolutions of the Moon with the Sun that are very
well known to all astrologers—indeed, even to rustics—from
which true predictions about the general effects of the month are
commonly made; therefore, we shall discuss only those in this
chapter, beginning the individual months from the new Moon, or
the conjunction of the Sun and the Moon, as from a primary and
'if we accept Morin's figure of 0:48 for the difference in 4 years, then in 120
years the difference would be 30 X 0:48 = 24:00 = 0:00; but since the true differ-
ence for 4 years is about 0:45, it would require 128 years to return to nearly the
same time for the Ingress.
175

=== Page 186 ===
independent syzygy, just as was explained above.
And so, according to Section I, Chapter 6, let the figure of the
conjunction of the Sun and the Moon be erected, whose rulers may
be found from [the rules in] Chapter 9. And then let the judgment
of that figure be made in accordance with the proper nature of the
rulers and their celestial and terrestrial states, as is done in the An-
nual Revolution and its quarters. Since there is one and the same
method for all those, the subordination must be taken into account,
and consequently there is often no need to repeat the same things.
And similarly, it will be necessary to proceed to the judgment of
the quarters, in which the angles and the Planets; especially the rul-
ers, will not have to be looked at by themselves, but with respect to
the figure of the new Moon on which each of those quarters de-
pends, and because per se it is the beginning of the lunar month.
For the quarter that will have a greater agreement with the new
Moon by reason of its angles, rulers, and transits will produce
greater effects and will more strongly advance the things signified
by the new Moon during that same quarter. But we shall now ex-
plain here the place in Ptolemy's Quadripartite about the
lunations and their quarters that Cardan calls the most difficult in
the whole volume.
Therefore, in Ptolemy's Book 2, [Chapter 12], Text 63 in
Cardan's Commentary? since he explained his own opinion about
the quadrants of the Annual Revolution of the Sun, or the four
quarters of the year, and he added his doctrine of the monthly new
Moons and full Moons, and then, asserting that there is a third
cause of the particular storms in the air, he says,
"in this there fall the particular configurations
of the Sun and the Moon, not only of the new
Moon and the full Moon, but also of the interme-
diate times, that is the squares; where it must be
noticed that about three days before [them] the
'Textus 63 begins on p. 231, col. 1.
176

=== Page 187 ===
significations of almost all the storms commonly
exist, or even after three days of the equated path
of the Moon with respect to the Sun."
Which words have been explained in various ways by Lucio
Bellantio and Junctinus, who want these words to be understood
by a figure of 16 sides' for a consideration of the aspects, then by
Cardan, Naibod,2 and Magini, who think that they can be under-
stood from a figure of 8 sides.3 Cardan himself wants there to be
observed not only the conjunction, opposition, and squares of the
Moon with the Sun, but also their intermediate positions, because
when the Moon will be placed in those intermediate positions, it
may be customary to judge which changes it is going to make
when it will have come to the next following conjunction, opposi-
tion, or square, or which changes should be expected from the next
preceding conjunction, opposition, or square.
But how much this deviates from Ptolemy's opinion and the truth
of the matter will be easily proved by [the words] of Ptolemy him-
self, who, for the third day before or after the equated path of the
Moon to the Sun, does not understand it to mean anything other than
the place in which the Moon last appears before the conjunction, or
is first seen after the conjunction—that is, when it sets or rises helia-
cally—which day is more frequently the third day before or after the
conjunction,4 rather than the fourth, second, or first day; and among
the ancients and also the rustics, it was always the most principal
consideration for judging the particular state of the whole month.
'By which he means a consideration of aspects of multiples of 22.5 degrees.
2Valentine Naibod (1527-1593), Enarratio elementomm astrologiae 'A Descrip-
tion of the Elements of Astrology' (Cologne: Arnold Birckman's Heirs, 1560.
4to.)
3This would mean aspects of multiples of 45 degrees.
4This should probably be understood to mean the second day before or after the
conjunction, because the elongation of the Moon from the Sun is a little more
than 12 per day; and twice this would be about 24°, when the slim crescent of the
Moon would be visible just before sunrise or just after sunset. (The ancients usu-
ally counted both ends of an interval, so what we would call the second day, they
would call the third day.)
177

=== Page 188 ===
And that this is Ptolemy's opinion is established by this—be-
cause the lunar path is only equated to that of the Sun at [the time
of] the new Moon, namely when the Moon arrives at the [the place
of] the Sun. Besides, although in this place he also wants the trian-
gular and sexangular figures1 of the Moon with the Sun to be
noted, but he doesn't mention the octangular or sextodecangular
figures.2 For in fact because in Book 1, Chapter 13, having counted
up all the figures or aspects that ought to be considered in astrol-
ogy—the opposition, trine, square, and sextile—he says then,
"many aspects or intervals or differences of figures are not re-
ceived among astrologers"3 on account of the reasons that he enu-
merates there. Therefore, Cardan along with the others deviated
from Ptolemy's opinion; and those things that he tried to prove by
an 8-sided figure in the case of the decline of illnesses can be better
proved without such a figure, as we shall say in [our book] The
Practice of Astrology* God willing.
But, from a genuine explication of the things mentioned above, it
follows that in the heliacal setting and rising of the Moon with re-
spect to us, diligent notice must be paid to the celestial and terrestrial
state of the Moon, and especially with what fixed stars and constel-
lations it appears, and which Mansion it occupies, and what consti-
tution of the air is then evident.5 For it is commonly thought that
'The trines and sextile aspects.
2The aspects that are multiples of 22.5 degrees and 45 degrees.
3This statement does not occur in the Greek text of the Tetrabiblos, nor in the
Latin translation printed in Cardan's Commentary. But Cardan adds this state-
ment at the end of Textus 45 (p. 144, col. 1), "Why did Ptolemy not consider the
sides of an octagon, which consist of 45 degrees, and those of the duodecagon,
which consist of 30 degrees? 1 reply that it was because the sides of the octagon
do not include whole signs, but the [sides of] the duodecagon because they are too
weak. Therefore the [previously mentioned] aspects are sufficient by them-
selves." Morin agreed with the first part of this statement, but he disagreed with
the latter part, because he accepted the semi-sextile and the quincunx aspects that
correspond to the sides of the duodecagon.
4A book that Morin intended to write, but which he did not live long enough to
complete.
'Here Morin says that the existing condition of the air must also be taken into ac-
count, rather than relying solely on the astrological indications.
178

=== Page 189 ===
whatever is [the condition of] the Moon on the third day before and
after the new Moon, that is all; that is, as far as the disposition of
the air during the whole month. And that is not said without cause,
both because then the Moon is approximately in semi-sextile to the
Sun, which aspect is effective and the first one that it makes after
its conjunction with the Sun; and also because if the heliacal
risings and settings of the other Planets and also the fixed stars are
of notable virtue on account of the same reason, [then] how much
more should the heliacal rising and settings of the Moon be impor-
tant, [since it is] a primary Planet and the one closest to us?
In addition, the following aphorisms about the lunations and
their quarters may be noted.
1. If the Planets that are rulers of the conjunction or the opposi-
tion preceding the Ingress of the Sun into a cardinal point are hot
by nature and in hot signs, and connected by body or by aspect
with Planets or fixed stars of a hot nature, either partilely or by ap-
plication; and if they are also in a hot quarter of the figure, and if
the quarter of the year is of a hot nature, a tremendous heat will be
produced in that quarter of the year, and especially at its begin-
ning. And the reasoning is the same about the others.
2. The monthly lunations and their quarters increase or decrease
the temperature of the quarter of the year in which they occur, with
their own nature and quality. And therefore judgment about the
whole quarter must not be made solely from the [chart for the]
quarter of the year, unless the monthly lunations have been in-
spected; and also not even from a lunation can an exact judgment
be made, unless the general nature of the quarter of the year has
been looked at from its figure, and from the preceding new Moon.
3. Great changes are not made without the concourse of Saturn,
Jupiter, or Mars with the rulership of the figure, with either a con-
nection by body or by aspect with the Sun or the Moon. And ca-
lamities are not accustomed to happen unless the malefics are
predominant.
179

=== Page 190 ===
4. A lunation occurring in the 1st or the 10th house, and espe-
cially in a mobile sign, will have sudden and swift effects; and
these will be great if Saturn, Jupiter, or Mars rules the angle of the
lunation; but greater still, if the lunation is with an eclipse; and the
effects will begin to appear on the very day of the lunation.
5. Planets that are direct and swift cause fine weather; when sta-
tionary, they cause winds; when retrograde, waters.
6. Fine weather is caused especially by the Sun, Saturn, Jupiter,
and Mars. But storms are caused by the Moon, Venus, and Mer-
cury. And therefore, fine weather is compatible with great heat and
cold; but rain showers are never compatible with great cold.
7. In the summer, the causes of cold must be many or strong;
then in the winter, those of heat must also be many and strong; in
order that that [such] notable effects could be allotted against the
nature of the quarter of the year.
8. The Planet to which the Moon or the ruler of the lunation first
applies must be carefully observed. For the air is very often
changed by [that body's] nature and both its celestial and terres-
trial state, having taken into account the quarter of the year; and if
it applies to Mars, hail and thunder will have to be expected, unless
the nature of the quarter of the year prevents it; if it applies to Sat-
urn, rains and cold spells; if to Jupiter, fine weather, etc. But very
often a change happens [at the time of] a separation rather than [at
the time of] an application; and the reason is because a change or
an effect is conceived or generated by an application, but it is bom
by a separation, or it is produced aside from its own causes; how-
ever, if the strong causes were from its celestial state, and they
were angular, an application will produce an effect that a partile
syzygy will reinforce.
9. Great attention must be paid to the eastern angle and its rul-
ers. For a Planet in the place of the conjunction, opposition, or
square, and in the ASC, will have many dignities in the figure; it
will then have to be preferred to any others. But in these same
180

=== Page 191 ===
places, the nature of the sign and the Mansion must be looked at,
and in the case of their ruler, its nature, sign, Mansion, and house
in the figure; and judgment must be made from these.
10. If the ruler of the lunation is of a humid nature, in a humid
sign, applying to a humid Planet, also in a humid sign, and if the
Moon first applies to a humid planet, etc., great humidities and
rains will have to be expected in [that] quarter of the year, espe-
cially in a humid one such as winter. And the reasoning is the same
with hot, cold, and dry. But if there should happen to be a contrari-
ety of qualities—as that the ruler is hot by nature, but in a cold
sign—and the votes of both are equal, moderation in heat and cold
will have to be predicted; but if they are unequal, the stronger part
will win out; but it will [also] have to be seen in which quarter of
the year, the nature favors.
11. Causes of heat in the summer increase the heat in accor-
dance with their strength; [but] in the winter, they diminish the
cold. Causes of cold act against the heat in the summer; and they
increase the cold in the winter. And similarly, the causes of humid-
ity moderate the dryness of summer; and they increase the humid-
ity of winter; from which it is evident what in general the causes of
dryness would do,
12. The fixed stars that are conjoined to the Lights or to the rul-
ers of the lunations must be diligently noted; for they are very
powerful for changes in the air; then, those that rise, culminate,
and set with them. See also the fixed stars that are rising and setting
at the moment of the figure.
13. If in any figure of a lunation there happens to be a conjunc-
tion or opposition of the other Planets, and especially one of the
superior Planets [either] among themselves or with the inferior
Planets, that [aspect] will be of greater virtue than one [happening]
at another time, and especially if it is partile. But they will be of the
greatest virtue if they also aspect the Sun and the Moon.
14. The change signified in a lunation will happen when the
181

=== Page 192 ===
Moon, after its conjunction or opposition with the Sun, is con-
nected by a strong ray with the ruler of the constitution; or when it
will come by its own motion to the sign or the degree of the ASC,
especially if that sign is angular in [the figure of] the Revolution of
the Sun, or its quarter. But the syzygies of the Moon with the Sun
will not cause those changes by themselves.
15. If Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars are conjoined among them-
selves, or with Venus and Mercury, or if they are opposed in the lu-
nation; and at the same time the Moon applies to them, the air will
certainly be changed in accordance with the nature of the strongest
planet.
16. When the Planets that are rulers of the constitution are sub-
ordinated or inferior, and by their own motion they come to the
signs of the angles, or to those angles of the figure of the superior
Planets, they act according to their own nature and that of the sign.
17. Some astrologers, according to Mizaldus's Book on the
Judgments of the Air, Chapter 2, direct the ASC of the Lunation to
the ruling Planet or its square or opposition, giving 13011' to each
day. And then they want the change to be [one that is] made ac-
cording to the nature of the Planet, the nature of the sign that it is
in, and the Mansion, unless that Planet is weak. However, this aph-
orism must only be understood to refer to a new Moon and the
places determined in it, as we have said elsewhere for the periodi-
cal Revolutions of the Moon in nativities.
18. Planets that are conjoined are more disposed to fine
weather, but those opposed are more disposed to rains. And when
many Planets, such as 4 or 5, come together in any sign, the judg-
ment about the air must be made rather from the nature of the plan-
ets and the ruler of the sign, than from the nature of the sign; [but]
with this [nature] not neglected, nor [that of] the ruler of the sign.
19. In the case of a new Moon, a full Moon, or a square [of the
Sun and the Moon], the Moon's latitude must not be omitted, nor
182

=== Page 193 ===
that of the planet that rules the chart, nor the triplicity in which they
are placed, since from that a conjecture may be made about the part
of the World in which the change in the air may be expected.
20. Great changes in the air are called the Opening of the Gates
or Cataracts of the Sky} For there is a double opening—that is, a
minor one Of the Gates, and a major one the Cataracts or the Dou-
ble Doors. The minor one is when the Planets that have opposite
domiciles, such as Saturn & the Sun, Saturn & the Moon, Jupiter &
Mercury, and then Mars & Venus, are mutually conjoined, in
square, or opposition to each other.
But the major one is when the Moon, [separating] from a con-
junction, square, or opposition of one of those, immediately moves
to an aspect of the other; that is, from Saturn to the Sun, from Jupi-
ter to Mercury, and from Mars to Venus; or the reverse; for then
[there will be] furious winds, storms, heavy rains, plentiful rains,
hail, thunder and lightning, according to the quarter of the year;
and the Opening of the Gates of the planets must be expected; es-
pecially if the Planets from which the Moon has separated, or to
which she applies in a universal constitution are fortified, and they
are with tempestuous fixed stars, and they are aspecting
themselves.
Moreover, a change in the air is sometimes made with the na-
ture of a superior Planet, sometimes with the nature of the stronger
one, but more often with the nature of the one to which the Moon
applies. As, if when departing from the Sun it will apply to Saturn,
there will be a saturnine change in the air, taking into account the
sign that Saturn occupies, the fixed stars to which it is joined, and
the quarter of the year. And if Mercury by body or by aspect
should be joined to a Planet that is Opening the Doors, it will ex-
cite winds and noisy tempests. Moreover, a retrograde Planet [ex-
cites] abundant rain; two retrograde planets excite even more
abundant rain.
'These expressions for heavy downpours of rain correspond to the popular Eng-
lish expressions, powrmg down rain, raining cats and dogs, and A Noah's Flood.
183

=== Page 194 ===
And it must be noted that if the Sun is around its own perigee,
along with the inferior Planets, they will be inclined to the rains of
the Opening of the Doors, especially in a water sign. But if the Sun
was around its own apogee along with superior Planets, they will
be inclined to fine weather and dry spells, unless the nature of the
sign and its ruler prevents it.
And besides, it must be noted that the Opening of the Gates is
stronger, when the Moon has separated from an inferior planet and
is applying to a superior one, than if it should be separating from a
superior planet and applying to an inferior one. Finally, it must not
be omitted here that both a minor and a major Opening of the Gates
singularly confirm the bond of sympathy, by which the planets are
connected with their own celestial domiciles, and that they act not
only by reason of their proper nature, but also by reason of their
rulership.
Chapter 12. The Synodic Revolutions of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
Venus, and Mercury, both among themselves, and with the
Lights, and their Quarters; and then about their Effects.
Now that the Revolutions of the Sun and the Moon, the primary
Planets in the World, have been sufficiently discussed, the order of
the doctrine demands that we should at least speak of those things
about the Revolutions of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mer-
cury, that do not exceed the strength and capacity of human
intelligence.
First, therefore, their periodic Revolutions to their own radical
places at the beginning of their own creation are even much less
known to us than the periodic Revolutions of the Sun and the
Moon. And that which pertains to their synodic Revolutions, both
with the Lights and among themselves, although it can be known
in what sign and degree of the zodiac they occur, yet at what hour
they may exactly be made is still unknown on account of the defi-
ciency of the astronomical tables; and the hour can scarcely ever
be known about the revolutions of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars
184

=== Page 195 ===
among themselves, on account of the slowness of their motion, es-
pecially when they are located near their stations.
Therefore, on account of these reasons, a celestial figure of
those revolutions cannot be erected from the tables1; whence, it is
not known which one of them is the ruler of a particular house, [as
judged from] the angles, and [consequently] what special effects
they may be going to produce because of the house [positions] at
individual places on Earth; but it can only be known what they
would signify for the whole Earth by reason of their celestial state,
when they are at least considered separately. And that was perhaps
done by Divine Providence, so that at the time of great, threaten-
ing, unfortunate conjunctions, the individual nations might have to
be fearing God and assigning the cause to Him.
Moreover, having supposed that the tables of the motions of the
Sun, the fixed stars, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury
were accurately restored, and also that figures of the synodic Rev-
olutions of the Moon with all the Planets might be accurately
erected, and especially those with Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars; and
that there will be possible figures of the Revolutions for the Sun,
Venus, and Mercury among themselves, and more so with Saturn,
Jupiter, and Mars; and consequently only the figures of the revolu-
tions of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars among themselves will remain,
which, if anyone tries to erect them, he will have to attempt that by
observations and not by tables, because the tables cannot be
brought to such precision and that for every day.
But [instead] it will be necessary to proceed thus. Let the diur-
nal motion of both Planets be observed in some circle, especially
in the meridian circle, on the day before their conjunction [as
shown in] Problems 2 and 4 of Part III of our Astronomy Restored?
'This was true in Morin's time, but it is no longer true in our days, since astrono-
mers are now able to calculate the planets' positions with great accuracy.
Morin's book, Astronomia jam afundamentis integre et exacte restituta... 'As-
tronomy now from its Fundamentals completely and exactly restored...' (Paris:
the Author, 1640.4to 361 pp.).
185

=== Page 196 ===
but having avoided a time in which they are moving more slowly.
And when the difference of longitude of the Planets will be estab-
lished by observation and the diumal [motion] of the slower Planet
at the same time added to make the sum, which does not exceed the
diumal [motion] in longitude of the swifter Planet; then by the
golden rule, the difference of both the diumal [motions] may be
put for the first number, 24 hours for the second number, and the
above said difference in longitude for the third number; for the
fourth will be the proportional hour and minute1; at which time af-
ter the observation the conjunction of those Planets will be made.
And since this observation does not seem to be impossible, espe-
cially when the conjunction will be one of Planets, it is certain that
if it rightly succeeds, it will sometimes be of the greatest utility on
account of the noteworthy force of those conjunctions.
But now, whether the figure of the conjunction was erected or
not erected, the following things should be noted about its celestial
state.
1. What are the natures of both of the conjoined Planets.
2. In what trigon is it made, and into which one will it next pro-
ceed.
3. In what sign is it made, and who is its ruler; then, what is its
celestial state; then, whether and to what extent does it aspect the
place of the conjunction.
4. Whether the conjoined Planets and their ruler are oriental or
occidental to the Sun or the Moon.
5. Whether they are well or badly disposed in the sign, and
which one of them is stronger, and also which one of them is more
familiar to the ruler of the place of the conjunction.
6. What is their latitude and declination.
'That is, find the time to conjunction from the equation, (Difference in longitude/
Difference in motions) X 24 hours = time to conjunction.
186

=== Page 197 ===
7. Which Planets are aspecting the place of the conjunction and
its ruler; and to which Planet do both of the conjoined Planets first
apply and also the ruler of the conjunction.
8. To which fixed stars are they also conjoined, and in which
Mansion.
Moreover, by having combined all of these, the universal virtue
may be elicited, by which that sort of conjunction will act upon the
whole Earth.
But if the figure of the synodic Revolution can be erected, from
that can also be known its terrestrial state and what kind of effects
it may be going to produce according to the things signified by the
houses for any horizon.1 For since it is certain that those things will
be made in any house of the figure that is made with respect to any
horizon, it is also certain that it will do those things that are signi-
fied by that house and by those [Planets] that are in it, or which the
rulers of that conjunction rule on account of their determination.
And so, if the conjunction is made in the 1st house, it will act
upon the beginnings and arising of things, and the nativities of
men; and it will perhaps cause the birth of some notable man of the
nature of the Planets that are conjoined. If it is made in the 10th, it
will act upon kingdoms, republics, dignities, and undertakings. If
it is in the 9th, it will act upon religions and sects; if in the 7th,
upon marriages, lawsuits, and wars; if in the 8th, upon deaths, nat-
ural disasters, and violent [occurrences], according to the force of
the conjunction.
But the conjunctions of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars produce
greater effects than the others; and they are commonly believed to
excite the overthrow or change of kingdoms, new religions, sects,
wars, savage plagues, floods, and other stupendous ef-
fects—namely, in regions where they are in houses conformable to
such things, or in regions where they are overhead, and there is a
'That is, for any particular location on Earth.
187

=== Page 198 ===
disposition of the lower things conformable to the notable strength
of that conjunction. And therefore, astrologers are accustomed to
pay close attention to these conjunctions, having scorned the rest
of the conjunctions. And Albumasar in his book on the Great Con-
junctions states why they should be more effective in certain signs;
and in this matter he follows the principles of Hermes [as reported]
in Haly,1 Judgments of the Stars, Part 8; but their doctrine is con-
fused, so we think that it ought to be omitted here; and we have
only added some aphorisms below that are common to all synodic
Revolutions and in keeping with the tables included in Chapters 6
& 7 above, that will provide more light and certainty for making
predictions.
1. The synodic Revolution of any two Planets in the same
triplicity in which there was an immediately preceding conjunc-
tion of those same Planets, continues its effects, or produces simi-
lar ones again; in a complementary triplicity, it produces effects
partly of the same kinds, and partly different; but in a triplicity of a
contrary type, it produces contrary and extraordinary effects—not
however always the greatest effects—for the magnitude of the ef-
fects will correspond in all synods to the strength of the Planets
ruling the conjunction.
2. If a conjunction and its ruler are in the same triplicity, the ef-
fects of that conjunction will be greater by reason of the triplicity,
both in the air and on the regions of the Earth ruled by that
triplicity.
3. Great conjunctions in cardinal signs always produce great ef-
fects; and they will be greater the closer they are to the beginnings
of those signs; both on account of the maximum strength of the
cardinal points, and because those signs are the exaltations of the
principal Planets.
'Haly Abenragel, Praeclarissimus Liber completus de iudiciis astrorum 'The
Very Famous Complete Book on the Judgments of the Stars' (Venice; Erhard
Ratdolt, 1485. often reprinted elsewhere). Book 8 discusses the Revolutions of
the Years of the World (Aries Fngresses). Morin probably used one of the later
editions.
188

=== Page 199 ===
4. The conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter presages great things
more than the others, because both Planets are of the greatest vir-
tue and authority in the Caelum, as has hitherto been observed by
astrologers. No wonder! Since both of them are accompanied by
their own satellites like the Sun, which was [a thing] unknown to
the old [astrologers]. But their conjunctions in the cardinal signs
are more effective than in the rest of the signs.
5. Many Planets in cardinal signs always signify something
great, both in universal constitutions and in particular ones; for ei-
ther they are conjoined or square or opposed, which in those signs
very often causes some huge evils.
6. The conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter is always very evil, un-
less the benefic Planets powerfully rule that conjunction. More-
over, it is worse in cardinal signs, and worst of all in Cancer, which
is the exile of Saturn and the fall of Mars. And this conjunction is
always followed by corruption of the air, plagues, floods, the de-
struction of fish, wars, and the death of Princes.
7. All the conjunctions of Planets in malefic signs are ruinous;
but they are even worse if the malefic [Planets] badly afflict them,
or if they are badly configured with the place of the conjunction.1
8. In all conjunctions of the Planets, great notice must be taken
of the Sun and the Moon, whether they are conjoined with or con-
figured with the conjoined [Planets]. For the resulting effects are
more universal, more conspicuous, and they pertain to Kings and
Princes.
9. A conjunction in fire signs excites heat and dryness; in air
signs, winds and storms; in earth signs, icy cold and snows; in wa-
ter signs, rains. However, note must be taken of the quarter of the
year and the nature of the Planets that are conjoined; which, if they
agree with the [nature of] the signs, there will be a harmful excess;
'This entire paragraph is omitted by Hieroz, and the following paragraphs are
misnumbered - Par. 8 being numbered Par. 7, etc.
189

=== Page 200 ===
if they disagree, there will be a moderation of the natures.
10. The stronger one of the conjoined Planets in the place of the
conjunction, and the one that is higher in its eccentric path, and the
one that is raised up higher above the horizon, will be superior in
the effects; and if it is benefic by nature, it will do something be-
neficent; but if it is a malefic, it will do something harmful.
11. If the ruler of the conjunction is benefic by nature and is
well disposed, it will do something beneficent; if it is a malefic and
badly disposed, it will cause evils.
12. If the conjunction is in a fixed sign, its effects will be slow
and long-lasting, especially if Saturn is one of the conjoined Plan-
ets, and if in addition it is stationary or slow in its motion. If the
conjunction is made in a mobile sign, the effects will be swift and
of a brief duration, especially if Mars or Mercury is one of the con-
joined Planets and swift in its motion. If the conjunction is made in
common signs, the effects will be middling.
But that which pertains to the squares and opposition of these
conjunctions is two-fold—namely, by determination and by syz-
ygy; which, since they deploy the effects of the conjunction by ad-
vancing, increasing, diminishing, suppressing, or doing something
new, as was stated in connection with the synodic revolutions of
the Sun and the Moon; also, the judgment of these comes about
similarly—namely, account being taken of the virtue and determi-
nation of the conjunction, and of the celestial constitution that is in
effect.
Finally, the times of the effects of each synodic Revolution are
detected by bringing the conjoined Planets to the angles of the fig-
ure or to the places of the rulers, or by bringing the rulers to the an-
gles and place of the conjunction, or by directions defined by the
diurnal mean [motion] of the swifter one of the conjoined Planets
of the periodic or synodic revolution, as was done for the Moon in
Section I, Chapter 12; but it must be noted that both here and for
the Moon, the directions must not be started from the figures of the
190

=== Page 201 ===
quarters or the opposition, but only from the figure of the conjunc-
tion, down to the next following conjunction, taking note of how
the celestial charts of the quadratures and the opposition agree
with the determination, or disagree with the directions to those
times.
Chapter 13. The Composition of the Subordinates of the
Universal Constitutions of the Caelum, and their mixed Effects.
In Section I, Chapter 3, the subordination of the Universal con-
stitutions of the Caelum was fully discussed; and it was shown that
the synodic Revolutions of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury,
and the Moon, both with the Sun and among themselves, are sub-
ordinated to the Mundane Revolution of the Sun. But then we have
hitherto only discussed simple constitutions—that is, the Mun-
dane Revolution of the Sun, and the synodic Revolutions of the
Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, both among
themselves, and seen separately with the Sun, and their effects.
Now, therefore, it remains that we should talk about their mixtures
and say a few things, but particularly necessary ones, about their
mixed effects.
And so, for judging the effects of the Mundane Revolution of
the Sun, the proper significations of the celestial charts must be
combined—both that of the Revolution itself, and those of the new
Moon, the full Moon, and the squares of the Sun and the Moon im-
mediately preceding that revolution. Taking note that the signifi-
cation of the squares and the full Moon depend upon the significa-
tion of the new Moon, as was already said previously; and conse-
quently, particular notice must be paid to the new Moon itself,
even though between it and the Sun's Ingress into the beginning of
Aries, the full Moon or a quarter comes in between; so neverthe-
less that that new Moon should only be viewed as the cause that is
disposing or preparing the sublunar Nature for the proper effects
of the Solar Ingress into Aries, but not as the efficient cause [of
those effects]. And the celestial charts of the squares and the oppo-
sition of the Moon to the places determined at the time of the new
191

=== Page 202 ===
Moon, for which there is no small force, should not be spumed.
Moreover, in the case of the lunations in the first quarter of the
year—that is, those occurring between the Sun's Ingresses into
Aries and Cancer—the proper significations of the quarters and
the full Moon will have to be combined—first, indeed, if they are
close to the signification of their own new Moon itself—but then
all of the significations or what results from them, will have to be
combined with the signification of the chart of the solar Ingress
into the beginning of Aries; and no more should note be taken of
the chart of the new Moon preceding that Ingress, whose efficacy
has passed and lapsed.1 And it will have to be done similarly for
the individual quarters of the year.
But for that which concerns the other synodic Revolutions of
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, with the Lights, and
among themselves, it must first be seen which [Planet] the Sun last
encountered before its Aries Ingress, and the Moon before the new
Moon preceding that Ingress. And note will have to be taken of
that sort of synods as the causes disposing sublunar Nature to the
effects of the Sun for that year, and the effects of the Moon for that
month; and the transits of the Sun and the Moon through the
squares and opposition to the places of those synods will [also]
have to be looked at until the time when the Sun and the Moon
come together with them again—also not having omitted the
squares and opposition through the syzygies.
But as for the other synods of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and
Mercury among themselves, there are noted in the charts of the
Sun and the Moon, their current synodic Revolutions, but espe-
cially those of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, and the transits of both
the Lights and Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury through
the places in which they last came together; since none of the
above said things are superfluous in Nature or can be indifferent,
'He means that the lunations and their quarters occurring after the Solar Ingress
need no longer be compared to the lunation preceding the Solar Ingress, because
its signification has lapsed.
192

=== Page 203 ===
but the individual things come together with their own force to al-
ter and change these sublunar things. Whence the breadth of this
marvelous science and the difficulty thrown to human intelligence
can easily be inferred. But so that this may be at least in part
removed, the following rules may be noted.
First. If the same [Planet] is the ruler of two subordinated fig-
ures, and is in the same sign in both cases, that one will be very ef-
fective in the latter figure for the common signification of both fig-
ures, also with the ruler of that sign strongly concurring. If the rul-
ers are different but in the same sign, see in the latter figure
whether the ruler of the sign is connected by a strong ray with the
rulers of the figures or with one of them, or whether it is in the prin-
cipal angles of a figure; for then, the latter figure will also be very
effective with regard to the common significations of both figures.
Finally, if there are different rulers of the figures, and they are in
different signs that are not in the same triplicity, nor do they re-
ceive themselves in the latter figure, nor are they connected by a
strong ray, the latter figure will be of small virtue or of none at all
with regard to the signification of the former figure, at least to
move it forward.
Second. If two subordinated figures have the same ASC sign,
and its ruler is also the ruler of the primary points in the constitu-
tions, or in at least one of them, and especially if it is the first one,
or if it aspects those points by a strong ray, and if that one is strong
in its celestial state and is angular, the latter figure will strongly
move forward the things signified by the previous figure.
Third. A universal constitution that is prior in order and supe-
rior will burst forth into its own significations through later and
subordinated constitutions that occur during its own period [of ef-
fectiveness] if those constitutions signify things similar to the prior
constitution; but they are retarded or impeded if they signify the
contrary; for the prior and superior constitutions always retain
their own Iliture effects in potential, which are reduced to actuality
by later or inferior constitutions, not indeed by all of them; but
193

=== Page 204 ===
only by the proper virtue of those that are similar and concordant.,
as is similarly plain from the genethliacal figure of a native and its
Revolutions.
Fourth. Many constitutions occurring at the same time, such as
a new Moon along with a synod of Saturn & Jupiter, or a similar
synod, or a new Moon along with a Mundane Revolution of the
Sun, produce the greatest effects, especially if the ASC of the con-
stitutions that occur at the same time is the same, or the ruler of
their primary point is the same.
Chapter 14. The Dependence of the particular Constitutions of
Nativities on the Universal Constitutions already discussed; and
how they act upon individual Natives during their Lifetime.
The doctrine contained in this chapter is of great moment in as-
trology—that is, because particulars are subject to universals, as
Ptolemy rightly instructs in the Preface to [Tetrabiblos] Book 2.1
And this is plain in the case of any native who depends upon his
own genethliacal constitution for his temperament, habits, intelli-
gence, and the future accidents of his life, that universal astrology
gives evidence to that experience; in fact that his particular consti-
tution of the Caelum will depend upon the preceding universal
constitutions—namely upon the Solar Ingresses into Aries, Can-
cer, Libra, and Capricorn, and upon the lunations, of which the for-
mer can only be a part, not one acting independently entirely,
which form a potentiality that it reduces into actuality according to
its own mode.
But neither Ptolemy, nor Cardan in his Commentaty, have set
forth and elucidated this doctrine as is right. For Cardan erred in
his Comment on Textus 2 when he says2: "No one thing can be sig-
'Ptolemy says {Tetrabiblos ii. 1): "And since weaker natures always yield to the
stronger, and the particular always falls under the general..." and also
{Tetrabiblos i. 3) "...for the lesser cause always yields to the greater and stron-
ger..." [Robbins's translations]
2Cardan, ibid, pp., 169 col.2 - 170, col .1.
194

=== Page 205 ===
nified generally for the whole Earth; and therefore general consti-
tutions are not given by way of an acting cause, but only by way of
the place." That is, no celestial cause can be given that signifies
some one thing for the whole Earth, but it will only signify differ-
ent things by way of the different places. If indeed it is certain from
the elements that a conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter viewed by
themselves with their own celestial state, does some other thing in
respect to the whole Earth, than a conjunction of Saturn and Mars,
and both the latter and the former signify some one thing generally
for the whole Earth. That is, the latter is the effect or impression
from Saturn and Mars conjoined, but the former is the effect from
Saturn and Jupiter conjoined.
For from the elements it is also certain that the conjunction of
Saturn and Mars is, at the same moment of time, in the individual
houses of the figure, not with respect to one place, but with respect
to the whole Earth. And for those for whom it is in the 10th, it cer-
tainly signifies about the accidents of the 10th; for those for whom
it is in the 8th, it signifies about the accidents of the 8th; for those
for whom it is in the 7th, it signifies about the accidents of the 7th;
but in each house, it produces effects and makes an impression ac-
cording to its own force; and that is other than what the conjunc-
tion of Saturn and Jupiter would do; therefore, it signifies some
one thing for the whole World, but only generally; and the same
thing must be said about the Solar Ingress into the beginning of
Aries, about an eclipse, or any particular new Moon, etc.; from
which it is plain that that universality of celestial cause was not
known to Ptolemy nor to Cardan.
Furthermore, such a cause or universal constitution is deter-
mined for the whole Earth by the individual places on Earth
through its own terrestrial state with respect to each location,
which state is pronounced by the celestial figure erected for each
place; and from it arises the universal cause with respect to the
kingdom, province, city, and country district, which Ptolemy and
Cardan admitted; and about which we also must discuss.
195

=== Page 206 ===
Therefore, Ptolemy in Textus 3 and Cardan in his Commentary,
divide this universal cause into those that are determined to the
whole kingdom, the whole province, a single city, and a single
country district; and as the country district, the city, the province,
and the kingdom are subordinated, just as a part is to the whole, so
it is insinuated from that that those universal causes are subordi-
nated. However, neither Cardan nor Ptolemy have said how an in-
ferior [cause] can depend upon a superior one in acting, or how it
can determine it, nor how a celestial figure for a whole kingdom
should be erected, so that it can be known from it what may be
signified for the whole kingdom.
And since Cardan in his Commentary, in Textus 7, has asserted
with his customary audacity that after the year 1583 and down to
the year 1782 before the middle, a monarchy will begin and every-
thing will be ruled by a single will; and this [prediction] perhaps
stimulated the Kings of Spain to their desire for a monarchy, to
which they were directly proceeding for a sufficiently long time,
and finally under Philip III (1578-1621) they became stationary;
and under Philip IV (1605-1655) they turned retrograde, having
lost the kingdoms of Catalonia and Lusitania, along with the East
Indies and much other wealth; it is certain that for such a monar-
chy, no figure of any universal constitution could be erected, such
as for a new Moon, a Solar Ingress into Aries, or any eclipse.
For if it should be said that it can be erected in a city that is the
metropolis or headquarters of a whole monarchy, in which the
monarch himself stays, surely since it is by the will of the monarch
whatever city of the World he wishes to make his metropolis and
in it to fix his residence, it is plain that individual nations would be
subject to a universal constitution, not by reason of their terrestrial
status or site proper to a [particular] horizon, but [simply] by the
will of the monarch, which is entirely alien to the mode of acting of
the stars. And this reason is valid not only for monarchy in general,
but for any kingdom or empire. For what astrologer would have
said that the Philippine Islands would be affected by an eclipse,
with its figure erected in Spain, where the Prince who rules those
196

=== Page 207 ===
island stays, unless perhaps by accident as will be explained
below?
And so, all these universal causes, whether they are of a natural
kind found between the Solar Ingress into Aries, and the following
new Moon seen only in the Caelum, or a local kind that is found
between the figure erected for the whole kingdom and a figure
erected for any of its cities, it seems to us that it must be defined ac-
cording to the following rules.
First. No place on the face of the Earth naturally rules another
and per se. For in the Terrestrial Globe looked at as itself, the indi-
vidual parts of its surface are in themselves equal; and having
taken one part as A, no valid natural reason can be offered why that
one should be subject to part B rather than to part C, or D, E, F,
etc., placed around it, or to the closer part L rather than to the more
distant part M.
Second. The metropolitan city1 of a kingdom can be con-
structed at any place on Earth, as is self-evidently known. There-
fore, no place on Earth per se and naturally will depend upon an-
other as the designated metropolitan city.
Third. Any place on earth is naturally affected by the constitu-
tion of the Caelum through a celestial chart determined for that
place on Earth, and not for another place in which the chart of that
constitution admits a noticeable diversity of the angles with regard
to the degrees, but especially the signs [on the angles]. Otherwise,
universal astrology would collapse, if a judgment about the acci-
dents in each place could not be made from a figure erected for that
place.
Fourth. No man is naturally subject to another man except his
parents, from whom he receives his existence as a man and his life;
and this natural liberty still endures amongst the people of the for-
est. But politically, each man can be subject to another; and thus a
'By metropolitan city Morin evidently means capital city.
197

=== Page 208 ===
servant is subject to his own master, a client to his Prince or King,
and a captive Emperor to his conqueror, as was the case with
Bajazet1 and Tamerlane,2 and it is known for many others.
Fifth. But from these it follows that this country district de-
pends upon some city, and that city depends upon some kingdom;
this must not be understood of the natural dependence of those
same places, but [only] of the political dependence of the men in-
habiting those places, who are politically subordinated to some
King or Prince—which is a dependence by accident, as mentioned
above, and frequently changeable by the accidents of Fortune.
Sixth. The accidents or fates of each place are of two kinds. For
some of them are natural, such as dispositions of the air, and the
plagues, sterilities, and floods that follow from that, then those that
pertain to the things signified by the houses per se. But others are
political, such as laws, edicts, taxes, etc. The fates of the first kind
in each place depend primarily and per se on the constitutions or
the universal celestial causes by charts erected for that place. But
fates of the latter kind depend particularly on the personal nativity
and Revolution of the King or Prince or their plenipotentiary min-
ister; but universally by the same universal constitution, according
as it is received by the King and his Minister and Council in the
place, in which these are found at the moment of that constitution.
For that constitution affects individuals according as it is
determined with respect to those individuals.
And therefore, individuals act and experience [its effects] ac-
cording as they receive it, according as by their own nativities and
directions they agree or disagree with it. And so if the figure of a
universal constitution is erected in the metropolitan city of any
province, and it is compared with the figure of that same constitu-
tion erected for the place, where the King and his Prime Minister
was [at that time], by having consulted the figures of their nativi-
1 Bajazet I Yilderim (1347-1403), Ottoman Sultan, was defeated and taken pris-
oner by Tamerlane in 1402.
2Tamerlane or Timur Lenk (13367-1405), the great Mongol chieftan.
198

=== Page 209 ===
ties and [current] Revolutions along with their directions, it will be
possible to conjecture what will be signified by such a constitution
for that same province. Moreover, by the title 'King' is to be un-
derstood not only the King himself or the Queen, but the royal pri-
mates, amongst whom there is an absolute power of acting, in
which case it must refer to those primates rather than to the King or
Queen, namely because they will govern everything according to
their own free choice and impulse.
Seventh. The native receives the influx of the Solar Ingress into
Aries, in the place where he is then found; and that Ingress allots its
own effects in that place by reason of its celestial and terrestrial
state during that revolution of the Sun. Moreover, the native who
receives that kind of influx with both its states in that same place; if
he [later] proceeds to another place, he of course carries with him
the influx received by him according to both its states; but by trav-
eling he frees himself from that influx of the terrestrial state re-
ceived in his former place, and he becomes liable to the effects that
the same Ingress produces by its own terrestrial state in the places
that he traverses, or in which he resides, just as when going
through a city in which a plague is raging, or making a stay there,
he may be greatly exposed to the plague. And from that it can hap-
pen that in the prior place death or illnesses may be signified for
the native and in the latter place health and life
Therefore, for the best remedy for the plague, it was said not un-
helpfully by the ancients that one should go a long distance away
from the place where the plague is raging—namely, beyond the
limits of the celestial figure that stirred up the plague in that place,
namely where the angles [of the figure] are changed, or the rulers
of the constitution signifying the plague, and one must be slow to
return for fear of remnants [of it remaining]. And let these things
that have been said about the dependence of one place on another
by reason of a celestial constitution, and then about the depend-
ence of the native on individual [places], be sufficient.
Consequently, moreover, we should say how the native may be
199

=== Page 210 ===
subject to the universal constitutions of the place in which he is lo-
cated—whether he would receive [the influence of] that constitu-
tion in the place where he is located, or whether he would receive
that constitution in the place of his nativity, or where he stays for a
time, or in another place from which he has departed. For which,
the following rules should be noted.
First. All of the universal causes are [made] powerful by the
dignities of the planets, the strength of the rulers, and the state of
the universal constitution, namely its celestial and terrestrial state;
but some of them are weak. Moreover, they must be compared
among themselves and with the particular ones.
Second. The celestial causes that are the most universal and
most powerful produce the greater and more powerful and longer
lasting effects. And so, the Solar Ingress into the beginning of
Aries, then the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, are the more uni-
versal and produce greater and longer lasting effects than a new
Moon and an eclipse, at least other things being equal compared to
the strength and debility of conjunctions in turn.
Third. Other things being equal, a universal constitution pre-
vails over a particular one; and a more universal constitution pre-
vails over a less universal one. But a weak universal constitution
will not prevail over a strong particular constitution; and a weak
universal will not prevail over a strong particular. Therefore, if the
Solar Ingress into Aries weakly signified dryness, and a following
new Moon strongly signified rains, it will rain in that month. And
similarly, if both the Solar Ingress into Aries and the new Moon
would have signified a good and healthy condition of the air.
Moreover, if a native had in that year and month the signification
of a severe illness from his directions, Revolutions of the Sun and
the Moon, as well as from transits, which he did not foresee and
which he did not resist, he will certainly be ill. And so with the rest
[of the indications].
Fourth. Other things being equal, the effects of a constitution
200

=== Page 211 ===
on many people, such as that a plague signified by a universal con-
stitution, will kill many people, is more certain than the effect of a
particular constitution on one person, such as that a native from his
own direction and revolution is going to die. Since it is easier to
prevent a single particular effect than [one affecting] many people.
Fifth. Particular constitutions agreeing with a universal consti-
tution will undergo the effect of that universal constitution,
whether it is good, or evil—and that entirely or in part, according
as they agree strongly or weaker between themselves. And there-
fore, if in a universal constitution of the Caelum while repeating
the synods or syzygies of the Sun, the Moon, or a Planet, they may
have been similarly disposed as in the figure of the radix or a Rev-
olution of the native, he will certainly be affected by the universal
constitution in accordance with its significations.
Sixth. If the significator of illnesses or death in the nativity, or
in a Revolution of a native, will be the same as the significator of
calamitous illness in a universal constitution, and if there is a con-
cordant direction, he will die in that same year or month. And simi-
larly, if a Planet that is the significator of dignities in a nativity is
the same as the ruler of the MC of a universal constitution, and if it
should be strong and fortunate in either one [of those charts], that
native will get honors or a dignity.
Seventh. In those nativities in which there are the same angles
or places of the Lights along with the angles and the places of the
Lights in a universal constitution, those nativities are well or evilly
affected, according as the universal constitution is good or evil. If
the places in the nativity are opposed or in square to the places in
the universal constitution, they will be evilly affected, [but] if they
are in trine or sextile, they will be well affected.
But if the principal rulers of the nativity, and especially those of
the ASC, the Sun, and the Moon, should have a connection by rul-
ership or aspect with the place of the new Moon or full Moon im-
mediately preceding the nativity, or the ruler of its place; and
201

=== Page 212 ===
should Saturn and Mars be in the principal angles of the natal fig-
ure, or if the Lights should be afflicted, such nativities will be base,
unlucky, and monstruous.
But if the degree of the conjunction of the Sun and the Moon
immediately preceding the nativity is fortunate in its celestial and
terrestrial state in the natal figure, then some notable good will be
signified according to the nature of the house of the figure in which
that degree was. As, if it was in the 1 Oth, it will signify notable dig-
nities; if in the 7th, great fortune in marriage, etc. If it was unfortu-
nate in its celestial and terrestrial state, it will signify some huge
evil—as, if it was in the 8th square Saturn or Mars, a premature or
violent death. If it was well disposed in its celestial state, but in a
bad house, the native will fall into misfortune [signified] by that
house, but he will overcome or evade it, and he will not succumb to
it. And that is evident in my case, since I have that degree in the
12th house which is [the house] of illnesses, enemies, and prison.
Finally, if it was evilly afflicted in its celestial state in a good
house, it will prevent the good things of that house, or it will throw
them into confusion.
Eighth. Unfortunate constitutions from which none or few es-
cape are those whose rulers are very powerful for evil and [pos-
ited] exactly in the principal angles.
Ninth. If the ruler of the nativity or of the ASC of the native is a
benefic and strong and rules the primary point of the constitution
or its ruler, he will escape [the effect of] the evil constitution, but
especially if that constitution is not very evil, and the native's rev-
olution is also contrary to it. But there is nothing that renders him
more safe from a bad universal constitution than when the ruler of
the nativity or its ASC is also the ruler of that bad consitution, and
especially if it is a benefic; for if it is a malefic, he will be saved at
the beginning, but he will perish at the end, especially if the direc-
tion and the Revolutions are in agreement.
Tenth. The nativity and the Revolutions of the King are univer-
202

=== Page 213 ===
sal causes with respect to his subjects. And therefore, a subject of
the court who has a discord with the King's nativity or Revolution,
should fear for himself from the [actions of the] King; but he who
has a concordance will be made fortunate with him, especially
with his own nativity or revolution inclining to good or evil. And
what is said about a King or a Prime Minister of a kingdom should
also be understood to be said about any Prince.
Chapter 15. The General and Particular
Significations of Comets.
Among the new phenomena of the Caelum, there is none that
disturbs the minds of men so much as a Comet, which by almost
everyone is thought to be some threatening scourge of God, and a
portent of some imminent huge evil on the Earth, whence this
[verse] of Claudian1:
"And never is a Comet seen in the sky with impunity."
Moreover, Ptolemy says a few little things about Comets in
Tetrabiblos, ii. 9, on which Cardan commented diffusely; then in
Aphorism 100 of the Centiloquy,2 of which Ptolemy is however
not the author, as I have proved in my Astrological Notes on the
Commentary3 on that same Centiloquy published by Lord de
Villennes.4 But from those things that have been handed down by
Ptolemy and others, selecting those that are more conformable to
'Claudian (c.370-c.404), Roman poet.
2See now James Herschel Holden, Five Medieval Astrologers (Tempe, Az.:
A.F.A., Inc., 2008), where the latter part ofPtolemy's Aphorism 100 reads as fol-
lows, "And the comets, whose stand is in the eleventh sign from the Sun, if they
appear in an angle of some kingdom, that king or some great man of the kingdom
will die; but if they appear in a succedent house of it, the things of the treasuries of
it will have good, and it will change the government of it; but if they appear in the
cadents, they produce sick people and sudden deaths; and if they move from the
west to the east, some other enemy will attack those regions; but if it does not
move, the enemy will be indigenous."
^ Re marques astrologiques de lean Baptiste Morin...svr Le Commentaire du
CENTILOQVEde PTOLOMEE... (Paris: Pierre Menard, 1657)
Nicolas de Bourdin, Marquess of Villennes (17th century), LE CENTILOGVE
DE PTOLOMEE (Paris: Cardin Besongne, 1651)
203

=== Page 214 ===
the principles and the truth of astrology, and repudiating the rest,
the following presages about Comets may be noted:
First. What is the nature of a comet; for since comets are the
offspring of the Planets in the Ether,1 and they are therefore said to
be pseudo-planets; therefore, in its effects a Comet will principally
emulate the nature of that Planet whose color it resembles. And
therefore, the one that appears dark is of the nature of Saturn; the
one that is very white is of the nature of Jupiter; the one that is very
red is of the nature of Mars; the one that is yellow is of the nature of
Venus; the one that is variegated is of the nature of Mercury; the
one that is pale white is of a Lunar nature; the one that is brilliant is
of a Solar nature; and each one according to its own nature pro-
duces various changes on sublunar things, and thus the kinds of its
future effects may be foreseen.
Second. The greater, longer-lasting, and brighter a Comet will
be, the greater, longer-lasting, and more conspicuous effects it will
produce. And the same thing must be said about its tail, the longer
it is. And contrary things are signified by the contraries.
Third. The swifter a Comet is in its own motion, the quicker
and more rapidly will it give forth its effects.
Fourth. Comets retrograding into a preceding sign by their own
motion portend huge changes of kingdoms and religions, and a
great deprivation of all natural order in those. But when direct,
changes that are more conformable to Nature and to reason.
Fifth. During a Comet's own apparition, any Planet or notable
fixed star that it is continually pointing to with the end of its tail,
portends that that Planet or fixed star will be the principal cause of
the future effects.
Sixth. A Comet during its own motion passing from one sign
into another is always under the rulership of the Planet in whose
l93In Morin's day, comets were thought by some to be generated by the Planets.
204

=== Page 215 ===
domicile it is, and it acts with its nature and state, especially if it is
connected to it by body or by a strong ray.
Seventh. A Comet acts with the strong aspects that it receives
from the Planets, especially in its rising, as did the Comet observed
by Haly Rodoan.1
Eighth. A comet acts strongly on those places on Earth which it
is directly above. And therefore, the wider the zone of the Caelum
that it passes through from south to north, the greater the portion of
the Earth lying under that zone that it will affect with great changes.
From which the reason is evident why the great and terrible Comet
of 1618,2 which began with a southern declination of 17 degrees and
left off in a northern declination of 80 degrees, with a retrograde
motion and a long tail, principally portended the invasion of the
Chinese empire by the Tartars3; for the whole of China suffered
from that region or zone of the Caelum. I say principally, for even
though through the whole circumference of the Earth subject to that
zone it made great changes; nevertheless, the invasion of China by
the Tartars with the horrendous massacre of men was the principal
effect of it, having begun at the time that the Comet appeared.
Ninth. The presages of comets selected in their appearance and
progress taken from the nature of the signs, according as they are
'Haly Rodoan or Haly Abenrudian was "All ibn Ridwan (988-1061 or 1067), an
Egyptian astrologer, who was the author of Tractatus de cometarum
significationibus perxii sign a zodiaci 'A Treatise on the Significations of Com-
ets in the 12 Signs of the Zodiac' (Numberg, 1563). The comet in question was
observed in 1006; Haly's chart of its appearance (set for the lunation of 30 Apr
1006) is given by Cardan, Commentary, p. 213.
2There were two comets in the year 1618. Morin refers to the second one, now
known as Comet 1618 II. According to calculations made from the orbit in Brian
G. Marsden's Catalogue of Cometary Orbits (Hillside, N.J.: Enslow Publishers,
1983), its Declination was 17° South on or about 25 November, and its motion
was retrograde. Thereafter, the Declination rapidly increased in the northerly di-
rection, reaching 15° North on or about 22 January 1619.
3Morin apparently refers to the invasion of Chinese territory in 1618 by the
Manchu under Nurhaci (1559-1626), who began the overthrow of the Ming Dy-
nasty, which was completed by his successors with the establishment of the
Ch'ing Dynasty in 1644.
205

=== Page 216 ===
commonly said to be human, wild beasts, bicorporeal, etc.; then
from the forms of the constellations Aries (Ram), Taurus (Bull),
Pisces (Fishes), Serpentarius (Serpent-holder), Delphinus (Dol-
phin), Hydra (Water-snake), etc. are groundless and only founded
upon fables and fictions, but not presages taken from the proper
natures of the fixed stars and constellations.
Tenth. Judgment must be made of a Comet in any particular
sign as of a Planet analogous by nature to it in that same sign.
Eleventh. Comets oriental to the Sun are said to produce their
own effects more quickly than those that are occidental to the Sun.
Twelfth. Regions of the World from which Comets begin to
emerge and move must be noted. For the place from which a
Comet emerges indicates that something evil will be produced
from there, and that it will affect places to which that Comet moves
by its own motion, namely to the east, west, north, or south.
And these things said about the general effects of Comets,
traced through the whole World which they traverse, should be
sufficient.
But in their types, in so far as they are considered in celestial
charts, a two-fold observation occurs. The First is with regard to
general charts, namely the Annual Revolution of the Sun and the
lunations, either with or without an eclipse, for it is said in the last
Aphorism of the Centiloquy that it must be observed whether
Comets oriental to the Sun within the distance of one sign appear
in the angles, or in the succedent places, or in the cadents, which
must be understood to refer to the figure of the Annual Revolution
of the Sun or the synod of the Moon that immediately precedes the
appearance of the Comet, as I have explained in my Astrological
Notes,1 in which the true doctrine of the whole Centiloquy is
handed down.
'His Remarques aslrologiques, mentioned in a previous note, contains an exten-
sive commentary on all 100 Aphorisms of the Centiloquy.
206

=== Page 217 ===
And it will have to be judged from that about the effects of a
particular Comet in the region to which that figure pertains; cer-
tainly, considering the house of the figure in which the comet falls
in its appearance, and its determination, and its connection with
the rulers of that figure, noting also its transits through the princi-
pal places of the figure, and then its celestial state.
The Second is with regard to natal horoscopes. For similarly, it
must be observed in what house of the figure the appearing Comet
falls, and then what is its celestial state. For if it is badly disposed,
and it has fallen into the 1st house, by being especially for life,
with an unlucky radical direction and a similar Revolution of the
Sun or the Moon, death will have to be feared. If it is well disposed
and it falls into the 10th, it will be lucky for undertakings and dig-
nities with a current radical direction, and a similar revolution of
the Sun or the Moon, it will also signify something great in under-
takings and honors; and so with the rest [of the houses].
But those ones who are born at the time of the appearance of a
comet are very powerfully affected by it, according to the determi-
nation of that Comet and the celestial state of the Comet; and for
them, something great is signified if the Comet is in the ASC or the
MC of the natal figure. But those who are bom after the appear-
ance of the Comet are not otherwise affected by it except as the
Comet pertains to the lunation that immediately preceded the na-
tivity, if it had appeared during the lunation.
Whoever wants to see more things about Comets that are less
true, indeed alien to reason, may read the ample collections of
Junctinus on this subject.1
Chapter 16. How the Daily Effects of the Stars on these
Sublunar Things should be Predicted.
The daily effects of the stars on these sublunar things depend on
the universal constitutions, which have been sufficiently discussed
'Namely in Junctinus's famous Speculum Astronomiae 'Mirror of Astrology'
(Lyons: Symphorien Beraud, 1583. 2nd ed.).
207

=== Page 218 ===
previously. For if a universal constitution of the year and the
month presages rain, the daily constitution of the Caelum presag-
ing rain (such as an application of the Moon to Saturn) will give
rain, but not however if the universal constitution has signified
dryness. Moreover, there are effects of the universal constitutions
in at least seven different ways—namely, heat or cold, dryness or
humidity, wind or calm, lightning flashes, thunder, lightning, fer-
tility or sterility, sickness or health, and peace or war; of which, in-
dividual instances are signified by their own genuine causes that
are powerful in those universal constitutions, as was said above.
And 6 ways are given for predicting the daily effects of the stars on
these sublunar things, which must be called a daily or particular
constitution, and which will now be discussed individually.
First. By the doctrine of Offusius, the imperfection of which we
disclosed in Section II, Chapter 1. Add that, by it only hot and cold
can be predicted, then dryness and humidity in the air; for the Sun
above the horizon anywhere or any time heats; but [it cannot pre-
dict] winds, thunder, lightning flashes, storms, and such like, or
what is going to happen presently; and in this [method] no account
is taken of the elemental nature of the signs.
Second. It is by Kepler's doctrine, which tries to provide a rea-
son for all meteorology by the syzygies of the Planets, viewed sim-
ply and unrestrictedly, which is rightly rejected by us in that same
Section II, Chapter 1, on account of the reasons set forth there.
Third. It is by the directions of the Lights or the angles in a uni-
versal constitution, or of the Planets ruling that constitution, to
conformable promissors, which are those same Planets and their
aspects, or powerful fixed stars that are in that constitution. For if
the Sun in an Annual Constitution or the Moon in a monthly one,
are directed to Saturn ruler of the constitution, which is retrograde
in a humid sign; and the quarter of the year is especially spring or
winter, rains will happen from such a direction, especially if the
universal constitution and especially if the monthly one has
signified rains.
208

=== Page 219 ===
But if at the same time directions differing in virtue occur, judg-
ment will have to be made from the more effective one, taking into
account the quarter of the year, and the place, and the monthly con-
stitution. And for each promissor, the nature and the celestial and
terrestrial state will have to be looked at, both in the figure of the
constitution and on the day of the completed direction. And these
things must be observed for each direction.
Fourth. It is by the applications of the Planets, with regard to
which no small difficulties occur. For [the task] for us is not about
predicting the daily effects for the places on Earth lying hid under
our horizon, but only for those that pertain to our horizon, for
which the figures of the universal constitutions are erected. But
now, when one Planet applies to another, both can be above the ho-
rizon or both below, or one above and the other below, or one or
both on the horizon. If they are both above the horizon or on the
horizon, there is no doubt that that application would be very pow-
erful in the place of the figure; if only one, it will be of moderate
virtue; but if both should be below the Earth, there will either be no
or little virtue in that place. And this will be especially apparent in
the Opening of the Gates}
Moreover, this reason seems to me to be because since the daily
changes of the air are very powerful elementals, and they therefore
principally depend upon the elemental qualities of the stars, it is
especially found that to produce those things, the stars themselves
should be above the horizon, or at least both of them should not be
below the Earth, as is plain from the Sun, which in our air does not
pour on its heat when is located below the Earth. But I have seen
nothing about this shown by the ancients; and therefore the experi-
ences of their successors may be trusted.
Another minor difficulty occurs. For although Kepler by
syzygies only understood them to be partile, as is plain from the
daily effects that he attributes to a partile syzygy of Saturn and Ju-
'That is, in the case of a very heavy deluge.
209

=== Page 220 ===
piter or Mars. Nevertheless, it is certain and accepted by astrolo-
gers that every total syzygy comprises three principal moments of
time—namely, the application, properly said, when the swifter
Planet by its own orb of virtue touches the center of the slower
Planet; the partile syzygy; and the separation, when the swifter
Planet departs by the virtue of its own orb from the center of the
slower Planet.
And when astrologers speak of the effects of those stars from
their applications, they do not exclude the partile syzygy and the
separation. But now the center is that which the total syzygies of
Saturn and Jupiter may last through several months; those of Jupi-
ter and Mars for more than a month; but the total syzygies of the
Sun, Venus, and Mercury with Satum, Jupiter, and Mars among
themselves may last for several days. Therefore, from these indi-
vidually and looked at simply, one cannot make a daily prognosis
for the constitutions of the air for any particular place on earth.
However, the Moon, on account of her swift motion of course in
rousing up daily storms through her syzygies with the Planets, is
the most appropriate and the most powerful; but because during
the total [time] of her syzygy, she goes around the whole circum-
ference of the Earth, therefore from her total syzygy, looked at in-
dividually, one cannot predict even the daily effects in any particu-
lar place on earth, although astrologers acknowledge that the ef-
fects occur from an application properly said, occasionally from a
partile syzygy, and never from a separation.
And although it squares with reason that they should be from
the first application, when the sublunar disposition is mature, from
the partile syzygy, when it is still incomplete, and from the separa-
tion when it is more incomplete, either by reason of the place, or by
reason of the quarter of the year (which maturity or incompletion
is not known to us sufficiently for prediction).
However, it is certain that in the same place on Earth, and in the
same quarter of the year, it does not rain as many times as the
210

=== Page 221 ===
Moon applies to or is partilely joined to Saturn in a humid sign, or
separates from him. And consequently, there is still something re-
quired, either on the part of Saturn, or on the part of the Moon, or
on the part of both; namely, that they may be powers in the preced-
ing universal constitution, that they are at least not both below the
Earth, and that they are posited in a conformable place with respect
to the horizon, namely in the ASC, MC, or DSC, or with fixed stars
conformable to the effect.
And if all of this should have occurred (which Kepler never
thought about), the Planets would act, even at their first applica-
tion, on the air and the Terrestrial Globe, and not here in them-
selves, as Kepler dreamed; or they would act at a partile syzygy, or
in their separation, according as at whichever moments the Planets
and the fixed stars were disposed more concordantly to the hori-
zon. And, by the common consensus of astrologers, the effects will
be especially in accord with the nature of the Planet to which the
Moon applies, and its state. And from other applications of the
Planets, it will have to be predicted similarly.
About which, there are many more Aphorisms in the old astrol-
ogers referring to this rule—that the stars produce their own ef-
fects, not promiscuously, but according to certain laws. Moreover,
how the planets through the mixture of their rays produce, rains,
winds, calms, heat, cold, storms, etc. is very difficult to define. For
it is not, as by the collision of two stones the sparks of fire are cast
out; and so, by the coming together of two Planets, conspicuous
meteors are cast out into the air; but the elemental mixed qualities
rising up are producers of those meteors.1
The Fifth motion is through the rising and setting of the stars or
constellations, which is two-fold, namely absolutely and respec-
tively. The absolute rising is the ascension of a Planet or a star
above the horizon without respect to anything. But the respective
[motion] of that Planet is by the common consensus of astrologers
"in Morin's time meteors, like comets, were thought by some to be generated by
the Planets.
211

=== Page 222 ===
either the ascension of the star above the horizon with respect to
something else, that is the Sun. And the same thing must be said
about the setting.
Furthermore, a star rises respectively to the Sun, or it sets in two
ways, namely truly and apparently. The true rising and setting is
with both the Sun and the star rising or setting at the same time lo-
cated on the horizon. And such a rising and setting are again
two-fold, that is either with the Sun or in its opposition. A star ris-
ing with the Sun rising is said to be matutine or arising cosmically,
and one setting with the Sun setting is said to be vespertine or set-
ting acronychally.1 But one rising when the Sun is setting is called
vespertine or rising acronychally.
Similarly, an apparent rising or setting (which is also com-
monly called heliacal) is two-fold, [meaning] of course, a little be-
fore Sun rise and a little after Sun set; and both of these again are
two-fold, namely matutine rising and vespertine rising.
Matutine rising is heliacal, when the star before the rising of the
Sun, at first not visible, first comes into sight through the elonga-
tion of the Sun from a star that is slower or retrograde; it is appro-
priate for the fixed stars and all the Planets, except the Moon. But
the vespertine rising is heliacal, when the star after the setting of
the Sun at first not visible, first comes into sight through its elon-
gation from the slower Sun; and this is appropriate only for Venus
and Mercury, and especially for the Moon.
The matutine setting is heliacal, when the star seen in the morn-
ing before Sun rise, first disappears through its approach to the Sun.
And this is appropriate for Venus, Mercury, and especially for the
Moon, which by their own motion are faster than the Sun. And fi-
'The words matutine and vespertine here mean morning star and evening star re-
spectively, referring to the appearance of a star before the Sun rises or after the
Sun sets, The Greek word acronychal (lit. 'point of night') refers to something
that is sighted when the Sun touches the western horizon and then sinks below it.
An acronychal rising is a star that is opposed to the Sun, so that it rises as the Sun
sets. Astronomers would call this in opposition.
212

=== Page 223 ===
nally, the vespertine setting is heliacal, when the star, first seen in
the evening after the setting of the Sun, first disappears through the
approach of the Sun to a slower or retrograde star; and this is ap-
propriate for the fixed stars and all the Planets, except the Moon.
From these previous statements, it must be known that the
above said risings and settings of both the Planets and the fixed
stars are powerful for arousing daily changes in the air, but espe-
cially the vespertine risings and settings, both the true and the ap-
parent ones; and then especially when those stars have some ruler-
ship in the preceding universal constitution. For they do not
change the air through the whole circumference of the Earth, al-
though through the whole circumference they are rising and set-
ting. And among those stars or constellations that are thought to be
stormy, the famous ones are Arcturus, Orion, the Pleiades, the
Hyades, the Eye of Taurus,1 Praesepe, the Aselli,2 Lucida,3 Librae,
the Heart of Scorpio,4 the Heart and Tail of Leo,5 Canis Major and
Minor,6 Castor & Pollux, The Head of Hercules,7 Aquila,
Delphinus, and many others; concerning which, consult the astrol-
ogers and experience. For one must not entirely trust the writings
of the astrologers, nor their tables of the rising and setting of the
fixed stars, both because some are accommodated to the Julian cal-
endar, others to the Gregorian calendar; and then because error is
also discovered in them with regard to the true rising or setting
with respect to the Sun; and this from some supporters of astrology
can hardly be noticed.
And therefore, it will be safer to look at the risings and settings
of the fixed stars on a celestial globe, and then to inquire about
"Aldebaran or a Tauri.
2The little stars X and 6 Cancri, which are usually called Aselli or the Little Asses.
3Lucida means 'the bright one'. Probably, Schedir or ad Cassiopeiac.
"Antares or a Scorpii.
5Regulus or a Leonis and Denebola or P Leonis.
6Sirius or a Canis Majoris and Procyon or a Canis Minoris.
7Ras Algethi or a Herculis.
213

=== Page 224 ===
their presages; or, look at them in Origanus, Part 3, Chapter 6, or in
the Dianoia Astrologica of Wolfgang Satler,1 Chapters 28 & 29, or
in [the books of] others who have written about these.2 For to dis-
cuss and expound them here would be too tiresome; and it is suffi-
cient for us to show a natural way, to set forth general rules, to
solve difficulties, and to warn about avoiding errors. Those things
that seem to be lacking here, we shall perhaps supply in our Pre-
dictive Astrology, if God the Best and Greatest bestows [a longer]
life [on us].3
But it must be noted that the true risings and settings of the fixed
stars must not only be noted with respect to the Sun or the Moon,
but also the other Planets, and also those claiming for themselves
the rulership of a universal constitution. For those risings and set-
tings are scarcely less important in strength than the respective
risings and settings of the Lights.
And finally, the Sixth way is through the phenomena seen in
the Caelum, the air, the water, or on Earth, which is the common
astrology of farmers and native people. For from those close and
perceptible causes impending in the air, they are accustomed to
predict changes in a marvelous fashion, and from those to look af-
ter themselves and their property if they need to, and if it can be
done, lest in this matter they should seem to be of a worse condi-
tion than a brute animal.
Incidentally, Ptolemy speaks of this in the last chapter of
[Tetrabiblos], Book 2, but the most fully and best of all, Mizauld1
'The reference is to the Dianoia Astrologica... 'Astrological Thought...'
(Montisbelgardi, 1605) of Wolfgang Satler of Basel, Switzerland. See Lynn
Thomdike, History of Magic and Experimental Science (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1923-1958. 8 vols.), vol. 6, pp. 143-144.
2A modem work is Mundane Tables of Fixed Stars in Astrology by Perceval and
Fox (Blackwood terrace, N.J.: Quick Specs, 1980).
3Alas, that did not happen. Morin refers to his intention to write a book specifi-
cally dedicated to making predictions using the methods that he explained in the
Astrologia Gallica. But he died not long after making his final revisions to the
AG, which was published five years after his death through the generosity of
Queen Marie Louise of Poland (1611-1667), a grateful former client.
214

=== Page 225 ===
in his Aeromantia or Astrologia Meteorologica, which [you
should] open up and learn through experience. For this knowledge
is not only very useful on land and sea for agriculture, seamanship,
medicine, hunting, military matters, etc., but it also affords notable
honor to one skilled in its practice. And whoever has excelled in it
and has lived at court, in addition to admiration, will also procure
the favor of Kings and Princes for himself. Especially if he pos-
sesses the practical knowledge of the 3rd, 4th, and 5th ways, which
embraces the knowledge of universal constitutions. But all of
these things previously said are sufficient for the theory of astrol-
ogy, and for the honor and glory of the Omnipotent Creator of
Heaven and Earth, for Whom let there be praise and the giving of
thanks eternally.
Amen.
End of the Twenty-Fifth Book.
'Antoine Mizauld (15107-1578) was a very prolific author. I am uncertain which
of his books Morin refers to-—possibly to his Le Mireur de I'air . . . de touts
changements de temps 'The Mirror of the Air . . . of all the Changes in the
Weather' (Paris: R. & C. Chaudiere, 1547. 94 ff. 8vo.).
215

=== Page 226 ===
Appendix I.
The Method of Offusius as Revised by Morin.1
This method, of which Morin speaks on several occasions, per-
mits one to determine some coefficients for each planet, express-
ing numerically at a given moment, the acting force of the constit-
uent elements of that planet. Offtisius puts first, for each planet,
two coefficients corresponding to the power of its elements when
it is found on the horizon and at its minimum distance from the
earth (at its perigee).
Hot Cold Dry Humid
SUN 24 48
MARS 1 12
SATURN 96 12
JUPITER 1.5 6
VENUS 1.5 6
MERCURY 6 12
MOON 12 121
27 114 84 133
To know the value of these coefficients at a particular instant, it
is necessary to multiply the figures from the tables:
1. By the cube or the square of the ratio of the apparent actual
diameter of the star to its apparent diameter at perigee (cube for the
hot, square for the other three elements).
2. By the cube or the square of a coefficient depending upon the
altitude of the planet above the horizon,2 cube for the hot, square
for the other elements. This coefficient is given by the formula
1 + N / 30, where N represents the planet's altitude in degrees
above the horizon.
'Translated from Jean Hieroz, L 'Astrologie mondiale (Paris; Editions Leymarie,
1946), pp. 163-165.
2Do not forget that the elementary action is zero below the horizon.
217

=== Page 227 ===
3. By the cube or the square of a coefficient (cube for the hot,
square for the others) depending upon the number of hours elapsed
since the rising of the star. This coefficient is given by the formula
1 + N / 8, where N represents the number of hours.
Thus, for the Moon's humidity at its perigee at 65 degrees
above the horizon and having risen seven hours previously, one
must multiply 121, the figure from the table, by 1 for its distance to
the Earth, by the square of 1 + 65 / 30, that is by 10, for the altitude,
and by the square of 1 +2, that is 9, for the time elapsed since its
rising; then one has:
121 X 1 X 10X9 = 10980
Morin does not accept either the initial coefficients or those of
the variation. He proposes the following method:
With the thermometer, one will measure exactly, during four or
five hours, the increase of heat due of the Sun, the hourly increases
being noted, and that on some sphere, but especially on the right
sphere,1 the day of the Equinox; this observation will serve as a
base for the oblique and parallel spheres, as is said further along.
As for the influence of the altitude of the Sun at the time elapsed
since its rising and of the length of its diurnal arc, one will note that
two observations being made, either in places of the same latitude
or in places of different latitudes, if the altitudes and the times
elapsed are the same, the diurnal arcs are identical; if the altitudes
are the same, but the times elapsed (or the reverse), the diurnal arcs
are different; finally, if the diurnal arcs are identical and the
elapsed times are different, the altitudes are different, because if
two of these elements have not varied, the third must remain
identical.
'One calls the right sphere the sphere that is local to the Equator; the parallel
sphere, the sphere local at the Pole; and finally, the oblique sphere, the sphere
that is local to a particular latitude.
218

=== Page 228 ===
That much said, one will observe at the Equator on the day of
the equinox, from the first to the third hour after its rising; the first
altitude will be 15 degrees and the second 45 degrees, and as the
diurnal arc is the same for the two observations, the differences of
heat can only come from the altitude and from the time elapsed. If
the productions of heat were proportional to the altitude and to the
time, they would be in the ratio of 15° in an hour, that is 15° in the
first case and at 45° in three hours, that is 135° in the second case.
Consequently, if the increase registered by the thermometer had
been in the first case 2/3 of a degree, it must be (2/3) X (135/15),
that is 6 degrees in the second case, which is effectively registered
by the thermometer. Likewise, the increase for 90 degrees of alti-
tude in six hours would have to be 24 degrees.
If on different spheres one has at the same instant the same alti-
tude of the Sun, it is certain that the elapsed times and the diurnal
arcs differ. One will note that these proportions of heat will be pre-
sented just as the ratio of the time elapsed to the diurnal arc of a
sphere relative to the same ratio of the other sphere is presented.
Thus, if the Sun is elevated by 15° on the right sphere and on the
parallel sphere, the elapsed time will be one hour for a semi-arc of
six hours on the right sphere, and consequently the ratio between
the time elapsed and the semi-arc will be 1/6. On the parallel
sphere, the time elapsed will be forty-one days for a semi-arc of 93
days, and the ratio envisaged will be 41/93. If the increase of heat
on the right sphere has been 2/3 of a degree, it will be on the paral-
lel sphere:
(2/3) X (6/1) X (41/93) = 1° 71/93
If one supposes the Sun to be elevated on the two spheres by 23o30/
(which is the maximum on the parallel sphere), the elapsed time on the
right sphere will be 1:34, and as the semi-arc is, as we have already
said, 6 hours, the ratio will be 47/180; on the parallel sphere, the time
elapsed will be 93 days for a semi-arc of the same value; the ratio there
will then be 1. If the elevation of the heat has been on the right sphere at
122/75 degrees, it will be on the parallel sphere
219

=== Page 229 ===
(122/75) X (180/47) X 1 or 6° 162/705
The elevation is then definitely more elevated at the Pole than at
the Equator, but not exorbitantly, in view of the difference in the
elapsed times, and it does not seem contrary to experience.
If one had considered the method recommended by Offusius,
the increase of the parallel sphere would have been more than
2,000 degrees for the same elevation of 122/75 degrees at the
Equator, which is absolutely contrary to material possibilities.
What we have said about the heat of the Sun can be applied to
the cold of the Moon and Saturn, to the dryness and the humidity,
by utilizing the following table of the elementary qualities of the
planets as proposed by Morin:
SUN
Hot Cold
5.5
Dry Humid
2
MOON
SATURN
JUPITER
MARS
5
3.5
6
3
VENUS
MERCURY
1.5
2.5
0.5
3
4
1.5
10 10 10 10
220

=== Page 230 ===
Appendix II.
World War II Charts drawn by Jean Hieroz1
Astrologers have often been criticized for not having known
how to announce the war of 1939 in advance; but is the insuffi-
ciency of their science the only cause of this? Personally, having
wanted to predict in July 1938 the mobilization of some classes [of
the military], which took place the next month, the management of
L 'Avenir du Plateau Central (in which, at that time, I was publish-
ing my monthly predictions) refused my article under the pretext
that it was likely to provoke panic. I was asked (very simply) to
change my predictions. This request, which I of course refused,
brought about the end of my collaboration with that periodical. I
must admit that, when the fact was accomplished, L 'Avenir made
honorable amends and inserted the rejected article preceded by an
explanatory caption;2 however, the Editor-in-chief was careful to
request of me the resumption of my collaboration. And here are the
reasons that, to my great regret, restrained me from making known
to the public the analysis that was going to appear in the Constitu-
tions du Ciel of 1939. All of its merit, moreover, must go back to
the Master whose methods I utilize and not to myself, his modest
disciple:
The entry of the Sun into Aries (Fig. 8)3 occurs
at Paris the 21st of March at 12:29; that which
puts the MC at 8 Aries and the ASC at 0 degrees
of Leo. Mars, ruler of the Primordial Point [P.P.],
is exalted in Capricorn; its ruler, Saturn, is situ-
ated in Aries, that is to say in mutual reception by
sign rulership with Mars. Such a case was for-
'Translated from Jean Hieroz, L 'Astrologie mondiale (Paris; Editions Leymarie,
1946), pp. 166-170.
2In the issue of 16 November 1938.
translator's Note. The following charts are drawn in a French style that puts the
cuspal numbers inside the wheel and the positions of the planets outside the
wheel.
221

=== Page 231 ===
mally foreseen by Morin (the 4th paragraph of
Chapter 3, Section II). [Thus,] Saturn and Mars
share the rulership of the Primordial Point. Since
Mars is also the ruler of the MC, the following an-
gle, to which Saturn is conjoined, it is obvious
that the rulership of the year is divided between
the two malefics. Moreover, that would be very
inauspicious, for Saturn is in exile and the ruler of
the 7th house, the house of WAR, and Mars is in
the 6th in exact square with the Sun. The first aph-
orism of Chapter 14, Section II, informs us that
the malefic planets dominating at the Primordial
Point and badly disposed presage some evils.
Those will be still more grave if the said planets
occupy or govern the angles of the figure (here,
Mars is ruler of the MC, and Saturn conjoins the
MC) and extremely grave if they are determined
to evil by the places that they occupy or govern,
for example if they are in the 4th, 6th, 7th, 8th, or
12th house (here, Saturn is ruler of the 7th, and
Mars is in the 6th). Grave evils being obviously
probable, it remains to determine the epoch and if
possible the exact date. In order to do that, we are
going to consider the subordinate charts accord-
ing to the 4th aphorism of Chapter 13, Section II,
which teaches us that several simultaneous uni-
versal charts, for example a Mundane Revolution
of the Sun and a New Moon, produce the greatest
effects, especially if the charts have the same ASC
or the same ruler of the Primordial Point!
Precisely, the second quarter of the year, the solar ingress into
Cancer (Fig. 9) has its ASC in Leo like the Aries Ingress. Further-
more, in it Mars is also the ruler of the MC and is also found to be
governed by Saturn. The latter planet is not only still conjoined to
the MC, but this time it is in partile conjunction with it.
222

=== Page 232 ===
« o V'« « o
4.
Fig. 8
81 fj «- 9 v
* A
4"
Fig. 9
223

=== Page 233 ===
Fig. 10
Precisely also, the lunation of 14 August (Fig. 10) presents the
same characteristics: ASC in Leo, Mars in the 6th, ruler of the MC;
Saturn in the 10th, ruler of the 7th.
We have, therefore, in 1939 not only two but even three simul-
taneous charts, all three of which have the same ASC, the same
ruler of the MC, the same ruler of the 7th in the MC, and the same
malefic in the 6th. Since the first constitution and the one of supe-
rior order realizes its effects powerfully in the posterior and sub-
ordinate charts if the latter have some significations similar to
[those of} the first (Aphorism 3, Chapter 13, Section II), it is ex-
ceedingly probable that it is in the course of the second quarter,
and more exactly in the course of the lunation commencing on the
14th of August, that the first chart, the Aries Ingress, will realize its
"extremely grave effects."
Aphorism 3 of Chapter 12 of the first Section indicates to us
how to determine more precisely the date of the event by means of
directions and transits.
224

=== Page 234 ===
1. By directions. We read there in effect: They (the ejfects) are
produced by the fact of the directions of the luminaries or of the
angles, especially of the ASC, towards some congruent promittors,
as well as towards some of the rulers of the universal chart. In the
course of the lunation from the 15th of August to the 13th of Sep-
tember, we were able to calculate three directions of this kind:
MC square Mars on 11 September
Sun opposite Saturn, about the 3rd of September
Moon opposite Saturn about the 8th of September,
2. By transits. We read ftirther in the same aphorism: The ef-
fects are bom... when the luminaries apply by body or by aspect to
the rulers of the charts; and we know on the other hand (Chapter
IX, Section I) that in the syzygies, the swiftest planet is the only one
to be examined', we must then, in the lunation of the 14th of August
take note of the transits of the Moon to Mars and Saturn. We find:
Moon conjunct Mars on 26 August at 10:04
Moon conjunct Saturn on 3 September at 12:33
We state definitely that a unique date calls itself to our attention,
at the same time by directions and by transits. This date is:
the THIRD OF SEPTEMBER 1939
It is then very probable that it is on this day that the inauspicious
effects of this deplorable Ingress of 21 March 1939 will manifest
themselves.
Was this study actually written before the outburst of the catas-
trophe? I would have a good chance of pretending that it was,
while protecting myself behind the ostracism of my former edi-
tor-in-chief and resting upon the success of my previous prognos-
tications that appeared in the same periodical:
On 7 December 1937,1 announced for the fol-
lowing spring "a government accepted by all the
sound elements of the nation." It is known that the
225

=== Page 235 ===
Ministry of Edouard Daladier [1884-1970], es-
tablished on 10 April 1938, was considered by the
sound elements as the downfall of the Popular
Front.1
On 4 March 1938 I announced the fall of the Chautemps2 cabi-
net for the 13th or the 27th of the same month. The second Blum
cabinet was established on 13 March.
On 2 April I announced the imminent fall of Blum. This hap-
pened the 9th of that same month, following an unexpected vote of
the Senate.
On 20 July I announced an approaching mobilization of some
[military] classes (which occurred on 24 September).4 Further-
more, I pointed out "the moderating role of Paris and Rome in the
Prague-Berlin dispute"5 (the article, however, only appeared on 16
November).
But I owe it to the truth to acknowledge that although I had
clearly noticed, from the beginning of 1939, the similarity of the
three charts and announced to all my entourage some grave events
for that lunation, [yet] the calculation of the directions and the in-
vestigation of the transits fixing the date of 3 September were
made after the fact, at the time of the translation of the present
book, in order to verify the excellence of Morin's methods.
'Translator's Note. The socialist government under Premier Leon Blum
(1872-1950 ) which had been voted into office at the general election in the spring
of 1936.
translator's Note. Camille Chautemps (1885-1963).
translator's Note. Leon Blum's Popular Front government was overthrown by a
vote of 214 to 47 in the French Senate. £douard Daladier (1884-1970) was cho-
sen to replace Blum.
translator's Note. Billboards were posted throughout France the night of 23/24
September calling up roughly a million reservists to report for active duty in the
armed forces.
translator's Note. This was the demand Hitler made on Czechoslovakia that it
yield one of its provinces, the Sudetenland, to Germany.
226

=== Page 236 ===
Appendix 3
World War Charts
05" /
or
Full Moon Natal Chart Mar 12 1914 4:57.25 am LMT-0:09:20 Paria. Franca 48-N52' 002'e20' Gaocsnlric Tropical Reoiomontanus True Nooa Parallax Moon
09
• * ^3S
K o
05° TT 16'
17° X 08
pO
Anes ress Natal Mar 1914 20:10 am LMT -0:09.20 Paris. Franca 48"N52' 002*E20' Gaocenlrlc Troptcal Regiomonlanus fnre Node ParaHax Moon
cf 12°s 28'
30'"x
227

=== Page 237 ===
L C
Full Moon NaiaJ Chan Jun8 1014 6;29 20am LMT-0 09.20 Par^. France 4fl•N52■002,E20, Geocantrlc Troocal Reoomorianua
? oe-a.
? 1*'?M
Off -e-" . . w D V
22 -HP M
& Cancer Ingress Natal Chan Jun 22 1914 7:04:35 am LMT-0 09.20 Pane, Franca 48•N52, 002*E20, Goocaniric Tropical RaQ^monlariua True None Parallax Moon
? 24
08- J 26 ®53 «06 02 fl
V
These charts are drawn for Paris, France, 48N52, LMT, with
Regiomontanus cusps and the Moon affected by parallax (which
Morin recommended but did not use). (The charts for Brussels
would be rotated 2 degrees.) The War began with the invasion of
Belgium at 8:02 AM on 4 August 1914.
228

=== Page 238 ===
Appendix 4.
The time used in all of the charts in AG Book 25 is Local Appar-
ent Time (LAT). To assist the reader who may want to recalculate
some of the charts, I have prepared a table of the Equation of Time
for the year 1625. That year is approximately in the middle of the
time period spanned by the charts. The Equation of Time changes
slowly from year to year, but the table shown below is sufficiently
accurate for dates within 75 years or more before or after 1625.
The argument of the table is the true longitude of the Sun. To
find the value of the Equation of Time, locate the solar longitude
that is just before the longitude of the Sun and the one just after;
these are at 5 degree intervals. Interpolate these two values to get
the value for an intermediate longitude. Once found, the Equation
of Time can be rounded off to the nearest whole minute.
Table of the Equation of Time for the Year 1625
Sun Eq.T Sun Eq.T Sun Eq.T Sun Eq.T
0 +7.7 90 +0.9 180 -7.7 270 -0.9
5 +6.1 95 +2.0 185 -9.4 275 + 1.6
10 +4.5 100 +3.0 190 -11.0 280 +4.0
15 +2.9 105 +4.0 195 -12.4 285 +6.3
20 +1.4 110 +4.8 200 -13.7 290 +8.4
25 -0.0 115 +5.3 205 -14.7 295 +10.2
30 -1.3 120 +5.6 210 -15.4 300 + 11.8
35 -2.3 125 +5.7 215 -15.9 305 +13.1
40 -3.2 130 +5.5 220 -16.1 310 +14.1
45 -3.8 135 +5.0 225 -15.9 315 +14.7
50 -4.2 140 +4.3 230 -15.4 320 + 15.0
55 -4.3 145 +3.3 235 -14.5 325 +14.9
60 -4.1 150 +2.1 240 -13.3 330 +14.6
65 -3.7 155 +0.7 245 -11.8 335 +13.9
70 -3.1 160 -0.8 250 -10.0 340 +13.0
75 -2.3 165 -2.5 255 -7.9 345 +11.9
80 -1.3 170 -4.2 260 -5.7 350 +10.6
85 -0.2 175 -5.9 265 -3.3 355 +9.2
90 +0.9 180 -7.7 270 -0.9 360 +7.7
LMT = LAT + Equation of Time
LMT = LAT - Equation of Time
229

=== Page 239 ===
Suppose for example that the Sun in a chart is in 23° 19' of Scor-
pio. This is equivalent to 233° 19' or 233.3' to the nearest tenth of a
degree. Looking in the table, we find for 230° that the Equation of
Time has the value -15.4, and for 235° the value is -14.5. The dif-
ference is 0.9 and it is decreasing. We want 3.3/5 or 0.67 of that
difference; it will be 0.67 X 0.9 or O.6., so we subtract that amount
from the figure for 230°, and we have -15.4 reduced by 0.6 or
-14.8. That is the value in minutes and tenths of a minute. We can
round it off, and we will say that the approximate value of the
Equation of Time is -15 minutes. Then, if the stated time was 6:05
AM LAT, the equivalent LMT will be 6:05 AM -0:15 or 5:50 AM
LMT.
230

=== Page 240 ===
Appendix 5
The Mansions of the Moon for the Year 2000
Table of the Mansions of the Moon.
1 a little dry 3 d 58 15 wet 3 1TL58
2 temperate 16 d 49 16 cold & wet 161TI49
3 wet 29 d 41 17 wet 29 1TI41
4 cold & wet 12 X 32 18 dry 12/32
5 dry 25X24 19 wet 25/24
6 temperate 8 S 15 20 temperate 8^15
7 wet 21 S 07 21 wet 21 "YS 07
8 a little wet 3 ^ 58 22 temperate 3 sz 58
9 dry 16 49 23 wet 16 ^ 49
10 wet 29^41 24 a little cold 29^41
11 a little cold 12 W 32 25 dry 12 H 32
12 wet 25 W 24 26 a little dry 25 K 24
13 temperate 8=0= 15 27 wet 8 T 15
14 a little wet 21 =0:07 28 temperate 21 T 07
231

=== Page 241 ===
Index of Persons
Achilles, Homeric hero 20
Albohazen Haly ("All ibn abi al-Rijal), astrologer 140
Albumasar (Abu Ma<shar), astrologer 14,21n.2,22,155,157
Alexander the Great 20
Al-Kindi, science writer 140,15 5,167
Ancients, 67,69,177,199,209
Arabs 14n.l,19n.l,109,132,140
Ax'\s\o\\e,philosopher 8,20,92
Astrologers, xiv,3,5,13,14,18,21 n.2,22,24-26,37,43-44,53,55,
57-64,68,84,85,87,90-91,91n. 1,104,108-109,112-114,116-117,
127,130-133,137-139,141,145-147,152-157,168-169,175,182,
189,203n.2,210-213,221
Astronomers xiv,5-6,8,30,55,64,97n.2,174n. 1,185n. 1,212n. 1
Bajazet (Bayazid), Sultan of Turkey 198
Baldwin, Richard S., translator vii n.3
Blum, Leon, prime minister 226
Brahe, Tycho, astronomer 30, 34,50-51,53,121,140n.4,152-153
Cardan, Jerome, astrologer 4,11,19,25,36,53,57,68-69,71,73,
81-83,85,96-97,99,127,135-167,141,169,170,172,176-178,194-1
96,203,205
Chautemps, prime minister 226
Claudianus, Claudius, poet 203n. 1
Commanders of armies, 133
Daladier, Edouard, prime minister 226
Dukes 137
Emperors 134,198
Eudoxus ofCnidus 174
Firmicus Matemus, Julius, astrologer 20,21n.l,132,138n.2,
139n.l
233

=== Page 242 ===
Firminius (Firmin de Bauval), 139
Gassendi, Vitrrt, astronomer 60,121
God 3,8-9,1 ln.3,75,132,134,141,178,185,203,214
Haly, astrologer 19,127,139,168-169,188
Haly Abenragel ^Ali ibn abi al-Rigal) 140,188n. 1
Haly Rodoan ("Ali ibn Ridwan) 205
Haly Abenrudian (''Ali ibn Ridwan) 19n. 1,188n. 1
Holden, James Herschel, translator x n.2,15n. 1,131 n. 1,203n.2
Homer,20
Kepler, Johann, astronomer xiv,5,8,9n.l,30-33,36n.l,51,l 10-
112,140n.4,145,153n. 1,175,208-209,211
Kings 9,18,84,128,133-134,187,189,196,207,215
Ignorant astrologers 111
LaBruzza, Anthony Louis, translator x n.4
Langsberg (Lansberge, Philip van), astronomer 31n.l
Little, Lucy, translator x n. 1
Llacer, Pepita Sanchis, translator x n.4
Magnates 134,160
Marie Louise, Queen of Poland ix
Mason, Zoltan, astrologer & publisher x n.l
Ministers 29,198
Morin, Jean Baptiste, passim
Offusius, Jean Francois, astrologer 1 10,112,125-126,208,217-
220
Old astrologers, 3,5,14,18,21n.2,22,26,30,37,38,43,53-54,57-59,
68,84-85,87,91,104,109,112-114,117,137-138,141-142,145-146,
152,155,157,169,189
Origanus, David, mathematician & astrologer 6,50-51,53,56,63,
132-133,168,174,214
Paris Alexander, Prince of Troy 21 n. 1
Philip III, King of Spain 196
Philip IV, King of Spain 196
234

=== Page 243 ===
Pontano, Giovanni, humanist scholar 132
Popes 134,153n.2
Princes 32,44,70,71,73,75,103,107,108,110,117
Ptolemy, Claudius, science writer 4,18,20,25,27,29,34,44,53,
58-59,68-69,73,80-81,83-91,93,96,99,100,112,127,130,13 ln.1,
132-141,152„169,172,174,176-178,194-196,203,214
Queens ix,73,108,116n.9
Royer, J., publisher 61 n. 1
Satler, Wolfgang, writer on astrology 116
Sauk, Jonas,15n.4
Selva, Henri, translator ix n. 1
Tamerlane (Timur-i-leng), Tartar conqueror 108
Villennes, Nicolas Bourdin, Marquess of, astrologer 111
235

=== Page 244 ===
Bibliography
Albohazen Haly (<Ali ibn abi al-Rijal)
De iudiciis astroram.
[The Judgments of the Stars,
with the Liber novem iudicum at the end]
Basel: Liechtenstein, 1571.
Cardan, Jerome
In Quadripartitum Ptolomei.
[the Quadripartite with Cardan's Commentary]
Basel: , 1578. repr of 1552 ed.
repr. in vol. 5 of the Opera Omnia edition, pp. 93-368, as
Claudii Ptolemaei Pelusiensis Libri Quatuor
De astrorum iudiciis cum expositione Hieronymi Cardani.
Lyons: Huguetan and Ravaud, 1663. 10 vols.
New York and London: Johnson Reprint Corp., 1967. 10 vols.
facsimile reprint
Firmin de Beauval
Repertorium pronosticum de mutatione aeris.
[A Treatise on Changes in the Air]
Paris: lacobus Kerver, 1539.
Holden, James Herschel
A History of Horoscopic Astrology.
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 1996. paper xv, 359 pp. diagrs
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2006. 2nd ed. rev. paper xviii, 378 pp.
diagrs
Kepler, Johann
Tabulae Rudolphinae...
Ulm; Jonas Sauk, 1627.
237

=== Page 245 ===
Tabulae Rudolphinae...
supputatae a Joanne Baptista Morino...
ad accuratum et facile compendium redactae.
[The Rudolphine Tables...
calculated by Jean Baptise Morin...
and reduced to an accurate and easy compendium]
Paris: J. LeBrun, 1650.
Tables Rudolphines...
trans, into French by Jean Peyroux
with facsimiles of the Latin original
Paris: A. Blanchard, 1986.
Morin, Jean Baptise
Astrologia Gallica.
The Hague: A. Vlacq, 1661. folio
Morin, Jean Baptiste
La Theorie des Determinations Astrologiques
de Morin De Villefranche.
[Astrologia Gallica, Book 21]
trans, by Henri Selva
Paris: Bodin, 1897.
Paris: Bodin, 1902. repr.
Paris: Editions Traditionelles, 1976.reprin facsimile
Paris: Editions Traditionelles, 1991. repr. of the 1976 ed.
Astrosynthesis.
[Astrologia Gallica, Book 21]
trans, from Selva's French version by Lucy Little
New York: Zoltan Mason, 1974. 192 pp.
Astrologia Gallica/Books 13-15 & 19
trans, by James Herschel Holden
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2007. paper
238

=== Page 246 ===
The Morinus System of Horoscope Interpretation/
Astrologia Gallica, Book Twenty-One,
trans, by Richard S. Baldwin
Washington: A.F.A., Inc., 1974. paper 109 pp.
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2008. paper repr. viii, 144 pp.
Astrologia Gallica/Book Twenty-Two/Directions.
trans, by James Herschel Holden
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 1994. paper xv, 292 pp. diagrs
Astrologia Gallica/Book Twenty-Three/Revolutions,
trans, by James Herschel Holden
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2002.
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc.,2004. 2nd ed. revised paper xi, 112 pp.
diagrs
Astrologia Gallica/ Book Twenty-Four/
Progressions and Transits,
trans, by James Herschel Holden
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2004.
L'astrologie mondiale/ et meteorologique/
de Morin de Villefranche.
[The Mundane and Meteorological Astrology
of Morin De Villefranche.]
[Astrologia Gallica, Book 25.]
trans, into French by Jean Hieroz
with a Summary and Appendices
Paris; Les Editions Leymarie,1946. paper 176 pp. diagrs tables
The Mundane and Meteorological Astrology
of Morin De Villefranche.
[Astrologia Gallica, Book 25, with a Summary
and Appendices by Jean Hieroz]
trans, from the French by James Herschel Holden
(never published) x, 128 pp.
239

=== Page 247 ===
Hieroz, Jean
La doctrine des elections de Morin
[part of Astrologia Gallica, Book 26]
trans, into French by Jean Hieroz
Nice: Les Cahiers Astrologiques, 1941.
Offusius, JoFrancus
De divina astrorum facultate in larvatam astrologiam
'On the divine Power of the Stars against a bewitched Astrology'
Paris: J. Royer, 1570.
Origanus, David
Ephemerides.
Frankfurt on the Oder: Andreas Eichhom, 1609. 3 vols.
Origen
Peri Archon 'On First Principles'
trans, by Trannius Rufinus into Latin as
De Principiis 'On the Principles'
trans, into English as 'On the First Principles'
by G. W. Butterworth
New York" Harper & Row, 1966.
Perceval and Fox
Mundane Tables of the Fixed Stars.
Blackwood terrace, N.J.: Quick Specs, 1980. 3rd ed.
Ptolemy, Claudius
Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos/ or Quadrpartite...
trans, by J. M. Ashmand from the Greek
Paraphrase by Proclus
London: W. Foulsham & Co., 1917. repr. xxxiii,242 pp. 8vo.
Ptolemy/ Tetrabiblos. [Loeb Classical Library series]
ed. and trans, by F.E. Robbins
London: William Heinemann, 1940. xxiv,466 pp.
240

=== Page 248 ===
Note: The chapter numbers in the Latin translation1 of the
Tetrabiblos used by Jerome Cardan do not always agree with the
chapter numbers of the two translations above, nor do either of the
latter agree exactly with the latest edition of the Greek text by
Wolfgang Hiibner, Claudii Ptolemaei/ Opera quae exstant omnia
Volumen III I AIIOTEAESMATIKA (Stuttgart and Leipzig:
B.G. Teubner, 1998). If the references given in the present transla-
tion of Book 25 do not indicate the appropriate chapter in which-
ever text the reader is using, he should look at the chapters imme-
diately preceding or following the one mentioned.
Schoner, Johann
Tabulae astronomicae...
[Astronomical Tables...]
Niimberg: Johann Petreius, 1536.
'According to F.E. Robbins, it was made by Antonio Gogava directly from the
Greek text (presumably that of Camerarius published in 1535) and first published
at Louvain in 1543; it was subsequently reprinted several times.
241
