=== Page 1 ===
THE MORINUS SYSTEM
OF
HOROSCOPE INTERPRETA TION
Translated from the Latin and edited by
Richard S. Baldwin
ASTROLOGIAE GALLICAE
LIBER VIGESIMUS PRIMUS
De Activa Corporum Coelestium Et
Passiva Sublunarium Determinatione
* * *
ASTROLOGIA GALLICA
BOOK TWENTY ONE
The Active Determinations of The Celestial Bodies And
The Passive Determinations of The Sublunary World
J. B. Morin
Paris * 1661
Published by
AMERICAN FEDERATION OF ASTROLOGERS, INC.
Six Library Court, S.E.
Washington, D.C 20003

=== Page 2 ===
Foreword
In contemporary astrology it is ironic that at a time when so much is
being written on this subject, so very little is actually known of the man
whose work has formed the basis of all reliable horoscope interpretation
since his lifetime. At a time when one sometimes hears that astrology
should be purged of its medieval superstitions and archaic formulas,
many are surprised to learn that this process of pur gation and renewal
was in fact already completed in the seventeenth century with the
publication in France of the Astrologia Gallica of Jean-Baptiste Morin
(known in English by his Latinized name, Morinus).
In chapter 21 of this vast work the author demonstrated a lucid
comprehension of the principles of the interpretation of the horo scope
that has not been presented in so succinct an outline either before or
since. From the turmoil and argument that surrounded astrology during
that century. Morinus alone wrested the logical truths of interpretation
and was able to give to them an irresistible and definitive statement. But
it was too late! The beginning scientific revolution had already begun to
pass by the ancient science whose accumulation of superstition had made
it seem foolish. And although astrology's long association with the
Ptolemaic system of astronomy dealt it an unfair but heavy blow, its
timeless vision of man as micro cosm or mirror of the interplay of
celestial forces was never com pletely forgotten. The fact remains, in any
case, that in an historical context the present work is the single most
important document on the subject of interpretation since the Tetrabiblos
itself, although the original work has up to now been unknown to the
English-speaking peoples, and the debt owed by astrologers to the work
of Morinus has not been realized.
Morinus was born in 1583, the son of modestly well-off parents. He
received a doctorate in medicine from the University of Avignon in 1613
but during the twelve years he practiced this profession he was never
happy and stated he felt he was treated as a domestic by the two patrons
in whose service he was employed as a physician. After being
introduced to Astrology by one William Davidson, a Scot residing in

=== Page 3 ===
Paris at that time, Morinus later predicted that in the year 1617 his
employer, the Bishop of Boulogne, would be arrested and imprisoned.
When this actually occurred it won Morinus a certain fame and he began
to be consulted by the high-born and the important, including Queen
Marie de Medicis herself. In 1629 the Queen interceded with the King on
behalf of Morinus who had applied for appointment to the chair of
mathematics at the College de France, and in September of that year he
left the service of the Duke of Luxembourg and took up his duties as
professor of mathematics.
There is no evidence that Morinus was ever employed by Cardi nal
Richelieu, though it is quite possible the Cardinal may at some time have
asked Morinus for a consultation. In any case the reader may wonder just
why Morinus felt so unjustly treated at the hands of Cardinal Richelieu
as this is never made clear in the text, although Morinus alludes in many
places to his dislike of Richelieu.
Several of the reigning monarchs in Europe at the time —including
the king of France —had offered a large sum of money to be awarded to
anyone who discovered a reliable method for the calcula tion of
geographic longitudes, as this had long been felt necessary, and
particularly for determining precise locations in sea travel. Morinus
developed a method for this based on the following procedure: The
elevation of the Moon was measured from a star whose position was
known exactly, and from this the right ascension and lat itude as well as
its longitude and declination were obtained. It was necessary then to
calculate according to tables the time when the Moon had this same
position in the sky in the place for which the tables were compiled and of
which the longitude was known. The dif ference in the time when
converted into degrees would give the position of the ship.
On March 30, 1634, in the great hall of the arsenal at Paris, Morinus
gave a demonstration of his "Science of Longitudes" before an
assemblage of 300 persons including eight commissioners designated by
Richelieu, as well as mathematicians, prelates, and members of the court.
After questioning and discussions lasting six hours a verdict of approval
was given by the mathematicians present.
Nevertheless, for reasons which are not clear Cardinal Richelieu
summoned five of the commissioners ten days later and without
allowing Morinus to be present reversed the earlier decision. Morinus
bitterly resented this and never forgave Richelieu. After the publica tion
of the Science of Longitudes in July, 1634, he solicited letters from well-
known astronomers throughout Europe on the value and correctness of
his work and then in 1636 published this correspondence, although it in
no way caused Richelieu to reverse his decision.
However, after Richelieu had been dead for three years, Morinus
prepared a lengthy report summarizing all that had occurred, and

=== Page 4 ===
after enlisting the support of the Duke d'Arles and the Prince de Conde
and other important nobles, he submitted the report to the Royal Council
in 1645 with the intention of obtaining the financial reward that had
originally been promised. At last a favorable decision was reached and
he was granted a pension of 2,000 livres per year (a very good sum) as
well as a reward of 1,000 livres direct from the royal treasury.
Morinus's difficulties with money had begun at an early age, and the
following episode illustrates this as well as provides an explana tion for a
remark in the text concerning the unfavorable attitude of his mother
towards him. When he was twelve years old both of his parents became
ill at the same time —his mother in childbirth from which she later died,
and his father from a fever from which he was not expected to recover.
During this time his older brother asked him which of his parents he
would rather see die and Morinus said he would prefer that his father
should live. His brother repeated the con versation to his mother who
from that instant until she died two days later wanted to disinherit him,
and refused to give him her final bless ing. The local priests, however,
reminding her about the state of her soul, finally persuaded her to give
this blessing and to allow him to in herit at least the minimum legal
amount. Morinus later noted that his sister received three times what he
did and his brother even more than that.
In the first section of this book, the author examines the theories of
stellar influence put forth by Kepler and others and demonstrates with
irrefutable logic what is to be accepted or rejected in them. Mor inus's
argument in this section is invaluable as a source of under standing of the
kind of disputes which occupied the minds of the best astrologers of the
period, while in the second section of the book his own system of the
principles underlying horoscope interpretation are set forth with elegance
and simplicity. A devout man, Morinus ends this final section with a
moving statement describing the stellar forces as the primary instrument
of the Divine Will in nature.
The translator

=== Page 5 ===
PREFACE
In judging the effects of the celestial bodies on the sublunary world,
the astrologers of antiquity relied upon principles that were either
invented and therefore unfounded in nature, or that were to a certain
extent founded in nature but badly understood and put to even worse
application. In the former group are the terms, decans, faces, the various
parts, and the annual, monthly, and diurnal progressions, as well as the
other worthless items introduced by the Chaldeans, Arabs, and Egyptians.
In the latter group are the univer sal significators, which Cardanus calls
"significators by essential nature," and with which all astrologers
heretofore have been mainly concerned. 1 In fact, it is quite natural that
the Sun should be considered analogous to honors, kings, the father, etc.,
rather than to dishonor, peasants, or children, etc. It is also clear that
Jupiter should stand for money, Venus for the wife, Mercury for the
mental qualities, and so on for the other planets, as has already been
explained. Undoubtedly, the Sun represents the father and is the universal
significator of honors, but what astrologers wish to deduce therefrom is
absurd—namely, that in any horoscope the honor and prestige of the
native, as well as his father (at least in a diurnal horoscope), is to be
judged chiefly from the Sun alone, regardless of the house it may occupy
or be ruler of. They also consider that when calculating direc tions the
Sun should always be taken as the significator of the con dition of the
father and of honors —and so on with the other planets. Bnl (he celestial
bodies are universal causes and are indifferent to the individual things of
the sublunary world though these latter give a determination to them.
There are various kinds of determinations of these influences, but they
can be reduced to the two main classes of position and rulership in the
horoscope. So, the celestial bodies influence all things born into the
sublunary world according to the par ticular way that influence is
modified by them —that is, by location or aspect in a given house of the
horoscope, or by rulership over a house, or by aspects with the rulers of
the houses —all of which is ascertained from the moment of birth. No
planet can cause or indicate anything
1 Cardanus is the Latinized name of Girolamo Cardano(1501-1576) whose Commentaria or
Commentaries on Ptolemy's T etrabiblos appeared in 1554.

=== Page 6 ===
in the horoscope except according to these methods of determination
which will later be explained.
The plain truth of this method is found occasionally in the aphorisms
of the astrologers of antiquity, who often judged planetary effects from
their position in or rulership over one house or another, or from aspects
with the rulers of the houses, but these aphorisms are too confused,
fanciful, and intermixed with false notions, with the result that that truth
in its simplicity has never become apparent, but instead has become
obscured. Actually, from Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos, Book 3, ch. 1, the
method of predicting by combining the influence of the stars with each
other and with the signs and houses (which is nothing else than the
problem we will later be considering) appears to be quite old and to have
been used by his Egyptian predecessors and certainly by the Chaldeans
and Arabs, as Cardanus explains in his Commentary. From them the
Greeks received that astrology handed down by Adam and Noah, but
already fallen into an impure and corrupted state. However, Ptolemy
rejected this method, not because he says it is false, but because he felt it
to be at best confusing, dif ficult, and too indefinite, and having reference
more to the in terpretation of particulars than to general precepts.
However, Cardanus in his Commentary admits that if it could be worked
out in detail it would be a much simpler method. So, Ptolemy only treats
the general principles he himself thought out —that is, he takes the
position of the Sun in a horoscope as representing the health, and
considers the whole caelum in reference to it, as Cardanus has shown in
his Commentary; and he treats his other general significators in the same
way. Nevertheless, Ptolemy frequently proceeds according to this very
old method, as when he compares the ruler of the MC or of the
Ascendant with the Sun or the Moon. For the confusion, dif ficulty, or
indefiniteness is far worse when comparing the Sun's position with the
whole caelum in questions of health, as Cardanus in his Commentary on
Book 2, ch. 7, of the Tetrabiblos also claims should be done, than when
making a judgment on the length of life or health from the condition of
the Ascendant and its ruler. Thus, this ancient method must be revived if
we wish to pursue that true astrology handed down to posterity by Adam
and Noah and remain faithful to its principles.
And so finally, having recognized and then weeded out these fic -
titious elements, I now pass on to posterity —with God's will—the basic
fundamentals of judicial astrology, which are presented in this book on
the various determinations of the celestial bodies. Of these
determinations the astrologers of antiquity never even dreamed, but in
them is contained the whole science of making judgments and
predictions, and in the following pages their use will be made clear.

=== Page 7 ===
CHAPTER I
The formal or essential determination
of the primum caelum1
All philosophers admit that the celestial bodies are universal causes
and they are right to do so, because along with the principal agents
inferior to themselves the universal causes produce all natural effects, in
accordance with our definition of a universal cause given earlier. In fact,
these effects are accidental to those bodies, since it is quite accidental to
the caelum or the Sun that they should produce a man, a horse, or a tree,
etc., over which flows forth the formal effect of those bodies. But when
the Sun pours forth its specific influence, this action is not accidental to
the Sun but is contained in its essence —as man himself can observe —
and if the Sun were placed in some imaginary space outside the caelum it
would still be unable not to pour forth its specific influence or its heat,
though these be not received by any object. Therefore, the Sun is not a
universal cause of that effect, but a particular cause, for without the
cooperation of any inferior agent it nonetheless produces that effect —
whether its heat or specific influence is received by any object or not.
So it is clear that every universal cause is in itself indifferent to its
own accidental effects, and is capable of determining those effects but
not its own formal effect, for this latter has been essentially deter mined
by the Author of nature, and nature is an entity endowed with an active
power.
Therefore, we shall consider first the determination of the primum
caelum and after that the planets and the fixed stars.
The primum caelum has the greatest capacity to produce any given
effects in nature, in cooperation with any of the other natural causes In
the various regions of the world—celestial, ethereal, or
1 Primum caelum —the sphere of the fixed stars. The reader is probably familiar
with the pre-Copernican idea of the universe according to which the primum caelum of
the most d i s t a n t of those spheres rotating around an immobile earth. The primum
mobile or that force which caused the caelum to rotate around the earth was invented to
explain the illusion which we now know to be caused by the earth's own rotation.

=== Page 8 ===
elemental—because it clearly comprises all other natural powers, as was
proved earlier; therefore, the caelum itself is a first natural cause.
It may be objected that if the primum caelum and all other celestial
bodies were annihilated except the Sun and earth, the Sun would still
give off its light, heat and specific influence, and would illuminate and
warm the earth, would still have an influence on it —or any animal born
on it — independently of the primum caelum. Therefore, the Sun must
effect these things independently of the primum caelum, for the caelum
could not confer through its presence or exist ence that which would not
be taken away by its absence or annihila tion; therefore, the primum
caelum is not a first natural cause.
But I would reply that it is nevertheless true that —admitting such a
hypothesis—the Sun would still give off these qualities men tioned, for
they are formal to the Sun and active even to a great distance, causing
the heating and illumination of the earth; however, these effects are not
celestial but elemental, and in conformity with the nature of fire. But the
Sun does not have an influence on earth, or any animal born on it, except
very generally, but not specifically—as on the health, profession, etc. —
because no such specific influence exists except that which is brought
about through house-location in the horoscope; and the influence of the
stars always comes through these houses.
One might argue that the primary houses which condition this
influence are nothing other than a division of the entire space
surrounding earth, and on earth are —or can be conceived of as —the
poles, axis, and equator by which that space is divided; and in this way
the influence of the Sun or a planet is to be admitted.
I would reply that there is no active influence through the primary
houses, which are nothing other than empty space and therefore inactive,
but there is rather a determinative influence through them. But in fact we
showed earlier that the system of sign division has an active influence
not only with the planets but also by itself, such as when the various
signs appear on the Ascendant or in the other houses. The signs,
however, are not parts of immobile space since they themselves are
moveable through the primary houses or spaces; nor are they parts of the
earth because the earth is also im mobile and therefore without poles,
axis, or equator. In fact, the signs are those parts of the primum caelum
which were determined by the planets at creation—that is, first causes
from secondary ones. Since they now have a simultaneous influence, as
a first and second cause of the same effect which is necessarily
dependent on each, it follows that the stars are not able to exert a specific
influence without the cooperation of the primum caelum, although they
are able to give off light and heat.
From this it is clear that it is one thing to give off heal or some

=== Page 9 ===
kind of influence and another thing to actually heat up or exert that
influence on something. For this latter situation requires an object which
is receptive to that heat and influence, the former does not, since this
effluence can take place without an object, as in the imagi nary spaces
where the power of the primum mobile probably originates, if one admits
that such spaces exist. Further, it is clear that the primum caelum is the
first cause of all celestial influences and also the first cause of light and
heat since it clearly contains light, heat, and other elemental qualities, for
otherwise it would not be divisible into the twelve signs which have
different elemental natures.

=== Page 10 ===
CHAPTER II
The formal or essential determination
of the planets and the fixed stars
Just as the primum caelum has been determined by the Author of
nature who gave to its own essential nature and active power, so the
seven planets have also been given their own essential natures and
qualities. Therefore, the Sun acts in a solar manner —that is, giving off
heat and light and its own specific influence —while the Moon acts in a
lunar manner; and so on for the remaining planets and the various fixed
stars.
Just how difficult it is to define the nature and the quality of a planet
has already been stated. This difficulty arises from the fact that through
the same essential quality a planet causes one result in a metal, another
in a plant, and another in an animal or a human; moreover, it causes
different things in different men as well as in the same individual. And in
addition, a planet causes one thing in one sign and something else in
some other sign; similarly, one thing in aspect to one planet and
something else in aspect to another; and also, different results will be
seen depending on the different aspects it may have with that other
planet. Because all kinds of combinations usually occur, the
interpretation of a planet's action and quality can not but be extremely
difficult. But it acts in all classes of objects at the same time, and if it is
carefully and closely studied in any one class —such as humans —an
adequate understanding can be realized which will result in greater
certainty of judgment.
When a planet is in domicile the nature of that planet is not mingled
with any other, especially if it is not in aspect with any other planet; for
example, the Sun in Leo suffers no admixture of other qualities in that
sign as both the planet and the sign have a solar nature. But the primary
houses or spaces of the horoscope neither directly influence nor actively
concur in these effects, but merely qualify or give a determination to the
influence of the celestial bodies.
In understanding the elemental nature of the planets no dif ficulty is
presented in the case of the Sun and Moon, each of which has but a
single sign, but some difficulty arises in the case of Saturn,

=== Page 11 ===
Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury, as each rules two signs which are
contrary to each other by nature. For example, Saturn rules both
Capricorn and Aquarius, and the latter is warm and moist while the
former is cold and dry. In describing disposition or character astrologers
are accustomed to state somewhat carelessly that Saturn in Capricorn is
cold and dry—that is, it makes things cold and dry —but in Aquarius is
warm and moist, thereby making the planet's own quality follow the
nature of whichever sign it occupies; and they do the same with the other
planets. But how can it logically be said that Saturn is by nature cold and
dry if it is not only cold in a cold sign and dry in a dry one, but also
warm in a warm sign and moist in a moist one?
The fact is the astrologers err when, in evaluating disposition and
character, they do not take into consideration the elemental nature of the
planets in the various signs; instead they would have it that Saturn and
Mars in Aries, for example, are warm to an equal degree, as in fact
Origanus claimed.1
Moreover, it is a fact that even those signs which are devoid of
planets still have an influence on the Ascendant and elsewhere in the
horoscope; and they function in an elemental way according to that
nature which was determined initio mundi; their specific influence,
however, follows the nature of their rulers. For example, Saturn rules
both Capricorn and Aquarius, whose elemental natures are contrary to
each other, but each sign has an influence which is Saturnian because
Saturn is the ruler of both.
Saturn's elemental nature is most clearly seen in Capricorn because
in Capricorn he makes things very cold and dry, while in Aquarius, on
the contrary, his coldness and dryness are remitted, which is only
possible through the contrary qualities of heat and humidity belonging to
Aquarius. Therefore, we may say that Saturn is extrinsically, or
manifestly cold and dry, but intrinsically, or latently is no less warm and
moist.
We may conclude, then, that although Saturn's influence may be
warm, cold, moist or dry, its elemental nature is cold and dry. For this
reason Aquarius only has reference to the nature of its influence, while
Capricorn has reference to its elemental nature as well; and therefore,
Capricorn contains more of Saturn's nature than does Aquarius, and for
this reason Saturn in Aquarius is less malefic than
' David Origanus of Amsterdam (1558-1628). The reference is probably to this
author's best known work Astrologia Naturalis which was widely read at the time. He
became professor of Greek and Mathematics at the University at Frankfurt an der Oder
where he had studied, He advocated the revolving of the earth, but he is best known for
his Ephemerides Novae Brandenburgicae for the years 1595-1630. This was the firstI
attempt at the regular publication of an ephemeris.

=== Page 12 ===
in Capricorn. In Capricorn the injurious elemental qualities reveal
themselves but in Aquarius a balance is struck through that sign's
elemental nature of air. And so in a similar way with the other planets.

=== Page 13 ===
CHAPTER III
The description and refutation of an error
frequently encountered in Astrology
Astrologers have always assumed in considering the essential
determinations of a planet that the Sun, for example, would signify the
father, the husband, kings, nobles, fame, prestige, and the health, etc.,
and Cardanus states that the Sun signifies these things "ac cording to its
essential nature." Similarly, the Moon stands for the mother, queens, the
common people, etc.; Jupiter stands for wealth; Mercury for mental
qualities, and so on for the other planets. Such statements are frequently
found in the books of the astrologers of antiquity, where these planets are
called the general significators of such things and these significations are
made the basis of their predictions in both the natal horoscope and when
interpreting directions. Ptolemy, in Book 3, ch. 4, of the Tetrabiblos,
where he speaks of one's parents, states: "The Sun and Saturn correspond
to the father through their very nature; the Moon and Venus to the
Mother, and the relationship of these stars to each other and to the other
planets indicates the fortunes of the parents." Similarly, in Book 4, ch. 3,
he states that the Moon stands for the wife and the Sun for the husband
and from the condition of these planets the fortunes of both parents can
be predicted. Then in Book 3, ch. 18, in speaking of the native's mental
qualities he says: "The qualities characteristic of the mind and reasoning
powers are evaluated from the condition of Mercury; those characteristic
of the moral nature and of the sensitive faculties arc evaluated from the
luminaries of a less subtle constitution, for example, by the Moon and
the stars conjunct or in aspect to it." Up to now astrologers have
followed this instruction and made their judgments concerning the
native's father from the Sun or Saturn; concerning the mother, from the
Moon or Venus; on the moral nature from the Moon; and on the mental
qualities from Mercury, regardless of what houses these planets either
occupied or ruled over, since they only considered their celestial state
and their relationship with any other planets, but with no consideration
for the houses of the horoscope or for their rulers.

=== Page 14 ===
However, Ptolemy's instruction is not completely true and the
astrologers of antiquity made excessive use of the analogical meanings
of the planets due to the fact that, although each of the planets differs
from the others in its nature and quality, each does have an analogy to
the various classes of sublunary things which correspond to its essential
nature. For example, the Sun stands for the health, the father, the rank or
position, etc. But because this analogy is based on the essential nature of
the Sun and the influence of the Sun is completely universal and
indifferent, the Sun could not by analogy alone indicate the health any
more than it could the father, the husband, the king, or the position,
although the Sun's nature does indicate persons or circumstances which
are illustrious, public, and distinguished, rather than obscure and of little
importance. But because of this general indifference one could not
assume that the Sun specifically means one of these things any more than
another. If it were taken to stand for everything—that is, the father,
husband, position in life, etc. —everyone would agree that that would be
absurd and contrary to experience. In fact, Cardanus seems to ridicule
this very idea in ch. 6 of his Liber de Revolutione in the Commentary
when he states that Ptolemy introduced a great deal of confusion when
he assigned several meanings to one significator, and made the Moon,
for example, the significator of the body, the morals, the health, the wife,
mother, daughters, maid-servants and sisters. Says Cardanus: "What then
must be the condition of the Moon in the horoscope of one whose wife
had died in childbirth but himself lived a long life, who had many
healthy daughters but also maid-servants who ran away, who had a sound
body but a mother who died young, and who himself showed a poor
moral character?"
Ptolemy, Cardanus, and others were also in error when they claimed
that in every diurnal horoscope judgment concerning the father of the
native is to be made from the celestial state of the Sun, and in a
nocturnal horoscope from the condition of Saturn, but they do not see
that this is absurd, because if the Sun were in Leo and, for example,
conjunct or trine Jupiter or Venus no child would be born anywhere on
earth during the course of that day whose father would not be fortunate
and long-lived, or on the other hand, unfortunate and short-lived if the
Sun were badly placed. And of course, as this aspect would remain in
effect for several days it is clearly foolish to suppose that during this
period every child born would have the same kind of father; this is not
only contrary to experience but would also render meaningless the
significance of the houses. And the same would hold true for Mercury
with respect to the mental qualities as long as its celestial state remained
favorable or unfavorable, and the same for Jupiter with regard to
finances, etc.
It is now clear that each planet refers to all those individual things

=== Page 15 ===
with which it has an analogy of by nature, but that this determination is an
essential one and is so universal and indifferent that it has no more
meaning for a man than for an animal, since these analogies are shared as
much in the affairs of animals as they are in those of humans. Nor out of
the many men born at the same time over the whole earth does a planet
refer any more to one than to another —does not refer to life any more
than to death, the father any more than the husband, or friends any more
than enemies, unless these specifics are determined through its position
in or rulership over particular houses of the individual horoscope and its
aspect with their rulers. If it happens that these determinations through
the houses refer to things to which the planet has an analogy, the
resulting effect will take place with considerable certainty. Some
examples of this would be the reference the Sun has to the parents in a
day-time birth horoscope, or by its location or rulership in the fourth
house at night; the Sun's reference to the profession by location or
rulership in the tenth; or Mercury's reference to the mental qualities by
location or rulership in the first, and so on. And because it frequently
does happen that these significators have a specific determination in
accordance with their analogies, astrologers have deceived themselves by
taking to be an in variable truth that which is really an accidental
circumstance.
Consider my own horoscope: I was born during daytime and the
Sun, Moon, Mercury, Venus, and Saturn are in the twelfth house and
square Mars which rules the Ascendant. The Moon is therefore the
significator of the parents because it is ruler of the fourth, and of my
mother in particular since the Moon is feminine and is located in the
feminine sign Pisces; its separation from the conjunction of Saturn while
applying to no other planet indicates dislike by my parents —
particularly by my mother — and unfair treatment at her hands.
However, the Sun is in partile conjunction with Jupiter, and this caused
Cardinal Richelieu to be my secret enemy as this Sun is in the twelfth
along with Saturn. The Sun here is the significator of powerful enemies
and the injuries caused by them, but not of my father although 1 was
born during daylight; in fact, my father never disliked me and never
deliberately did me any harm. And so, this horoscope is an example of
how the universal significators are not able to refer to any specific
situation or event since, considered by themselves only, their meaning
and application remain too general.
The objection might be raised that while it may be true that the Sun
considered alone—has a significance which is too universal to refer to
the father in particular, or the Moon and Mercury are too universal in
themselves to refer to the moral or mental qualities, the fact is that the
Moon is indifferent to any specific moral qualities as these are actually
determined by the sign in which it is located, or by that sign's ruler, and
the moral qualities will differ according to what

=== Page 16 ===
that sign and ruler may be. Therefore, Ptolemy, Cardanus, and others are
indeed right in assuming that the Moon and the ruler of the sign wherein
it is placed will show the moral nature; and so on in the same way with
Mercury and the mental qualities, etc.
But I would reply that in this matter the astrologers of the past were
also mistaken. It is certainly possible to say that the Moon's in fluence
varies and something different is indicated depending on the sign through
which it is moving and the ruler of that sign, but this in fluence by sign is
still universal and applies to the entire world. For the Moon's celestial
state does not indicate the moral nature any more than the mother or the
wife, etc., because in order to refer to any one of these rather than another
a specific determination is required — that is, the Moon's rulership in the
horoscope or aspects with the rulers of the houses to which these matters
pertain. Thus the ruler of the Ascendant applying to the Sun, which is
always analogous to honors, indicates honors for the native; when
applying to Jupiter, which is analogous to money it indicates wealth;
when applying to Venus, which is analogous to a wife, it indicates the
wife and in this case will even more certainly indicate the wife when
Venus is in the seventh house or ruler of the seventh. And so, careful
attention should be paid to the planets' location by house, or their house-
rulerships, and to whether they aspect favorably or unfavorably a planet
having an analogy with the meanings of these houses, and what the
celestial state and determinations of this other planet may in turn be.
From all this a very accurate prognostication can be made, for herein lie
the secrets of astrology.
Furthermore, the Moon is in domicile in Cancer, and, since the
Moon and Cancer have the same basic nature, the Moon there is not
subordinate to another planet by rulership. Consider also the fact that for
the length of time Mercury remains in the same sign the mental qualities
produced would be the same all over the world, which is cer tainly
contrary to experience, since in fact at each hour or even at each minute
these qualities do change. So, if Mercury, the general significator of the
mind according to analogy, is found to be the par ticular significator of
this same thing by position or rulership in the first house —which refers
to the mental qualitiesas well as of the whole general condition of the
body and soul —the effect of Mercury on the mental qualities in such a
case will be very strongly pronounced. Similarly, if Mercury has some
relation to the Ascendant or its ruler by rulership or by aspect it will also
have a stronger influence on the mental qualities. And the more such
determinations it has the greater will its influence be on the mental
qualities, but if there are no such determinations Mercury will have no
reference to the mental quali ties; and the same is true for the other
planets and houses.
One may object that in several places Ptolemy takes into first

=== Page 17 ===
consideration the position of the general significators with respect to the
angles of the horoscope, and consequently, these should be considered an
important determining factor.
I would reply that this determination is still too general since there
are only four angles in the horoscope, nor is a specific deter mination as
possible as it is by using the twelve houses. And unless the determination
is a specific one the Moon could not indicate the moral character any
more than the mother or the wife. But Ptolemy, as is evident from the
passages cited above, does not follow our method nor do any other
astrologers; instead, when evaluating the mental qualities, they only
consider Mercury and Mercury's ruler, regardless of what Mercury's
condition may be in the horoscope —that is, they do not consider its
specific determinations. Their method must be false since as long as the
Moon would remain in the seventh house, the same things would have to
be predicted for both the mother and the wife, and that would be
senseless; for even if the Moon were ruler of the fourth house and
therefore significator of the parents and the mother in particular, it is still
located in the seventh house and by this determination through location
refers more clearly to the wife than to the mother; and so on for the other
planets and houses.

=== Page 18 ===
CHAPTER IV
The accidental determinations
of the primum caelum
Having discussed the active determination of the celestial bodies, we
will now consider their accidental determination and begin with the
primum caelum or the first cause in nature. The celestial bodies actively
determine the sublunary world while the latter provides a determination
of the celestial bodies in a passive way only, simply because the
sublunary world is directly influenced by the celestial bodies, and not
vice-versa, although the objects of the sublunary world may themselves
take action as a result of this influence through which they then become
the particular causes of their own effects. Thus, the primum caelum as an
efficient cause, determines all things. It determines the nature of the
planets as well as the elemental nature and the specific influence of the
zodiacal signs. However, this deter mination is shared by the entire
sublunary world and is unchangeable from the world's beginning even to
its end, for when this state of nature has ceased, the stars have dissolved,
and the elements have melted in fire, a new heaven and earth will be
formed, as predicted in the Holy Scriptures; thereafter will come another
world less inclined to disorder, less subject to change.
It also determines the nature of each of the planets and the fixed
stars through the motion of these bodies under the primum mobile. Just
as at the creation of the world the nature of the caelum was determined
for all time and for the entire world, so also that part of the primum
caelum which the Sun occupies at the birth of an animal or a man, and
which is called the position of the Sun, determines the specific solar
quality of an individual for as long as he lives. And in the same way,
Saturn's position at that time determines the specific Saturnian quality
for the native, the position of Jupiter —the quality of Jupiter; and so on
for the other planets and fixed stars. And these positions continue to
function in place of the planets themselves for the native's entire life, just
as the signs continue to function in place of their ruling planets for the
entire world as long as this world-state shall last. Since a first natural
cause is quite capable of making both a

=== Page 19 ===
universal and particular determination—as befits such a cause— Saturn's
antiscion or opposition point as well as all its other dexter and sinister
aspects, also receive a specific Saturnian determination, and at each of
these points something of Saturn's quality remains with respect to that
individual, as is proved by the directions of or to those points, and by the
revolutions and transits of the planets over them— all of which is most
wonderful to observe.
However, just how these things actually take place is difficult to
understand. Lucio Bellanti, in writing against Pico della Mirandola, 1
claims that the qualities of the planets are somehow impressed onto the
parts of the primum caelum and retained there for a long time. But he is
mistaken because first, the caelum is the first natural cause, while the
planets are secondary causes, and a first cause suffers nothing nor
receives anything from secondary ones. Second, he is wrong because the
caelum would be continually changing, when in fact it is unalterable.
Third, he is wrong because the qualitative force of Saturn remains in its
radical place for the native's entire life, but when throughout the native's
life the other planets—
in particular the Moon— would transit over
Saturn's location they would necessarily have to efface the quality of
Saturn at that point and thus render it ineffective, or at least distort it
through a mixing of qualities since there is no reason why the caelum
should reflect the nature of Saturn
 more than any other planet. Fourth, he
is wrong because the planets would by their own motion through the
signs destroy the nature of the signs or completely distort them through
these impressions. But in fact, the sign on the Ascendant, even though
devoid of planets or aspects, still has a direct effect on the native in
accordance with the true nature of that sign, and therefore the quality of a
planet does not remain in some area of a sign through an impression.
Kepler, in his Liber de Trigono Igneo, 2 ch. 10 denies that the
conjunctions of planets impress any qualities onto that part of the sphere
of the fixed stars where the planets come together, because of
1 Giovanni Pico della Mirandola (1463-1494) was the author of the widely read critique
and refutation of the claims of astrology: Disputationes adversus Astro
logium
Divinatricem. Among those who immediately came to astrology's defense was Lucio
Bellanti of Siena who wrote De Astrologica Veritate Liber Questionum& Astrologiae
Defensio contra Ioannem Picum Mirandulum in about 1498. In this work he claimed that
Pico was no great scholar, of meagre culture and ignorant of oriental languages, and cites
Aquina
s and others in defense of astrology. He became involved in Florentine political
intrigues and died mysteriously in 1499 at about age 33.
2 This work by the famous astronomer was published in 1603 and the work men-
tioned a little later De Stella nova in pede Serpentarii was published in 1606 after the
appearance of a new star was observed in 1604. These two works which illustrate their
author's interest in astrology have never been translated into English.

=== Page 20 ===
the immense distances involved. Instead, he claims that the power of a
conjunction consists in the impression made onto sublunary nature and
its divine faculties, and that the caelum contributes nothing except a plain
background. In ch. 8 he states: "The action of a con junction is not the
work of the conjunct planets, from which there is only light and heat; it is
rather the action of sublunary nature itself. For although the planets
conjoined may affect sublunary nature, they do not do so as natural
agents giving off some kind of quality or power, but rather they affect
nature as objects affect the senses —as light or color affect the eyes,
sounds the ears, etc. —for as the object is, so also is the sense in
sublunary nature." Kepler attributes to animals, plants, and even earth
itself, a sense which perceives the aspects of the planets, which must,
therefore, be intelligible; and he claims that the conjunctions,
oppositions, or squares perceived cause the sublunary world to be
stimulated to the movements and activities which are called the effects of
such aspects. "The sublunary faculties do not respond indiscriminately to
any and all aspects, but from these have the choice of harmonic
similarities, by which the earth is also stimulated to throw off vapors,
with a pleasure similar to that which an animal feels in ejaculating the
seed," he states in the Liber de nova stella in pede Serpentarii, ch. 28.
However, in ch. 10 of the Trigono Igneo he states: "When the planets
cross those points which were oc cupied by the Ascendant or the Sun or
Moon, the native is more greatly inclined to pursue all those activities
which are in conformity with his conditions of time and location;
however, this could only take place through an impression of the entire
configuration of the caelum at birth on the sensitive, animal faculty." In
other words, he believes that since the caelum exerts an influence on all
things, the nature of its configuration at birth continues on in the one
born. And he believes that this same thing occurs to the entire earth,
which he considers to be possessed of the same faculty.
But this opinion is similar to that foolishness of Kepler's concerning
the Moon, and we reject his arguments. Kepler does not prove any of his
assertions—least of all the claim that a divine faculty is inherent in every
sublunary body including earth itself, and that this faculty is able to
sense and discern the presence of a celestial body and react within itself
in accordance with its sensation of that body, without a celestial cause of
any kind participating in the reaction. Kepler claims that this faculty is
rational not only in that it perceives and distinguishes the celestial
aspects and their periods, but also in that it can make a choice between
several possible aspects; but this would be the function of a free agent
which can be indifferent to one action or another, and is contrary to his
hypothesis. Nor does he give a reason why this faculty would choose one
aspect rather than another. Or if his claim is that it is only excited by
harmonic aspects it is false

=== Page 21 ===
because if the harmonic aspects were alone sufficient for producing
effects in the sublunary world the same configuration would always
produce the same effects and it would not matter which planets were
configured
 by the same aspect—square, opposition, etc. But, in fact, we
know that Jupiter square Mars effects one thing while Saturn square
Mars effects another, and the difference here does not lie in the aspect—
which is the same in both cases—but lies in the different natures of
Saturn and Jupiter. Moreover, the perception of an object by a faculty
cannot be without any attention of the faculty, as is clear in our own
sensations. But how do the faculties of simple people pay
attention to such things when they are ignorant of them and do not know
what a conjunction, opposition, trine, or harmonic aspect is? Or in what
way are the blind and the deaf able to be attentive to these things—or for
that matter anyone else—when a conjunction, op
position, and square
occur below the horizon? For if the faculty can without any attentiveness
be excited to anger, lust, murder, or otherwise, why should not the one
who is attentive be aroused more effectively? Indeed, the astronomer
endowed with senses and intellect perceives with his own eyes the
conjunctions and aspects of the celestial bodies, but is not stimulated or
impelled to anything because of that, as astronomers know from
experience and Kepler himself knew well from experience — otherwise
the observation of the stars would be dangerous. Besides, there would
have to be allowed in man two minds or faculties perceiving the same
objects, of which one would be attentive to objects and would perceive
them, but would not be stimulated, while the other, though not attentive,
would perceive and be stimulated. But these postulations are absurd and
unheard-of in I lie perception of objects. Consider also the fact that this
second faculty would in man have to be something other than the
intellect and far more divine and superior to it than what Kepler
attributed to the planets or even the earth. Furthermore, if at birth the
caelum contributes nothing how is it that the character of individuals is
different,
since this difference would not alone follow from this faculty which is
the same for each individual, nor from the difference in the seed as we
showed earlier? In fact, character is always in agreement with the birth
horoscope, and the native does receive an impression from the power
llowing from the celestial bodies. Finally, in the same fashion it could be
denied that the Sun heats up the earth and the people on it, but that these
are actually heated by this inherent divine faculty which would function

when the Sun were present; for why should this faculty not function with
r
espect to heat in the same way as with respect to any other influences
attributed to the Sun? But if this were so, nature would not, in effect,
contain any extrinsic efficient causes, and this is plainly absurd.
Therefore, Kepler's assertion that the stars give off no power of their
own i
s absurd, for if none were given off the impression

=== Page 22 ===
on the individual of the active qualities we call character could not oc cur.
Moreover, when transiting planets come to the radical places of the Sun,
Moon, or Saturn, for example, they stimulate the native ac cording to the
nature of the Sun, Moon or Saturn, and it is therefore necessary that the
quality of these planets would have to be retained in their location in the
horoscope even after birth, and this is contrary to Kepler's opinion.
This, then, is our refutation of the opinions of Kepler and Bellan-ti,
and we maintain that for an individual the qualitative power of the Sun
will remain in the Sun's radical location but not through an im pression—
as Bellanti thought —but through a determination, which continues to
influence the native in a solar manner; and the same holds true for the
other planets. This system is nothing new, and we only continue to
emphasize the determination of the primum caelum—of the first cause in
nature which underlies all others.
The two determinations of the primum caelum described above are
caused by the planets and the fixed stars, which modify the caelum in a
particular way and according to the nature of the deter mining body; but
the effect is a universal one. The degree of the primum caelum where
Saturn, for example, is located has been deter mined to function in a
Saturnian way, but no more for a man than for an animal, and no more for
one particular individual than for any other. Most remarkably, this
determination does not negate or weaken the accidental determination of
the primum caelum by its division into the signs, but instead both have an
effect on each other. For example, when Saturn goes through Leo it does
not in any way destroy or suppress the power of the Sun, but instead the
power of Saturn and the Sun are both in force in the location of Saturn
just as if the two planets were actually found in the same location. It is
because of this that the locations of the Sun in Leo and Saturn in
Aquarius, or Jupiter in Sagittarius, etc., are so effective, for in Leo the
strength of the Sun is doubled, while in Aquarius the strength of Saturn is
doubled, and so on. On the other hand, the nature and quality of the Sun
and Saturn are to the greatest extent opposed to each other and when
Saturn is in Leo the quality of each is vitiated and an unfortunate effect is
produced. In other combinations that are not hostile, such as when Saturn
is in Sagittarius or Gemini, intermediate effects will result. This
determination of the caelum by the planets' conjunctions and other
aspects will be discussed in greater detail later on.
The caelum is of course determined by the nature of the par ticular
sublunary thing which receives its influence. In man the effects must be
in conformity with the capacities inherent in human beings; in a horse,
on the other hand, the effects must be in conformity with

=== Page 23 ===
the capacities of horses. The same will be true in the case of plants and
minerals.
Finally, the caelum is determined by the location of its various parts
in the birth-horoscope and must produce accidental qualities and events
which are in conformity with the individual. This location of its parts
makes the individual susceptible to qualities and events in conformity
with the nature of the parts. For example, Aries in the first house makes
one bilious, daring, generous, etc.; Taurus — sensual, Gemini —clever:
and so on for the other signs located on the Ascend ant, MC or elsewhere.
So, we can see that the celestial bodies actively determine the individual
with regard to the essential effect, but are in turn determined passively
with regard to the accidental qualities and events which are appropriate.
For a man receives an impression from the caelum which makes him
subject to some accidental quali ties rather than others and to different
reactions to these conditions as well.
It should be noted that the significance of the signs is broader than
that of the planets. Thus the significance of Cancer proceeds from the
fact that the Moon is in domicile there, Jupiter is exalted there, and Mars
is in triplicity there; and so on for the other signs. Also, the degree of the
sign rising has greater significance for the native than the ruler of the
Ascendant or a planet in the first house. This becomes clear when
direction the ascending degree, as aspects to this degree are more
powerful than those to the ruler of the Ascen dant; and the same holds
true for the MC.

=== Page 24 ===
CHAPTER V
The accidental determinations of the planets
and fixed stars in general
The planets and the fixed stars as efficient causes are subject to
several accidental determinations.
First, they are determined by the signs. Although the Sun must
necessarily function in some sign it is indifferent to whether it func tions
in one or the other. Therefore, its location in a particular sign—such as
Aries—is a determination of its own action, and ac tually the Sun and the
sign Aries effect a determination on each other at the same time. And the
same holds true for the ruler of the sign as well as the sign itself, for the
sign acts according to the nature of its ruler since they are of the same
nature. This fact forms the basis of all those text-book aphorisms which
state what a planet will do in the sign of another planet through a
combination of qualities. However, one should note that the planets
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury have two signs, and the Sun's
action is not the same in Aquarius as it is in Capricorn.
Second, a planet's action is determined through its contact with
other planets and fixed stars. For example, Saturn's action is in itself
indifferent to Mars, Venus, oculus Taurus, or cor Scorpio, but when it is
conjunct one of these they modify each other as though they were
partners in the same action. Further on this determination by con junction
or other aspect will be discussed in detail, but the two determinations just
given are only universal ones from which it is not possible to conclude
anything in particular since they only refer to the celestial state of the
planet and are the same for all sublunary things and therefore indifferent
with respect to individual things. Still, these two determinations can
assist or vitiate both the universal and par ticular action of the planets,
and this will also be explained in greater detail further on. But this fact is
the basis of all those aphorisms of the astrologers of antiquity which state
what a planet will effect in conjunction, sextile, square, trine or
opposition to another planet. But in this matter they erred in that, from a
consideration of the celestial state only — which is indifferent and
universal for the whole earth —

=== Page 25 ===
they predicted special or particular effects; but such a prediction will be
false unless consideration is also given to the individual and the
terrestrial state of the planets by location or rulership in the houses in the
horoscope.
Third, the planets are determined by the natures of the sublunary
things affected, as we have stated already in connection with the primum
caelum; whence comes that famous quotation from Aristotle: "Sol et
homo generant hominem." And it is also true that the son of a king is
something different from the son of a peasant.
Fourth, the planets are determined by the houses of the horoscope as
well as other ways; these determinations are particular ones because they
have reference to some particular individual or thing.
Moreover, the planets are determined by the houses in four ways —
by actual location in the houses, or by dignities, aspect, or antiscion in
them. The dignities are threefold—that is, they can be in domicile,
exaltation or triplicity within a particular house. And again, two
considerations follow upon the determinations of rulership or location.
First, consideration should be given to the analogical meanings of any
other planet a planet may be with; for example, if the ruler of the
Ascendant were conjunct the Sun it would also refer by this
determination to the prestige of the native. Second, consideration should
be given to the determinations in the horoscope of this other planet. So,
the ruler of the first house conjunct the Sun ruling the twelfth would
foreshadow illness or powerful hidden enemies. These things will be
treated later in greater detail and we will show which of the various
determinations are the most important, for in just these evaluations are
found the main secrets of astrology, which were quite unknown to the
ancients.
Later on we shall also explain what a planet shows through its
nature and celestial state —that is, through the sign it occupies, the ruler
to which it is subordinate, and its conjunction or aspects with other
planets; and also, what may be indicated through its terrestrial state —
that is, through its location in a particular house of the horoscope or
through its rulership in a particular house. For although a planet's
celestial state is universal and refers alike to all individual sublunary
things and therefore by itself indicates nothing specific for anyone, a
consideration of its terrestrial state alone in the individual horoscope
would not allow one to conclude what it might mean in particular for
that individual unless what is shown by its celestial
state is already known. For from a planet's nature and celestial state a
combination of qualities results in which the planet's own nature prevails
but is affected either for good or ill by its celestial state, and in
accordance with this combination the planet acts on a particular
individual through its local determinations in his horoscope.
Therefore. in judging the particular effects of the planets their univer-

=== Page 26 ===
sal condition must first be known, and this is understood from their
nature and their favorable or unfavorable celestial state.
When the Sun is in Leo and trine Jupiter, and there are no malefics
involved, all things of a solar nature in the entire sublunary world are
strongly affected by the support of the Jupiterian qualities, and this
includes any individual born at that time. But its power is vitiated in
Aquarius, or when in square or opposition to the malefics, and an effect
which is adverse both universally and particularly results in the Sun's
action; and the same is true for the other planets.

=== Page 27 ===
CHAPTER VI
The celestial bodies as both universal
and particular causes
It is commonly asserted by many philosophers, and in particular by
those who have written on astrology, that the celestial bodies are
universal causes only. But the following will show that this is not true.
If the primum caelum is considered as a whole it is a universal
cause, because only thus is it the most universal cause within nature —its
power concurring in all the effects of secondary or inferior causes. But
the primum caelum can also be considered in terms of its division into the
twelve signs whose natures are determined by the planet ruling the
particular sign. In one sense a sign is a universal cause as is the primum
caelum, but again a sign is to be considered in two ways. First, its action
concurs with that of the sublunary agents inferior to it, such as men or
animals in the process of begetting off spring. Insofar as the sign's power
produces the same effect among men as well as animals it is a universal
cause, but insofar as it confers to the offspring particular qualities which
neither men nor animals could confer it is a particular cause of such
qualities. It should be clear that the caelum and the stars not only contain
within their power
the forces and effects of the sublunary bodies but also contain powers
of their own which cannot be conferred by sublunary causes, and
therefore, sublunary causes require celestial ones since they are com
pleted as well as governed by them; even Aristotle himself stated this.
Second, a sign's action should only be considered as universal in that
it pours forth its power into the entire universe without concern for
particular effects in the sublunary world, but a sign as such is not a
universal cause because it does not act along with causes inferior to it
self, but only with partners, as was shown earlier. Therefore, its action
is as a particular cause; and in pouring forth its power into the entire
universe it matters not that this power produces at one and the same
time the most diverse effects, for this fact does not make a cause
universal.
It may be objected that every particular cause is subordinate to
some universal one, but a sign is not subordinate to any universal

=== Page 28 ===
c aus e unless you say that the primum caelum is a universal cause with
respect to its own parts, which seems absurd; therefore, a sign cannot be
a particular cause.
I would answer as follows. First, the antecedent is absolutely false;
otherwise God, who is the particular cause of grace, would have to be
subordinate to some prior cause. And the primum caelum—the particular
cause of its own influence—would be subordinate to some superior
natural cause, and an infinite series of natural causes would have to be
admitted, which is contrary to a hypothesis concerning any first cause in
nature, and this hypothesis must necessarily be ad mitted. Second, a sign
is a secondary cause subordinate to a first cause which is universal. Nor
does it matter that a sign is materially a part of the primum caelum since
formally it is no more than simply a sign.
The same thing may be stated regarding the planets because the
signs and the planets which are their rulers have the same nature. So, a
planet which concurs in the effect of any sublunary cause as, for
example, when the Sun concurs in the begetting of offspring, is the
universal cause of that effect because the Sun concurs with a cause in -
ferior to itself. But when it confers a specifically solar character to an
individual, or causes fame and position for him (which could only very
doubtfully be conferred by parents who were either peasants or too poor)
the Sun must be considered to be the particular cause of these effects
because they are explainable only by the Sun's power or in fluence.
Similarly, when the Sun is merely pouring forth its power into the entire
universe—in other words when it is acting universally—it is the
particular cause of its effects when no cause inferior to the Sun concurs
with it.
When the Moon or the earth, or objects on the earth, are illuminated
by the Sun these are particular effects of which some par ticular cause
must be found, but since there appears to be no other cause other than
the Sun, the Sun must be their particular cause. And the same holds true
for any other form of the Sun's influence, or for that matter for the other
planets and signs.
It may be objected that when the Sun is in Leo its action in that sign
is as a universal cause, for Leo must be inferior to its own ruler the Sun,
whether or not the Sun is considered as acting universally with a
sublunary agent.
But I would answer that the sign Leo is inferior to the Sun not
because of the nature of the solar influence, which is the same for both,
but because the sign's nature has been determined by the Sun. The
superiority of a universal cause is understood as proceeding from the
superiority of its nature, and a superior and inferior cause have different
natures, the latter being subordinate to the former, though both may
concur in their action. From this we conclude that the Sun

=== Page 29 ===
and Leo act as partners with the same nature, although the sign Leo is
essentially dependent on the Sun as its nature has been determined by the
Sun.
Therefore, the caelum and stars are at times universal causes and at
times particular causes, but not at all times universal ones, as in fact was
stated by many writers. Lucio Bellanti in his refutation of Pico della
Mirandola, art. 6, claims that the caelum is a universal cause because it
simultaneously produces different effects with causes inferior to itself.
But he makes the caelum a particular cause when it produces those
effects which are devoid of any other particular cause, as —he says —
among those born from corrupt matter. But the seed is in corrupt matter,
and is endowed with an active power, as we stated elsewhere. But the
simultaneous multitude and diversity of effects do not in themselves
make a cause universal.

=== Page 30 ===
CHAPTER VII
The celestial bodies as both signs and causes of
effects in the sublunary world
A cause is that which produces an effect either through its own
power, as, for example, when the Sun illumines the earth, or through
some other power, as a planetary aspect, where the aspect is depen dent
on the planet forming it, as will be described in Sect. 2, ch. 9. On the
other hand, a sign is that which presents itself to the senses, or if not
accessible to a sense, to the understanding of the intellect, as, for
example, the ivy hanging in front of a shop announces that wine is on
sale. The meaning of a sign does not consist in that which is presented to
a sense (for a sign is not simply a representation of itself), but in that
which is made clear to the intellect and is unknown to the senses, and of
which it is said to be the sign. Further, there are three kinds of signs:
diagnostic, prognostic, and recollective. Diagnostic signs are signs of
something present, such as those observations from which a doctor will
diagnose the kind of disease present. Prognostic signs are signs of
something to come, such as those observations from which a doctor will
predict the death or recovery of the patient, or from which a sailor will
predict a storm at sea or a farmer the barrenness or fer tility of the land.
Recollective signs are signs of something past, as ashes are a sign of a
previous fire, or a wolf's track is a sign that a wolf has passed by at some
previous time.
There are people of the opinion that the celestial bodies are not true
signs of future events because of the passage in Jeremiah, ch. 10: "Be not
dismayed at the signs of heaven." But the "signs of heaven" in this
passage do not refer to the celestial bodies but to the idols of wood and
gold which the Babylonians worshipped at that time, as is evident from
the frequent statements in that chapter which clearly refer to these idols
and not to the celestial bodies. Still other persons are of the quite
contrary opinion that the celestial bodies are only the signs of effects in
the sublunary world and not their causes, because of the passage in ch. 1
of Genesis where it is written that God said: "Let there be lights in the
firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night; and let them be
for signs, and for seasons, and for days,

=== Page 31 ===
and years, etc." Kepler also seems to have been of this opinion when he
stated that planets in conjunction, square, or opposition do not af fect the
sublunary world as natural agents actually pouring forth their power, but
rather that they only affect the sensitive animal (or vegetable) faculties of
sublunary things —and of this earth as a whole —as objects affect the
senses. Kepler's point of view has already been refuted, and it is certain
in any case that the Sun is not a sign of the day or the year, but rather
their cause since it causes both the day and the year. Nor is the Sun
simply a sign of the day which it causes, since, as we have stated, the
meaning of a sign consists in what the sign makes clear to the intellect
that is unknown to the sense; but as both the day and the year are made
clear to the senses the Sun is not a sign of these phenomena but the cause
of them.
Therefore, when Holy Scripture states that "the Sun and Moon are for
signs," we should understand that they are signs of something other than
days, years, or seasons, and we may conclude that they are signs of other
effects occurring in the sublunary world. Kepler himself would have
conceded this point, provided that they would not be con sidered the
causes of these effects but only the objective stimulus of a particular
faculty within nature. However, he contradicts himself to some degree
when he admits that an impression of the character of the entire
configuration of the celestial bodies is made on this par tic ula r sensitive
faculty and persists in the organism and stimulates it to action. For it is
necessary that a permanent power of excitation belong to that
configuration so that there will be a reaction when the planets come by
direction or transit to its most important positions; since the character of
that configuration flows forth from the caelum and is impressed on these
faculties, its power of excitation must therefore flow forth, and this is
contrary to Kepler's opinion. There fore, we maintain that the caelum is
the natural cause of these sublunary effects, for the cause of another
cause is the real cause of what is finally produced. In addition, consider
that this supposed faculty must by that impression be stimulated to action
not only in the affairs which, as Kepler says, are under his control, but
also to producing those passions, diseases, or disasters whereby both the
man and the faculty itself would be destroyed; nor would man's intellect
or reason be able to prevent these results since this faculty would have to
be independent of them.
Therefore, we must consider it proved that the celestial bodies and
the signs are the actual causes of sublunary effects; and this is contrary
to the opinion of Cardanus, who in the Liber de Interrogatlone, quest. 13,
stated that only the stars are causes, but not the
signs.
The celestial configuration atl a man's birth is a recollective sign of his
character and physical make-up. However, these are actually in

=== Page 32 ===
formation before birth and the possibility of evaluating the nature of this
character and physical constitution which has preceded birth means that
the horoscope is a recollective sign of these features, but not their cause,
since they preceded the horoscope in time.
Moreover, the same horoscope is a diagnostic sign of the charac ter
and physical make-up of the native insofar as these are now com pleted
and finished, but also of the moral nature, mental qualities, and entire
disposition, which are now exposed to the various vicissitudes of life.
This is so because although the character and physical make-up precede
birth they are actually brought to com pletion by the disposition of the
caelum which at a suitable time brings the child forth from the womb in
accordance with its destiny. And—as it were—a seal is imprinted on the
native which is a representation of the nature, condition, location, and
particular determinations of the celestial bodies. Therefore, the
horoscope for the moment of birth is not only a sign of these things by
which they can be recognized, but is also their cause insofar as the body's
formation and the character are completed and determined by the
celestial configuration.
Finally, the same horoscope is a prognostic sign of future events for
the native because of the submission to fate or destiny mentioned above,
for that celestial configuration which holds the native subject also
contains in potential events which at the appropriate times will be
produced by directions, transits, and revolutions, as will be explained in
detail later on. Therefore, it should be clear that the horoscope is not only
a prognostic and diagnostic sign, but is also the cause of those things of
which it is a prognostic and diagnostic sign; since unless it were the
cause it could not be the sign, and to the same extent that it is the cause it
is also the sign. For if the horoscope is not an efficient cause how else do
these things come about in conformity with that celestial configuration?
However, due to the fact that a cause only acts in accordance with the
disposition of the subject it follows that it is possible to resist the celestial
condition, as Ptolemy him self brought out in aphorism 5 of the
Centiloquy when he stated: "He who is knowing can avert many of the
stars' effects by understanding their nature and preparing himself ahead
of time." Therefore, these signs or causes are by no means inevitable —as
many think—and which error is also condemned by the Church. It also
seems clear that the same horoscope is at one and the same time the
actual cause of those things for which it is itself a diagnostic sign, and a
potential cause of those for which it is a prognostic sign, as will be more
clearly explained further on in the discussion on directions and transits.
Thus, assuming that the stars do in fact bring about that which they
indicate, the planets which are the significators of death, for example,

=== Page 33 ===
will bring about this event either through a direction or a revolution; and
the same will hold true in other matters.
It may be objected that Mars ruling the Ascendant and adversely
placed in the eighth house certainly indicates a violent death for the
native, but Mars itself does not kill the native—which is obvious—
therefore it is only a sign and not a cause.
I would answer that Mars does not kill the native directly but in-
directly, for its influence on the native makes him subject to a violent
death whereby he himself brings it about through just that influence;
therefore, Mars is the cause of the cause of death of that native.
Now let us ask whether the stars indicate with certainty the fu ture
events in the life of an individual. I believe the answer is "no," otherwise
an inexorable fatalism must be admitted and the statement of Ptolemy
given above would not be true. For the stars do not indi cate man's
possible resistance against their power through prudence and divinely
illuminated reason; they may show, for example, an ill ness or an
altercation at a certain time, but they cannot show simul taneously that
there will be no altercation, or that by prudence and taking suitable
medicines one's health may be safeguarded. The fact is that of those
things which can happen to a man in life some are not in his power —
such as who his brothers or enemies are, or his death, or chance
occurrences—while others are in his power in that they can depend on
his free will —such as his finances, children, servants, wife, litigations,
combats, journeys, and professional honors. These mat ters are extrinsic
to the native since he is able to make a free choice regarding them and
can avoid or reject them although the influence of the stars may make
him very much inclined to do otherwise.
But the stars' indications so strongly incline or predispose the
native that at least the inclination can be asserted with considerable
certainty. And of the possible effects attendant upon such an in clination
those which are not in the native's power will happen with the greatest
certainty while those which depend on his own will have a more doubtful
outcome. However, as most persons usually fall in line with the stellar
disposition and as man is usually ignorant of what he himself is —that is,
his own nature, as well as the things that are destined to happen to him —
he does not do enough to oppose unpleasant future events. And since it is
arduous to resist one's natural propensities very few even begin the
struggle much less persist in it with steadfastness. Therefore, astrological
predictions frequently come true; for inferior and particular causes
clearly are obedient to the power of superior and universal causes —this
is a law of nature—although all predictions are in fact merely conjectural
and no one can predict anything with certainty.
Therefore, we may conclude that the influence of the celestial
configuration at the moment of conception is the actual efficient

=== Page 34 ===
cause of the character and physical make-up of the native as these have
their beginning at that moment. And the configuration of the caelum at
the moment of birth is a recollective sign of that same character and
physical formation begun earlier, a diagnostic sign of what is now
finished and completed, and a prognostic sign of things to come in
relation to that constitution which has been completed. However, it is not
a cause of things past or in any way a horoscope for those who were born
before the native, such as his father, mother, or older brothers and sisters,
etc., but only a cause of things present and future. As a matter of fact, it is
the actual cause of the body for mation, character, and mental and moral
qualities; but of things to come it remains a potential cause which will
come to fruition in due time through actual causes; but if these latter are
absent, or contrary ones are present (as when an illness is prevented by
taking suitable preventive measures), that cause is not brought to action
and remains frustrated in its effect. It is still a cause, however, because at
that time it was not absent in the native or inoperative in his affairs, but
was simply without the cooperation of an actual cause, or was prevented
by others, as would be the case, for example, with prevenient grace.
Therefore, the constitution at birth is a prognostic sign of things to come
in the future —unless they are in some way prevented —but also a cause
of them if they do take place.

=== Page 35 ===
CHAPTER VIII
The extent of the entire caelum's concurrence in
any sublunary effect
The concept that the entire caelum concurs in every sublunary ef-
fect was entertained by Pico della Mirandola and other detractors of
astrology who were ignorant of its basic principles, and as such it is
false.
When an individual is considered in his entirety—that is, both
according to those things which are intrinsic to him such as his moral
and mental qualities, character, etc., as well as those things which are
extrinsic to him such as his finances, brothers, parents, children, religion,
and the various meanings of the houses other than the first —it is certain
that the entire caelum is divided into the twelve parts or houses to
produce this total effect in accordance with the meanings of each of
these houses and the different capacities for experience they represent.
But when such a total effect is only considered with respect to any
One of its parts which is inherent in it either actually or potentially, ex -
trinsically or intrinsically, as when an individual is only considered in
terms of his mental qualities, or finances, or profession, or children, etc.,
then the entire caelum does not concur in that particular effect, but only
the sign, planets, and stars which by location, rulership or aspect occupy
that house to which that effect pertains, including planets referring by
analogy to that effect. For example, if a man's marriage is all that we
wish to consider, only the parts of the caelum and the stars which have
reference to matrimony through the determinations of location, rulership,
or aspect concur in this matter, but not the entire caelum nor all the stars.

=== Page 36 ===
SECTION II
The accidental determinations of the planets and their
effect on the sublunary world

=== Page 37 ===
CHAPTER I
The accidental determinations of the planets
by location and rulership in the houses
These two methods of determination have greater effect than any
others, and the more effective of the two is the location of a planet in a
particular house of the horoscope. These two methods will therefore be
considered first.
All things which occur in this world are brought about by higher
causes—that is, the caelum and the stars —as Aristotle himself im plied
when he said: "This lower world is contiguous with the higher regions
which govern all its activities," and elsewhere: "The sun and man beget
man." However, man comes to understand the condition of the celestial
bodies by surveying and studying them and through the knowledge
gained thereby it is possible to predict future things; for if particular
celestial causes in the past and their resulting effects are known—such as
eclipses or the conjunctions of planets in the same sign —it is possible to
estimate correctly what these things will bring about when they recur in
the future. And these causes may be said to signify such future events or
that such events are to take place, for they can be said to signify
something only through their effects, and should they effect nothing
could not justifiably be said to signify anything (see ch. 7 of Sect. I).
Moreover, each planet has a unique and essential quality whose
power extends throughout the entire world and through which its ef fects
are accomplished, and this power is to be considered in two ways. First,
it is absolute and therefore affects all individual things in the sublunary
world universally and indifferently. Second, it per meates and reveals its
power in all things. But this power is con ditioned or modified by the
receiving object in such a way that although the power of the Sun's
action is the same on a man or a plant at the time either comes into
being, it does not, however, bring about the same effect in a man and a
plant because of the different nature of (he objects affected by this same
power, for in different kinds of objects it produces different effects
though it be applied to
each in the manner.

=== Page 38 ===
Furthermore, although this universal power is conditioned by a man
at his birth it does not affect each man in the same manner — even those
born at the same time —because clearly it will not be modified in exactly
the same manner by each individual nor does a planet usually refer in the
same manner to each individual, but for one is located in the first house,
for another in the second, and for another in the third, etc., or for one is
ruler of the first, for another is ruler of the second, for another of the
third, etc., so that for each in dividual different effects are produced by
the same planet.
Therefore, it follows that the Sun cannot be the cause of all the
accidental qualities and present or future events of a given individual, for
all these accidental qualities and events pertain not solely to one house of
the horoscope but to all twelve, and the Sun, neither by location nor
rulership, can at one and the same time refer to all these qualities and
events; therefore, the Sun's effect is only in accordance with its own
specific determinations, while other effects occur through the power of
the other planets and according to their own deter minations. Thus, the
entire horoscope has significance for the native since he is the subject of
the accidental meanings essential to its twelve houses and it affects him
in terms of those accidental meanings. The horoscope taken as a whole
does not cause a specific quality or event, as Pico stated it did, but each
of its houses causes these accidentals through the significance the caelum
assumes for something specific in that house. So, if the Sun or the Sun's
ruler is located in the first house it will act on the native's physical con-
stitution and character. And Jupiter or its ruler in the tenth acts on the
native's career and reputation, while if Mars or its ruler is in the eighth it
acts on the circumstances of the native's death, and so on. And although
the death or other events or traits appropriate to the native's brothers,
children, or spouse clearly have more direct significance for them than
for the native, it is nevertheless possible to infer something pertaining to
them from the horoscope of the native, since the affairs of persons close
to the native will be of some importance to him as well.
It must now be made clear that the primary houses, since they are
merely parts of the space surrounding earth, are neither the cause nor
strictly speaking the significators of the accidental features attri buted to
them (for space cannot be active as it is only empty space), but are
instead the factors which modify or delimit the quality of the signs,
planets or fixed stars so as to produce some kind of accidental quality or
event in the life of the native, according to the essential attributes of
those houses. For the spaces themselves have no deter minative power
and the first space does not, properly speaking, signi fy the physical
constitution and duration of life, but instead provides a specific
determination with respect to the physical constitution and

=== Page 39 ===
duration of life; the second space provides a specific determination with
respect to money, and so on for the other houses.
But neither are the secondary houses —that is, the parts of the
caelum or the signs occupying the primary houses —significators of the
accidental qualities and features attributed to the primary houses, nor are
the planets in them or ruling the signs in them. For the celestial bodies do
not signify anything present or future except in sofar as they effect that
which they are said to signify (see ch. 7, Sect. I). And the sign Capricorn
or the planet Saturn in the first space or Saturn ruling the first, does not
always have the effect of granting life, but sometimes destroys or denies
it. And Saturn or its ruler in the tenth house sometimes confers and
sometimes denies honors or prefer ment. Therefore, properly speaking, a
celestial body in the first space merely has some sort of significance for
the duration of life and the character, or in the tenth for the profession
and prestige, and so on for the other houses; and the planets do not show
that the native is with certainty going to have something, but rather
whether or not he may have it, for this is mainly what can be shown by a
planet in a house, its ruler, and by their celestial state. From these one
discovers whether he is to have it, as well as to what degree and in what
manner it is to occur.
The planets, then, denote through their determinations a certain kind
of inherent accidental quality or some future event, as well as its extent
and nature, and these circumstances are made clear by the nature and
state of the planets which are located in the houses referring to the
particular experience, or which rule over those houses, and of any
aspects which these planets may receive. So if the Sun by location,
rulership or aspects signifies friends it will show friends among kings,
princes, or persons of importance, while if Saturn llgnifies diseases it
will show Saturnian ones; and so on. The same is true for the rulers of
the first, tenth, and other houses, for by rulership a planet signifies the
same thing as if it were located in the house it self, since a sign's action
proceeds from the quality of its ruler, as we have stated earlier.
So it is clear that a planet in the seventh house denotes the spouse,
open enemies, and litigations; this will be true for any planet located in
the seventh house or referring to it by some other deter mination, and it is
possible to learn from these factors whether the native will encounter
these situations or not, and in what way and with what measure of
success. Thus, in consideration of marriage, for example, a planet's
nature is itself indicative, for Jupiter and Venus in the seventh show a
happy marriage; Saturn and Mars deny marriage or remove the spouse or
bring misfortune, hindrances, or delays in connection with the spouse.
These things can also he inferred by the
sign on the seventh and its ruler, by that ruler's position with respect

=== Page 40 ===
to the Sun and its aspects with other planets —especially with the ruler of
the seventh, or the first—and also by the rulership over some other house
by a planet actually in the seventh, for if a planet in the seventh is ruler
of the twelfth it implies something different about marriage, open
enemies, or lawsuits, than if it were ruler of the tenth; and the same thing
is of course true for the other houses. And the evaluation of the ruler of
the sign on the seventh proceeds similarly since it can happen that the
ruler of a seventh-house planet is not itself also in the seventh; for a
planet always acts according to its own nature and its specific
determinations—especially those of location and rulership. Thus, Mars
or its ruler in the eleventh gives military friends or friends of
prominence, or upsets friendships through quarrels, depending on
whether its celestial state is favorable or unfavorable; Saturn in the
twelfth house gives Saturnian illnesses, and so on for the other planets
and houses.
Moreover, experience shows that the Ascendant or a planet therein
or that planet's ruler refer to the physical constitution, while the MC or
its ruler or a planet therein refer to the career and public honor, and these
are likewise considered the significators of these ac cidental qualities or
events. Therefore, the Sun in the tenth will show the future outcome of
these accidentals by its nature and its celestial state, and may also show
the causes of the circumstances connected with any future event of a
tenth house nature, or even its impossibility or other change of
circumstance.
When we say that the Ascendant signifies the physical constitution,
we understand by that that part of the caelum which occupies the
beginning of the first space but not the first space itself. For with regard
to matters of health the Ascendant is moved by direc tion and the
directional motion is different for each point of the eclip tic in the same
first space of the same geographical location, and the beginning of that
space has no motion simply because space is im mobile. Therefore,
Saturn, for example, does not pass over the Ascendant in the same way
the eastern horizon passes by primary motion through the beginning of
the first space, but only with that secondary motion proper to itself does
it travel through that part of the caelum which the first space occupied at
the time of birth. Finally, the begin ning of that first space or house is not
effective but only determinative, while the sign or the part of the caelum
which occupies that space is effective, according to its own nature and
determinations. Therefore, Aries on the Ascendant produces one thing,
Taurus another, etc., either in the radix horoscope or through directions;
and so the direction of the Ascendant in Libra to Mars is more un-
favorable than when the Ascendant is in Aries.
The celestial bodies act on the individual things of the sublunary
world in four ways: by granting the accidental things to which they

=== Page 41 ===
refer by their determinations, by denying these things, by removing what
has been granted (which is intermediate between granting and denying),
or by affecting in various ways what has been granted to the native —be
it good or ill —through fortunate or unfortunate sub sequent
circumstances. For example, children may be granted or denied, or those
granted may be taken away, or they may be made for tunate or
unfortunate during the father's lifetime. From this it is clear that the
taking away of something pertains to the final outcome of a thing
granted; so, professional honors already acquired give rise to the question
of whether they will be lasting and stable or not. However, denial of
something—such as wealth—means not only that there will be no wealth
for the native obtained by his own efforts, but it also means that should
he gain some money by inheritance from his parents it will be dissipated
and poverty will ensue. Similarly, if the causes which deny brothers and
sisters are present the native not only will have no brothers younger than
himself, but also those older will die, as is shown in the birth horoscope
of Louis Tronson, who had Mars and Saturn in the third house and was
the youngest and ultimately the sole survivor of twelve brothers and
sisters. So therefore, the possibility of these varying situations is to be
carefully studied, and if there seem to be several, the comparative
strength of their effect must be weighed with even greater care.
Two things are now clear: the planets indicate various ac cidental
qualities of the native or circumstances pertaining to his life through
their location, rulership, aspects and antiscion, although a planet actually
located in a house has greater power than house ruler-ship by a planet
located elsewhere. Also, by granting, denying, removing, or affecting in
various ways what is already granted, the planets give further indications
of the things pertaining to that house.

=== Page 42 ===
CHAPTER II
A single planet in a house
If in a given house of the horoscope a single planet is found, the
action of that planet is primarily on the accidental qualities of the native
or events in his life which pertain to that house, and will exert a greater
influence than any other planets ruling or sending aspects to that house —
whether these be in domicile or not—according to the reason given
above that a planet's presence in a house has a greater effect than
rulership over that house by a planet located elsewhere, because
determination by location is immediate. This is contrary to the opinion of
Bellanti which we refuted in chapter 3 of Sect. I, but is supported by
Garcaeus1 in his Lib. de Jud. Genit., and Junctinus 2 in his commentary on
ch. 14, book 3 of the Tetrabiblos where, like Origanus as well, he claims
that a planet in the first house —whether in the ascending sign or in the
sign following—is the principal significator of the native's character and
the partner of the ruler of the Ascendant. So if this is true for the
character, why should it not be valid in judgments on finances, marriage,
career, etc., since the prin ciple would remain the same for any house.
When a planet is in its own sign, judgment on these accidental things will
plainly be in accordance with its nature and celestial and terrestrial state.
Judgment is made from this planet on whether it will confer the
accidental things attributed to that house or whether it will deny them,
impede, or remove them later, or affect them in some fortunate or
unfortunate way. The planet's nature is the first thing to be considered,
then its celestial state, and last its determinations other than by location;
if one of these considerations is omitted the evaluation may be defective
and inaccurate.
1 Johannes Garcaeus is the Latinized form of the German Johann Gartze who was
Doctor of Theology at the University of Wittenberg (1530-1574). His work Astrologiae
Methodus which appeared in about 1570 made him well-known. The reference above is
probably to a chapter heading in this work.
2 Junctinus is the Latinized name of the Italian Francesco Giuntini (1523-1590). He
was one of the greatest astrologers of his day; his principal work Speculum Astrologiae
appeared in 1581.

=== Page 43 ===
Any analogy between the planet's nature and the house's ac cidental
meanings should be well noted. For the Sun in the tenth shows
preferment through its very nature, since it bears an analogy to and is
therefore in natural agreement with this. On the other hand, Saturn by
nature denies preferment for the contrary reason. However, this is by
nature, for accidentally the Sun in the tenth would deny preferment if in
an adverse celestial state such as exile, peregrine, and squared or
opposed by the malefics, or also —which would make things worse —its
ruler were adversely placed in addition. Or if it granted something
because of its location in the tenth and its analogy the result would be
attended by difficulties, hindrances and misfor-
tunes, which would be the greater the more afflicted the condition of the
Sun. On the other hand, Saturn in the tenth could accidentally bring
honors and preferment if it were in its own sign, or in exaltation, oriental
to the Sun, moving rapidly in forward motion, and trine the Moon,
Jupiter or Venus. And plainly, Mars in the seventh through its nature
brings litigations and conflicts which Venus would by nature prevent or
smooth out. Jupiter in the second brings money, which Saturn by nature
denies and Mars squanders. Saturn in the twelfth will bring severe
illnesses, secret enemies, or prison, from which Jupiter by nature will
liberate the native; and so on for the other houses and planets as will be
explained in detail later. So, every planet whose nature bears some
analogy to the meaning of the house it occupies, or over which it rules,
grants that—whether good or ill —which particularly corresponds to its
celestial state unless this is strongly prevented in some other way.
However, if the planet's nature
is contrary to that meaning that planet negates, impedes, removes, or
causes to be unfortunate the affairs of that house.
Every planet in good celestial state, such as in its own sign or in
exaltation or triplicity, oriental to the Sun and occidental to the Moon,
free from adverse aspects to malefics, in direct and rapid motion, etc., is
said to be benefic universally and for the whole world,
and so will be a benefic for any individual born at that time —in
whatever house it may appear —and this is even more certain if it
receives the favorable rays of benefics. For the good or evil of a planet's
nature or condition is neither abolished nor altered by the' houses but is
merely given a specific determination, and the planets
are more effective in their action the more their celestial state is in
conformity with their natures. For this reason the power of the
malefics is always very great—possibly quite dangerous—when in the
seventh, eighth, and twelfth houses (open enemies, death, illnesses
and prison) simply because the malefic planets always bear an analogy
with these adverse house meanings anyway and incline to
such things through their very nature. Therefore, Mars exalted in the
seventh house in the horoscope of Prince Gaston de Foix brought him

=== Page 44 ===
powerful enemies, and Mars in Aries in the eighth house in the
horoscope of Henri d' Effiat brought him to a violent death, as will be
described in detail further on. So, Saturn and Mars in good celestial state
and in fortunate houses bestow good, in evil houses, evil; if they are in
the Ascendant or the MC and either peregrine or in adverse celestial
state, or strong but without dignity in the first or the tenth, they will
cause great evils, which will be even worse if in addition they are in bad
aspect to the rulers of the first and the tenth houses.
Furthermore, any planet in adverse celestial state, such as in exile,
retrograde, in bad aspect to malefics, and receiving no good aspects from
benefics, can be considered malefic universally and for the whole world
and so also for any individual born at that time —no matter in what house
it falls by either location or rulership—because such a condition vitiates
the planet's nature. The situation will be even worse for planets malefic
by nature, because their adverse state will usually bring about disgrace,
catastrophe, dishonor, loss of reputation, exile, prison, grave illness, a
violent death and similar misfortunes, in accordance with the
determinations of the planet by location or rulership. For example, Saturn
in Leo in the eighth house of the Duc de Montmorency showed his
violent death in disgrace.
Finally, a planet in an intermediate state such as peregrine and
adversely configurated by benefics —or favorably so by malefics —will
act in a moderate way in producing good or evil.
But one should observe that the more ways a planet is assisted in its
celestial state the more it is likely to produce good, but the more ways it
is impaired the more it will incline to cause evil. And it is so both
universally and particularly, for the universal mode of action is perceived
through particulars but always determines the particular.
In general, a benefic planet in good celestial state located in the
first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, ninth, tenth, or eleventh
house (which are said to be fortunate houses in that they represent
desirable things) grants the good things of that house, and the results will
be real, abundant, lasting, and unattended by dif ficulties. In the second
house it will bring money, especially if its nature would seem to indicate
that, as would Jupiter for example. The Sun in the tenth house will bring
public honor or fame, in the eleventh friends among kings, princes, and
nobles; Venus in the seventh —a beautiful wife and a happy marriage;
Mercury in the first —excellent mental qualities; the Sun, Saturn and
Jupiter in the fourth—parents or position and wealth, because each of
these planets in the stellium has an analogy to parents; and so on for the
other houses. So, one should always observe in what way the planet's
nature and condition correspond with the meanings of the houses.
However, a benefic in a fortunate house in a stale which is ad verse
by sign or through aspect either grants not hing, or grants things

=== Page 45 ===
attended by difficulties or through evil means, or which are at best
scanty, spurious, unreliable, or of little use.
A benefic in an intermediate state grants more than if it were in an
adverse state but with respect to quality, quantity, stability and duration it
will act with only moderate results.
On the other hand a malefic in an adverse celestial state but in a
good house, such as the tenth, will not grant the good of that house —the
honor or prestige—but rather will prevent that these should come about;
or if somehow these do take place there will be misfortunes, especially
through Saturn which is contrary by nature to honors.
But a malefic in good state and in a favorable house such as the
tenth will cause honors and prestige, especially if in its exaltation
(because exaltation, among the other possible dignities of a planet, is the
one most analogous to honors) and not squared or opposed or in some
adverse relation to the Sun or Moon, as the luminaries are par ticularly
analogous to honors. In the second it can bring money, par ticularly if
favorably aspected by Jupiter which is analogous to wealth; and so on
for the other houses. However, a malefic even in good state always
grants things attended by imperfections, or through evil methods or in
difficult ways, or with some accompanying misfortune, because of the
malefic nature of the planet through which it is more prone to evil than
to good. Whence it can be said that malefics in good celestial state in the
fortunate houses are like a dissonance in misuc that has been resolved to
produce a consonance.
Finally, a malefic in an intermediate state neither grants nor takes
away anything but only prevents the good from taking place, especially
if its nature is contrary to the good, as would be the case with Saturn in
the tenth house. Thus, Saturn in the second in only an intermediate state
neither grants nor denies money but through parsimony and avarice
conserves whatever is obtained; but Mars there shows Ihe squandering
of money through prodigality and foolish or useless expenditures.
A benefic in a good celestial state in the unfortunate houses —the
eighth and twelfth—prevents or mitigates the evil of these houses, and
this also is true for the seventh which through the meaning of litigations
and open enemies attributed to it is sometimes evil, not so much through
its nature as through its opposition to the first house; it is this that forms
the basis for its meaning of lawsuits and open enemies. So, Jupiter in the
twelfth—the house of illnesses—makes the native subject to few diseases
and even those will be easy to cure; and this planet will liberate the
native from prison as well as make the native victorious over hidden
enemies. In the eighth it will prevent the native's death by violence or in
disgrace but instead make it an easy one. For Jupiter through its nature
and by analogy does not incline to

=== Page 46 ===
grave and terrible diseases, prison, or violent death, and even less so the
better is its celestial state. No matter in what house it may be its nature
does not vary nor does its benefic influence of the entire earth vary while
it remains in good celestial state but instead is only subject to
determinations. Whence it follows by the necessity of its own nature that
it promotes good but diminishes or tempers evil; and all this is true for
other planets benefic by nature and celestial state.
But a benefic planet in adverse celestial state, in the twelfth or
eighth house or the ruler of one of these houses, will not prevent disease
and may even cause serious ones, nor will it prevent a violent death,
especially if this is shown in some other way. For example, Car dinal
Richelieu's horoscope had Jupiter in Gemini in the eighth house with the
fixed star oculus Taurus, which showed his death from a terrible disease.
Also, the horoscope of Henri d'Effiat had Jupiter with the Sun and Mars
in the eighth and he was decapitated; the horoscope of Monsieur des
Hayes had Jupiter in Gemini in the eighth house with oculus Taurus and
Mars ruler of the Ascendant, as well as the Moon in the seventh with the
Pleiades and the fixed star caput Medusae, and square to the Sun ruler of
the MC, and he too was decapitated by order of the king. 1 In my own
horoscope I have Jupiter —ruler of the eighth —and Saturn both in the
twelfth and have suffered from many serious diseases but luckily
recovered because of good medical treatment; I also have been in danger
of a violent death several times and was once very gravely wounded.
Finally, a benefic in an intermediate state neither causes evil nor
prevents it but only mitigates it.
On the other hand, a malefic in good celestial state in an un fortunate
house will not take away the evil —that is, it will not prevent it from
taking place—but instead will rescue the native from that evil, or temper
it through its own good celestial state. And also, the King of Sweden had
Mars in the twelfth in Scorpio but was not sickly, and was never
incarcerated or crushed by hidden enemies. One can see therefore how
much more effectively benefics in good celestial state in unfortunate
houses can be expected to remove the ills of those houses.
Henri d'Effiat had the Sun, Jupiter, and Mars in Aries in the eighth
and he died a violent death through Mars, a public one through the Sun,
and by judicial decision through Jupiter. Because this combination
squared Mercury, the ruler of the Ascendant and the MC, and Saturn was
in the tenth and unfriendly to the eighth
1 In citing example horoscopes the author quite naturally turns to those personalities
and events which were at the time widely known and the subject of much discussion.
Henri d'Effiat, the Marquis de Cinq-Mars, at first a favorite of the king (Louis XIII) was
beheaded in 1642 for conspiracy on the order of Cardinal Richelieu. Louis des Hayes and
the Due de Montmorency were likewise executed for plotting against Richelieu.

=== Page 47 ===
house cusp as well as in bad aspect to the Sun, Jupiter, and Mars, the
indications of a violent death were increased. So, it is clear one must pay
attention to many factors in making these astrological judgments.
A malefic in adverse celestial state in an unfortunate house, whose
evil it strongly promotes, brings the worse possible cir cumstances and
even infamy, disgrace or violence. So, Saturn in ad verse celestial state in
the twelfth will cause long and serious illnesses which are difficult to
cure, or prison and hidden enemies; in the eighth a fearful or violent
death, as is shown in the horoscope of the Duc de Montmorency where
Saturn is in Leo in the eighth. This is because planets malefic by nature
and in a celestial state in ac cordance with that nature portend evil for the
entire world for as long as that state shall last; and for individuals who
are born during this time it is still worse if these planets refer by local
determination to the evil affairs of the unfortunate houses. Nor is this
state to be construed from the sign only, but from the aspects with other
planets as well. For Saturn, even in its domicile or in exaltation, still
inclines by nature more to evil than to good, and if it is in the twelfth or
eighth and afflicted by square or opposition to a Mars which is also un -
favorably placed, it is at its most powerful for producing evil.
Finally, a malefic in an intermediate state in the unfortunate houses
does not prevent evil, but instead causes it to take place; the result is
more serious the more adversely the planet is placed.
For each of the planets, then, always consider their nature and
celestial state and their location in a particular house. And one should
note that the meaning of any given house is twofold: one essential one—
such as money for the second house —and another accidental one which
arises from the meaning of the opposite house; hence death is the
accidental meaning of the second house. Similarly, the essential meaning
of the sixth house is servants and animals but the accidental one is
illness, prison, and hidden enemies; and so on for the other houses.
Moreover, a benefic planet in good celestial state in an un-fortunate
house will diminish the essential evil of this house but promote the
accidental good things pertaining to it. Therefore, Jupiter in good
celestial state in the eighth house indicates an easy death because it is in
the eighth, but also indicates money by reason of the opposition of the
second house to the eighth. However, the opposition of a malefic planet
—no matter what state it may be in always portends evil or difficulties.
From this discussion it should be clear that evil is always caused by
either the malefic nature of a planet or its adverse celestial state, through
which its influence is either debilitated or vitiated when that influence is
by nature malefic anyway. Good things, however, come about through
the benefic nature of a planet or its favorable celestial state. And so, a
benefic planet in good celestial state will be the most

=== Page 48 ===
certain to produce good and prevent evil, or overcome it, or at least
diminish it. But a malefic in adverse celestial state is also just as powerful
for the contrary because this adverse state brings to the planets a certain
evil through which the nature of the malefics is made still worse and the
nature of the benefics is vitiated. And so, a benefic planet in good celestial
state and in a fortunate house will grant the good things of that house with
ease and in abundance; in an unfortunate house it will free the native from
the things signified by that house, or will ultimately grant the good which
is hoped will issue from the situation, such as recovery from illness,
release from prison, vic tory over one's enemies, or exemption from a
violent death, since death itself —because of Adam's sin —can never be
avoided. On the other hand, a malefic in good celestial state in a fortunate
house will promote the good of that house if it receives the favorable rays
of benefic planets, and in unfortunate houses will rescue one from the
evil, or lessen it; but if it is only in its domicile or exaltation it will still be
more powerful for evil than anything else because of the increase in its
malefic nature. The reason behind all this is the fact that the deter -
minations of a planet are most effective when malefics refer by local
determination to evil affairs, and benefics to fortunate affairs. When a
planet's nature and specific determination are not similar the malefics
cannot bring about the good of the house or only do so ac companied by
danger, difficulty or incompleteness, while the benefics cause little or no
evil, or if a great evil comes about they still rescue the native from it. And
every planet in good celestial state is said to be benefic if in a fortunate
house—still more so if its nature is benefic. In adverse celestial state a
planet is malefic, especially in an unfortunate house —still more so if its
nature is malefic. For from a benefic planet, or a planet in good celestial
state, good and evil do not equally arise otherwise its nature or its benefic
state would be of no import. And similarly, a planet malefic by nature or
in adverse celestial state can not equally give rise to good and evil
otherwise it would be falsely said to be a malefic or a planet in adverse
celestial state. For planets benefic by nature or in good celestial state
bring favor by granting good in fortunate houses and preventing the evil
of the unfortunate houses, while planets malefic by nature or in adverse
celestial state bring evil in the unfortunate houses and prevent the good in
the fortunate ones. Otherwise, if a planet through its own nature or
celestial state produced good in fortunate houses and evil in unfortunate
ones there could be no reason for saying that it was by nature any more
benefic than malefic, or any more favorable than unfavorable by celestial
state. However, good is represented not only by the appear ance of actual
good but also by the prevention of evil, and evil is also-represented by the
prevention of good; and so good is prevented by the causation of evil and
evil is prevented by (he causation of good,

=== Page 49 ===
After a planet's determination by actual location is known, its other
determinations in the horoscope must then be taken into consideration.
First, a planet will have besides its determination by location another
determination through rulership, and if both these determinations should
have reference to the same house, the planet will have maximum
influence over the affairs of that house and will bring about in a
conspicuous way those things if in a good house while tempering or even
preventing them if in an unfavorable one. But if both determinations
should refer to different houses —that is, if a planet is in one house but
ruler of another —the meanings of each house are then combined;
however, the meaning of the house which the planet occupies takes
precedence because the actual location of a planet has greater effect than
its rulership over another house where it is not located. So, if a planet in a
good celestial state is in the second house and at the same time ruler of
the seventh, money will come to the native through marriage, litigations
or conflicts; if it were ruler of the tenth money would come through the
native's profession and good repute. On the other hand, if a planet in an
adverse celestial state were in the second and ruler of the seventh or
tenth, the contrary would occur and financial hardship through marriage,
litigations or conflicts, or from professional activities would be the result.
However, a planet should not have a determination by rulership which is
contrary in meaning to that by location; for example, Mars in the first
and ruler of the eighth would be inimical to life itself for a violent death
or the danger of one is portended.
Moreover, a planet whose influence is already modified by its
location can be modified even further by another planet through a
conjunction or aspect, in accordance with the nature and meanings
through analogy inherent in the other planet. And so, a benefic in the
tenth, conjunct or trine the Sun, clearly indicates honors because of the
Sun's analogy with honor and prestige; in the second and trine Jupiter it
would indicate wealth. But a malefic in the eighth conjunct Mars or in
square or opposition to it shows a violent or cruel death; in the twelfth
and square Saturn, prison and dread diseases; and so on. And the
certainty of the effect depends on the condition of the planets involved.
Finally, it is possible to make a further determination through the
other planet insofar as it too is modified by its location and ruler-ship, so
that a planet in the first, if it were conjunct the ruler of the t e n t h or in
strong aspect to it or to a planet in the tenth, would incline the native to
outstanding deeds and foretells a profession which will result in honor
and prestige. If it were conjunct, square, or in op position to the ruler of
the eighth danger of a violent death is shown. And the same principle is
to be applied to the other planets and houses, especially when the
meanings of the houses can be combined,

=== Page 50 ===
for herein lies the real secret of making judgments. It is also clear how
important it is to ascertain the most valid method of erecting a
horoscope, as this procedure affects the determinations of the planets by
their location and rulership in the houses.
What has been stated here concerning a single planet in a house is
to to be taken to refer to the ruler of that house also, with the un -
derstanding, however, that a planet's location takes precedence over its
rulership by sign in the houses.

=== Page 51 ===
CHAPTER III
More than one planet in a house
If several planets are in the same house the essential meanings of
that house are affected by all the planets present, and each is to be
considered according to its nature and celestial state as well as its
determinations other than by location, in the manner given in ch. 2 for a
single planet. From this inquiry it should become fairly clear which of
these planets will have the greatest power to grant, deny, remove, or
cause misfortunes for those house meanings, as well as to what degree
this planet will be assisted or hindered by the others, and what each one
can be expected to effect with respect to the affairs of that house. A
judgment is then made on this combination of in fluences, and this does
not usually proceed without a certain difficulty which is the greater the
more planets are in the house, and especially when benefics and malefics
appear together. For when all the planets are either malefics or benefics
the judgment is simple. The following observations are to be considered.
First. When three, four, or five planets are in the same house this
house is clearly more important than the others for it indicates something
outstanding in connection with the affairs of that house, and the more
planets are in that house the more they indicate something important—be
it good or ill. An example of this is my own horoscope where Venus,
Sun, Jupiter, Saturn and the Moon are in the (welfth house. I have had
several serious diseases which were difficult to cure, and more than once
was almost put in jail because of youthful lollies, at least ten times was
close to a violent death and have experienced all kinds of dangers.
Sixteen times I have enlisted in the service of others, which is a thing not
dissimilar to incarceration or captivity, and have had many enemies
through envy, and nobles who treated me unfairly —one of which was
Cardinal Richelieu. Saturn in the twelfth house caused all these things
because it bears an analogy to these evils; but I always eluded the very
worst due to Jupiter and Venus in good celestial state, and it is true that
from the danger of a violent death I was rescued on more than five
occasions through divine goodness and mercy—once miraculously,
when I was thrown

=== Page 52 ===
from horseback and was in the greatest danger of death; may the Lord be
praised by all his saints and I be among them for all eternity, Amen.
Such a situation is shown in the horoscope of the well-known Louis
Tronson where the Moon, Jupiter, Venus and Mercury are in the tenth and
ruled by the Sun in the eleventh; he received many high honors from
Louis XIII for his outstanding accomplishments and faithful service.
Again, it is shown in the horoscope of Henri d' Effiat who had the Sun,
Jupiter and Mars in the eighth and whose death was violent through
Mars, a public one through the Sun, and by judicial decision through
Jupiter.
Second. When several planets are placed in the same house each of
them acts in accordance with its nature and determinations both
separately and in association with the other planets.
Third. If out of several planets in the same house a particular one
has an analogy to the affairs of that house, or is ruler of the others, or one
planet has an analogy while another is ruler, these planets are to be given
prime consideration as they will be the most capable of producing the
good of the house, or causing the evil or removing it. Thus, in my
horoscope Jupiter and Saturn are to be taken as the most important. Mars,
however, is to be considered the most important planet in the eighth
house of Henri d'Effiat since it is both analogous to violent death and
ruler of the other planets.
Fourth. The planet closest to the cusp should be noted well as this
position is very important on account of the strength of the cusp. So, the
planet of main distinction is to be sought —by being either the ruler of
the house, being exalted therein, having an analogy to the house
meanings, or being nearest to the cusp. If all these should refer to the
same planet that one will have by far the greatest power over the affairs
of the house.
Fifth. When two or more planets are placed in the same house and
some are analogous to the meanings of the house while others are
contrary to them—for example, when the Sun and Saturn are both in the
tenth the Sun is analogous to honors while Saturn is by nature contrary
to them—it must be ascertained which planet is most power ful for
producing the good or ill of the house or for removing or hin dering this
good or ill, in accordance with the procedure outlined in ch. 2, for the
stronger planet always has the greater effect. However, in evaluating the
balance between the good or ill reason must be used, for if Saturn is in
Cancer and the Sun in Leo honors will come through the power of the
Sun in Leo as well as by analogy, but in these affairs misfortunes will
not be lacking because of Saturn which is con trary by nature to honors
and in an adverse celestial state. If they were both peregrine —as in
Scorpio—honors would be indicated by neither planet, for to the same
degree that the Sun indicates them Saturn will

=== Page 53 ===
oppose them. It is possible, though, that they might occur through some
other means, such as a trine of Jupiter to the Sun, but misfortunes would
have to be expected in connection with these honors because of Saturn.
However, if both were in Libra where the Sun is in exile and Saturn is
exalted honors might come about through the exalted Saturn, and the Sun
would favor these more through its analogy than it would oppose them
through its placement in exile. Similar judgments are to be carefully
thought out in all other cases.
Sixth. It frequently happens that two benefics or two malefics are
found in the same house, or sometimes a benefic with a malefic. Two
benefics always indicate something good—whether by actually con-
ferring the good or by freeing one from the evil—
and this result will be
the more certain the better their celestial state. But two malefics always
indicate something evil—
either by causing the evil or preven ting or
spoiling the good— unless both malefics are strong by sign and in
fortunate houses. For example, Saturn and Mars in Capricorn in the
second was beneficial for wealth for de Chavigny, and Mars in Capricorn
and Saturn in Aquarius in the seventh showed benefits in connection with
the marriages of Prince Gaston de Foix. 1 But the good caused by malefics
is never unmixed with evil, and so in matters of wealth they cause avarice
or rapacity and in marriage the death of the spouse; in other words, they
stir up serious difficulties despite the power they also have to grant the
benefits of that house.
Seventh. If a benefic follows another benefic in a fortunate house
the resulting good will be certain to come and will remain stable. But if a
malefic follows the benefic, the good will ultimately end in some kind of
evil or will be impeded or hindered. And if a benefic follows a benefic in
an unfortunate house the evils will not take place or will be very much
attenuated. If a malefic follows a benefic it is certain that the evil will
occur because of the nature of the house, while if a benefic follows a
malefic the evil will also occur but the native will ultimately be freed
from it; but if a malefic follows another malefic the evils will be most
serious nor will the native be freed from them. Note, however, that by
"
benefic" or "malefic" we mean the combined assessment of the planet's
nature, celestial state, and local determinations as well. So, a benefic in
the tenth applying to a conjunction with an exalted Saturn would very
certainly indicate honors, while a planet in the twelfth applying to a
conjunction with the ruler of the eighth most certainly foretells an
illness and a grave threat to life.
Eighth. When two or more planets are located in the same house
1 Gaston de Foix, Duke of Orleans and brother of Louis XIII. At the instigation of
his mother and Cardinal Richelieu he married, against his own will, Mme. de
Montpensier who was one of the richest heiresses in Europe. She died within a year and
he married Margaret of Lorraine.

=== Page 54 ===
and their ruler is placed elsewhere one should consider well the house in
which that ruler actually is, for in the affairs of this house the origin of
the good or evil is to be found. Thus, in the horoscope of Louis Tronson
the Sun, ruler of the Moon, Jupiter and Venus in the tenth, is itself placed
in the eleventh and foretells public honors by means of friends —and
noble or princely ones at that.
Ninth. Two planets in the same house can be combined with each
other in nine different ways as each is to be considered in three ways —
according to its nature, celestial state, and local determination in the
horoscope; whatever conclusions are drawn can be combined with the
same three conditions for the other planet. And just here arises the great
difficulty in predictive astrology.

=== Page 55 ===
CHAPTER IV
The ruler of a house is located in some other house; whether
the meanings of both houses are always combined
We will now discuss a matter of the utmost importance in judicial
astrology which up to now has been ignored by other writers.
It has already been shown that a planet does not act in dependently
of the sign in which it is placed, but is always dependent on it, and the
sign is a part of the primum caelum or the first cause in nature, and was
determined initio mundi in accordance with the given nature of the
planets. This dependence of the planet on the sign func tions like an
association or partnership and is confirmed in the birth-horoscope, for a
planet's position in the caelum assumes meaning in accordance with its
own nature and its placement in one or another of the signs —from which
observation we say a planet is in a good or ad verse celestial state —and
these relationships are retained with respect to the native for his entire
life. For example, the position of the Sun in Aquarius will retain the
nature of the Sun in an adverse celestial state throughout the native's
lifetime. And the direction of the significators to these places
demonstrates this as do also the transits of the planets over them, for
transiting planets act according to the nature and con ditions of the
positions involved, as every-day experience proves.
Furthermore, the action of a sign is always dependent on the nature
and quality of its ruler, for it depends on it essentially since it is a sign;
and if the ruler of any sign were somehow taken away from (he world
that sign would no longer act as a sign, but as only a part of the primum
caelum. It is for this reason a planet is rightly said to rule its sign, to
preside over it, and also to rule the house into which that sign falls —in
other words, to rule the essential meanings of that house —since their
manifestation and development depend on that ruler as on an efficient
cause. It is less properly said to rule another planet actually placed in the
sign, for, if Mars were somehow taken away from the world, Jupiter
placed in that part of the caelum called Aries would not cease to act
according to its Jupiterian nature; for although Aries and Jupiter may
combine their qualities, each acts separately and in accordance w i t h its
own nature—Aries martially,

=== Page 56 ===
Jupiter jovially — so that if Mars were removed from the world the
martial quality of Aries would cease, but not the jovial nature of Jupiter.
But since a planet acts not only in accordance with its own nature
but also its celestial state —which always varies by sign and aspects with
other planets —the action of a sign depends on both the nature and the
celestial state of its ruler. Experience proves this because, for example,
when the ruler of the Ascendant is in exile and in con junction, square, or
opposition to a malefic planet it always bodes ill for the meanings of the
Ascendant.
Whence it follows that since a planet acts only in dependence on the
sign wherein placed, and the sign in dependence on the nature and state
of its ruler, the action of a planet in a sign other than its own will be
dependent on the nature and state of its ruler; and this is a fact always to
be borne in mind. So it is that in evaluating the affairs of the Ascendant,
which stands for the physical constitution, character and temperament,
one should not just consider the ruler of the Ascendant by itself, but, if
this is not in domicile the ruler of the other sign as well. I call this planet
the secondary ruler of the Ascendant and it frequently represents the
principal force in shaping the affairs of the Ascendant, and is therefore a
most significant point to consider in making judgments; the same is also
true for the ruler of the MC, the Sun, etc. However, one never goes on to
consider the ruler of the secondary ruler as having any effect, otherwise
he will end up in a vicious circle; for the more the light is bent the
weaker it becomes, and the same is true concerning these rulers.
Moreover, as the action of a planet may be considered universal and
indeterminate with respect to the entire world, but no particular (as it
would be in the birth-horoscope of an individual), a sign may be
considered in its universal action to be dependent solely on the celestial
state of its ruler; but in its particular action on an individual at birth to be
dependent on the terrestrial state of its ruler, or by its local
determinations in the horoscope. And therefore, the Sun, ruler of the
Ascendant and in the tenth house, raises the native to honors, while in
the eighth it indicates he may die in a public place and by violence if
afflicted at the same time by Saturn or Mars.
A planet's action is more direct and indicates something per taining
to a house through its determination by location in the horoscope with
greater effect than through its determination by ruler-ship; whence it is
commonly phrased that "location is stronger than rulership." Consider
the sign Capricorn in the twelfth house (signifying Saturnian diseases)
and Saturn in the tenth: Capricorn has derived its nature from Saturn
initio mundi and will of course effect something Saturnian. Illnesses
result not because of Saturn but because of Capricorn's location in the
twelfth, and since this house

=== Page 57 ===
refers to illnesses the Saturnian sign Capricorn indicates the par ticular
kind of disease; in short, Capricorn in the twelfth causes Saturnian
diseases. However, the power to cause them is not inherent in the sign
Capricorn but in its ruler Saturn on which Capricorn's ac tion depends, as
was stated elsewhere. Therefore, if Saturn in the tenth exerts a greater
influence on the affairs of the twelfth than the sign Capricorn in the
twelfth, it will have an even greater influence over the affairs of the tenth
than the twelfth when actually in the tenth, because in the tenth it acts on
its own, but in the twelfth through the intermediary of its sign. For similar
reasons, the ruler of the first in the ninth conjunct the ruler of the seventh
refers more to religion than to marriage, conflicts, etc.; on the other hand,
the ruler of the first in the seventh conjunct the ruler of the ninth inclines
more to matrimony, litigations, and conflicts than to religion.
However, one must make an exception of the first house whose
essential meanings—the physical constitution, character, etc. —are of
primary importance and the basis of all else, and which necessarily must
be evaluated first of all. For it is true that the character and other first
house meanings are described more clearly by the planet ruling the
Ascendant than the affairs of the other houses are described by any planet
actually located in them, even when that planet is conjunct its ruler.
Therefore, the ruler of the first in another house describes the
physical constitution, length of life, character and disposition in accor -
dance with the meanings of the house in which it is actually placed; and
this planet will have an even greater effect if it also rules this other house.
But as far as the remaining houses are concerned, the ruler of the twelfth,
for example, in the eleventh would indicate hidden ene mies who become
friends rather than the reverse; and the reasoning is the same for the other
houses.
It may be objected that the MC should be considered more im -
portant in matters pertaining to honors and the profession than the ruler
of the MC, even when that ruler is also placed in the tenth house; as is
proved through directions. Whence it is that in the affairs of the tenth
only the directions of the MC are considered by Ptolemy and his
successors, and therefore the sign is more effective than its ruler, whether
that ruler is in domicile or not.
I would reply that the MC does not have that greater power because
of any sign or sign-degree but simply from the fact that a par-licular
degree occupies the tenth house cusp, which is the most ef-fective point
of that house, regardless of what degree or sign may oc cupy it. And so,
the action of a planet also occupying that degree would be even more
effective than the degree by itself, especially if that planet is in its own
sign, for in some other its nature would be weaker on account of the
combination of different qualities.

=== Page 58 ===
One should note that the ruler of a house located in that house has
remarkable power to assist the affairs of that house if it is a fortunate one,
and especially when the planet bears an analogy to the affairs of that
house. For a planet in its own sign is unmixed in quality, is responsible
only to itself, and is independent of other planets in its ac tion and is
therefore very strong and generally benefic. If in an un fortunate house,
such as the eighth and the twelfth, it releases one from the evil, or at least
tempers it. And even Saturn and Mars generally act this way unless they
are made unfortunate through some other means, such as aspects with
planets malefic in nature or by determination, or when they are squared,
conjunct or opposed to the lights, or afflicting the rulers of the Ascendant
or the MC.
A planet ruling one house and placed in another, in addition to
having an influence on the meanings of the house it rules (just as if it
were in that house—though weaker), also indicates some combination of
the essential meanings of each house, through the agency of that planet,
in accordance with the combinations possible for both houses which
would conform to the nature, analogy, and celestial state of the planet.
This because the sign in a house acts on the affairs of that house in
accordance with the nature and celestial and terrestrial state of its ruler,
as we have frequently said. By terrestrial state we mean, of course, its
local determinations in the horoscope.
However, we must first ascertain whether a planet placed in a given
house, and ruler of another, always combines the essential meanings of
both houses, and whether or not it can in fact effect something through
its actual location which would be independent of a consideration of its
sign rulership; this point is of the greatest im portance in making
judgments.
First. Each planet is active through its own qualitative power and is
independent of the sign which it rules, from which it receives no power
of action; on the contrary, that sign receives its power from the planet
which is its ruler; therefore, a planet can act through house position
without the participation of its determination by rulership. This is
confirmed by the fact that Saturn in the twelfth always causes diseases,
imprisonment, or enemies. It does not have the power to do this directly
although its nature may be analogous to these twelfth-house affairs, for
Saturn itself is indifferent to life, illness, health, wealth, etc. Nor does it
assume this power from its own signs Aquarius or Capricorn, or from the
houses in which these signs fall, for, as a matter of fact, whatever houses
they may fall into Saturn in the twelfth nevertheless produces illnesses.
Therefore, it follows that it has this power solely from its actual location
in the twelfth —the house of illness. And so, a planet does effect
something by actual location in the horoscope which is independent of
its rulership in the other houses of the horoscope.

=== Page 59 ===
Second. A planet outside its own sign causes one thing by virtue of
the house where it is placed, and another by virtue of its rulership in
another house. These two effects do not necessarily have any reciprocal
connection in such a way that one would necessarily involve the other,
for they are of a different class and really quite distinct.
Third. If Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury, which rule two
signs each could not act by location without at the same time by rulership
as well, it would follow that every particular action of these planets when
placed outside their own signs would always involve combinations of the
meanings of three, four, or five of the horoscope's houses —that one in
which the planet is placed as well as those over which its two signs rule.
But this is absurd and contrary to experience. For example, in my own
horoscope Saturn is the significator of diseases; through directions to the
Sun around my eighth year it caused me to have the quartan fever; and by
directing the Ascendant to the square of Saturn in the year 1616, it caused
me to contract a long-lasting and serious disease. But although Saturn
rules the ninth, tenth, and eleventh houses it is completely false that their
meanings—religion, journeys, and profession —concurred in these
diseases, or were in any way involved with them.
Similarly, in the horoscope of Louis Tronson, Jupiter was in the
tenth, foretelling honors, and ruling the second, third, and fifth; however,
it is false that these honors occurred through a combination of wealth,
brothers, relatives, or children; for only through his own merit did he
obtain from Louis XIII these honors in return for his counsel and skills,
and with de Luynes —later State Secretary—helped free France from the
tyrannical power of Concini, the Marquis d'An cre.1 And again, a most
unusual event occurred to Tronson when he was eighteen years old. The
Parisians had banded together against Henri Borbon, King of France and
Navarre, and elected the father of Tronson himself into Parlement. He
was actually a faithful —though secret—servant of the king, and did not
want to accept the sacred seal. The Parisians went on demanding that at
least his son Louis ac cept the seal, and that on the day appointed for
affixing the seal he should bring it into the council and place it on the
required documents in his presence. The father assented out of fear of the
conspirators, should be show his allegiance to the king/ and so Tronson
himself at the age of 18 obtained a position in Parlement. And this public
honor
1 The Marquis d'Ancre, a Florentine, was confidential advisor to Marie de Medici, and
instrumental in the rise of Cardinal Richeliue in that he got him appointed Secretary of
State for War. The Duke de Luynes, statesman and for a time Constable of France,
convinced Louis XIII (then 16 years old) that his power was being usurped by the
I t a l i a n , and himself led the plot resulting in the murder of the Marquis. Not content
with that, his wife was sentenced to death as a witch.

=== Page 60 ===
came by the direction of the MC to the Moon, ruler of the MC, and the
first of the tenth house planets to which the MC arrived by direc tion.
Nothing to do with religion or voyages was involved although the Moon
was also ruler of the ninth. In addition, the Moon itself had by direction
come to Venus—the ruler of the Ascendant, and was coming to Mercury,
the ruler of the Sun. And the same kind of thing can be seen for many
events shown in other horoscopes.
And so, we may conclude that a planet in a particular house, and at
the same time ruler of another, does not always effect a com bination of
the meanings of both houses, but sometimes acts by virtue of its actual
location, sometimes by virtue of one or other of the house rulerships if it
rules over more than one sign and house; for example, the direction of
the Ascendant to Mars in the first, but ruler of the twelfth, would refer to
an illness, or to the ruler of the MC would refer to the profession or
prestige. However, at times there is an effective combination of the
planet's nature and location with the meanings of one or another of the
houses ruled by that planet, according to the combinations possible for
those meanings and to the state of the planet itself, bat not always with
all at the same time. And also, a combination of the meanings through
location with those through rulership will be indicated if the combination
is at least possible though the combination may only take place at some
future time. It happens occasionally that a planet ruling one house while
located in another may act principally through its location, and then as a
consequence combines later the meaning of location with that through
rulership; for example, in the horoscope of Tronson Mars was ruler of the
second but in the third and therefore the main significator of his brothers
and sisters, and through its malefic nature indicated their death,
especially since Saturn was also in the third and ruling the fourth. But as
one planet was ruler of the second and the other of the fourth, the
inheritances and wealth Tronson obtained through the death of his
brothers were shown quite clearly. As it happened, out of thirteen
children the last born became successor to all the others.
Contrariwise, a sign in any house, when its ruler is located
elsewhere, always acts in accordance with the nature and celestial state
of its ruler, but not always in accordance with its terrestrial state in the
horoscope. Otherwise if the ruler of the MC were located in the eighth
the native's professional activities would perforce be combined with
death or the danger of it; in the twelfth, seventh, or fourth —with the
meanings of those houses, which is certainly contrary to ex perience and
to the fact that the affairs of the houses are quite different in kind, as was
pointed out earlier. Therefore, a combination could only be predicted for
some time in the future —not, however, continuously or for every
possibility involved.

=== Page 61 ===
CHAPTER V
How a planet ruling one house but located in another
combines the meanings of each house
After what was stated in the preceding chapter it is clear that a
planet ruling one house but placed in some other foretells at the very
least a combination of the meanings of each house at some future time.
We will discuss here how such a combination may take place and how to
make an evaluation that will include the many things which have to be
taken into consideration.
First. For any given house there are several meanings, such as the
physical constitution, health, disposition, and character for the first;
illness, prison, hidden enemies, false friends who ridicule the native and
bear him secret ill-will for the twelfth; marriage, litigations, and
contracts for the seventh; for the tenth —professional activities, honor
and prestige; and so on for the other houses, as we have shown
elsewhere. And any house also has the same meaning as the one op posite
to it by dint of the opposition itself, but only accidentally, and experience
will show this to be true, for Mars in the second threatens death and
Jupiter in the eighth is an indication of money; Saturn in the sixth shows
illness or prison, while Venus in the twelfth shows good fortune in
connection with servants and animals; and so on. But this does not hold
true for the rulers of the houses. The ruler of the fourth does not have any
influence on the meanings of the tenth house unless it is actually in the
fourth, or rules over the tenth-house ruler, or is in strong aspect to the
tenth house cusp or the ruler of the sign there; and the same applies to the
other houses in opposition. A planet strong by celestial state holds great
significance for the house in opposition to it; if it is weak, then its
significance will be weaker. However, the opposition of a planet always
indicates opposition or difficulty in attaining the good shown by the
other house while it promotes the evil of that house.
One should also note that a planet in the first house has an influence
on the affairs of the ninth and fifth (the houses corresponding in this
instance to the fire triplicity, and even more so if it rules the ninth or the
fifth; and so on for the second, sixth and tenth, etc.

=== Page 62 ===
Second. It is wise to consider carefully what combinations are
possible for the meanings of the different houses. For when the ruler of
the fourth is in the fifth one would not say that the native's father will
become his son, as this is an impossibility; but we might say that the
father will be of benefit to the native's sons, or that his sons will receive
the native's paternal inheritance, or some such idea either similar or
contrary as the indications may be, since these com binations are possible
and could be predicted from the nature and state of the planet ruling the
fourth house. Similarly, the ruler of the sixth in the seventh can mean a
servant may become the spouse, or bring litigations against the native;
the ruler of the seventh in the eighth—the native's spouse or an open
enemy may be the cause of his death; and so on.
Third. One must learn to evaluate with the greatest care which of
these possible combinations of meanings fall into conformity with the
nature and celestial state of the planet as well as with the general life
conditions of the native himself. For some events are more likely to
happen to a prince or a noble, while other events are more likely to
happen to a merchant or a peasant, still others to a worldly man or a
priest, to a man or a woman, children or the aged, and so on; for only
those things in conformity with such important conditions of life are
likely to take place.
Fourth. The affairs of the houses represent the various areas of
experience possible for the native, and the action of the planets is
directed into these areas of experience by their location, rulership, or
both. Therefore, when the ruler of one house is in another, that is, a
planet is the significator of one area by rulership and some other by
location, these two local determinations —working either separately or in
combination—represent some future events or experiences so that at one
time one thing and at another time some other thing, and again at times
both will take place combined together. For example, when the planet
ruling the Ascendant is in the sixth and is benefic in nature and celestial
state it foretells good things with respect to ser vants and animals; if it is
malefic in nature and celestial state it foretells the contrary. If the ruler of
the Ascendant is in the sixth it indicates that the native stoops to servile
things, and a love, interest, or occupation with or for servants, animals
and household affairs is shown. And if the planet is a malefic and in an
adverse celestial state it threatens prison, exile, or illness as well as losses
and danger through servants on account of the opposition of the twelfth
to the sixth.
Fifth. A planet ruling one house and placed in another acts not only
through the house it occupies as well as the one which it rules over, but
also through any planets located in this latter house. For example, the
ruler of Mercury in the first house shows good mental

=== Page 63 ===
qualities, even though Mercury is not itself in the first house. And the
ruler of the Sun in the tenth—honors and prestige, and so on. This is
because any planet has an influence on the native through both the
celestial and terrestrial state of its ruler. And so if Mercury's ruler is in
the first and in good celestial state, Mercury's influence will be felt in the
affairs of the first house and especially on the mental qualities because of
the analogy; and this would be in a favorable way because its ruler is in
good celestial state. Terrestrial state is to be understood here as location
only and not rulership in another house —except perhaps only very
weakly—for otherwise, a vicious circle would be set up and we rejected
this in ch. 4. Therefore, if Venus is in the third house and its ruler Jupiter
is in the first and, moreover, Jupiter is ruler of the twelfth, Venus will act
on the native through the affairs of the first house, but not the twelfth.
But if Jupiter were in the twelfth and ruler of both the Ascendant and a
fourth-house Sun it would act on the native through its rulership over the
first and fourth house as well as the Sun placed in the fourth. But the Sun
in the fourth, whose ac tion is conditioned by its ruler and that ruler's
state, has no influence on the affairs of the first house where the ruler of
the Sun is not actually placed; and so on.
The first house indicates the essential qualities of the native him self
as well as the accidental features of his body and mind, while the
remaining houses refer to areas of experience which are of fun damental
importance to the native. When the ruler of the first is placed in one of
the other houses, or the ruler of one of the other houses is placed in the
first, a combination of the meanings of the two houses results. For
example, if the ruler of the first is in the tenth, or the ruler of the tenth in
the first, professional activities, honors and prestige are indicated for the
native in both cases; with the difference, however, that in the first case
the native is stimulated by his own will and ambition and works with
industry to attain recognition or an im portant position, while in the
second case he does not strive thus, but honor and preferment often come
to him quite without expectation. Similarly, if the ruler of the first is in
the eighth, or the ruler of the eighth is in the first, a premature death is
shown either way and the native himself is the principal cause, either by
deliberately placing himself in danger or by doing so unwittingly, such as
those do who in their excessive precautionary measures against death
draw off too much of their blood or attempt with intemperance to cure
their own illnesses. And in the same way, when the ruler of the first is in
another house the meanings health, character, natural inclinations or tem -
perament are joined with the affairs of the other house in com binations
that are appropriate as well as possible in view of the nature and state of
the planet, for these two considerations are the most im portant in
determining whether the affairs of the houses will come to

=== Page 64 ===
pass, and whether they will be fortunate or unfortunate if they do.
When the rulers of the other houses are in some house other than the
first, such as when the ruler of the second is in the seventh, judgment is to
be made by considering the problem three ways. First, the planet itself is
in the seventh and foretells something good or ill about marriage, open
enemies, litigation and contracts, in accordance with its own nature and
state. Then, since it is ruler of the second, some good or ill with regard to
money and for the same reasons. So, the ruler of the second is in the
seventh and if it were a benefic and in good celestial state it would
indicate money through the marriage, or through litigations and contracts;
if it were in adverse celestial state, it shows loss of money through
marriage, litigations or contracts. Therefore, a combination arises which
is either lucky or unlucky ac cording to the nature and state of the planet.
And if, contrariwise, the ruler of the seventh is in the second, the same
things are signified as before, but if the planet in this combination were a
benefic and in good celestial state, an increase in finances would be
indicated by either the frugality or work of the spouse, through
litigations, or the partner in a contract. But if the planet is a malefic and
in adverse celestial state, it foretells that robbers, open enemies, or the
spouse make away with the native's money. Similarly, if the ruler of the
tenth is in the twelfth, either the meanings of the tenth will be resolved
into the meanings of the twelfth, or vice-versa; because the determination
of a planet is stronger by location than by rulership the planet ruling the
tenth—and therefore the reputation and professional activities of the
native—will be the cause of illness, prison, enemies, or exile, etc. And if
on the other hand, the ruler of the twelfth is in the tenth, enemies, prisons,
exiles, etc. will be the cause of honor, recognition and professional
activities, especially if the ruler itself is a benefic and in good celestial
state. The first example can be seen in my own horoscope where the ruler
of the MC is in the twelfth. The second, in Cardinal Richelieu's
horoscope where Venus, ruler of the twelfth, is very close to the MC; and
so on. One must always pay attention to the planet's nature and state and
whether it has an analogy to the affairs of the house.
Moreover, it should always be carefully observed in what house the
ruler of another house is actually located, for in the angular houses it is
strongly disposed for causing good or ill, especially when also in its
domicile or exaltation. It may be located in a house whose meanings are
similar to those of the house of its rulership; for exam ple, the ruler of the
second in the fourth, seventh, or tenth, more clearly indicates money,
because from the affairs of those houses —inheritances, marriage and
profession—money would be more likely to follow. But if it is placed
contrariwise, as would be the case if the ruler of the second were in the
twelfth, the loss of finances

=== Page 65 ===
through illness, exile or prison would be shown, since in these com -
binations the meanings of the house without its ruler are usually resolved
into the meanings of the house where that ruler actually is. For example,
when the ruler of the tenth is in the twelfth, the profession of the native
will be the cause of his misfortune, or he falls from it or loses it, which
happened to me in the medical profession because Saturn was ruler of the
tenth and in the twelfth. Or because of professional activities the native
may be put in jail. But when the ruler of the twelfth is in the tenth,
enemies, exile, prison, or misfor tunes will be the cause of honor and
preferment, as was the case with Cardinal Richelieu, whose Venus was
ruler of the twelfth and in the MC, or within a close orb though actually
located in the ninth. And similarly, the ruler of the eleventh in the twelfth
changes friends into enemies, which happened frequently to me; and the
ruler of the twelfth in the eleventh causes the contrary. Likewise, when
the ruler of the tenth is in the eleventh, the professional activities and
repute of the native will bring him friends, while the ruler of the eleventh
in the tenth foretells the reverse; and so on.
From the above it follows that if a planet is ruler of two houses and
located outside of those houses, their meanings are resolved into the
meanings of the house in which the ruler actually is, or are at least
affected by this meaning. Thus, the ruler of the first and the eighth in the
seventh, and in adverse celestial state, foretells the native will be killed
or wounded by an open enemy; and so on. But attention should always
be paid to the nature of the planet and its analogy with the meanings of
those houses, as well as its celestial and terrestrial state, for a planet in
an adverse celestial state —and especially when malefic by nature —is of
no value for the fortunate houses it either occupies or rules over, but
instead denies, hinders, or brings misfortune to the good they signify.
However, if such a planet is in an unfortunate house it clearly promotes
the evil of that house, but not the good of the other house it may rule
over, and so no resolution takes place —unless perhaps unfortunate —of
the rulership meanings into the meanings shown by the planet's location.
It may be objected that a house is actually to be considered as two
things—a primary house, which is a fixed space, and also a secon dary
house, which is the part of the caelum occupying that space. And since
the primary house is a fixed space, the tenth house, for example, would
not be the house of honor and prestige for the native alone, but would be
a house referring to the honors of all born at that geographical point or
the house of honor and prestige for that place on earth. And the same
would be true for the eighth house and death, the seventh and the spouse,
or litigations, etc. Therefore, if the ruler Of the third is in the eighth,
death would then be indicated for the

=== Page 66 ===
brothers and sisters, if in the tenth, recognition would be indicated for
them, etc.
But I would reply that the calculations for the native cannot be the
same as that for his brothers, parents, children, etc., because the eighth
house is only the eighth house at that place with respect to the first, and
therefore the meaning of the eighth—death—has reference only to the
first house—that is, the native himself —and not to the third house and
his brothers. Therefore, the ruler of the third in the eighth indicates death
for the native through his brothers as a cause, but not death for the
brothers. However, the tenth house is the eighth from the third, and
therefore, if the ruler of the third is in the tenth it indicates the death of
the brothers —which can be frequently ob served—and indicates honor
and advantage to the native through his brothers; whence it can be
concluded that the native, upon his brother's death, will succeed to his
position and estate or will acquire these through inheritance; and so on.
Again however, attention must be paid to any planet which the ruler
of a given house is conjunct, for the ruler of the first conjunct the Sun
makes likely or inclines to dealings with kings or important per sons as
well as to glory, fame and honors. The ruler of the second with Jupiter is
a certain promise of money; the ruler of the eighth with Mars threatens a
violent death or danger thereof; and so on for the rest, with due
consideration to the house and any possible analogy to the planet which
is conjunct the ruler of that house. Moreover, in con sidering the two
planets together one should note over what houses these rule, for if the
ruler of the first is conjunct the ruler of the twelfth or the eighth an illness
or death is shown; if conjunct the ruler of the tenth or the eleventh it
shows success in the profession or with friends. Similarly, if the ruler of
the second is with the ruler of the tenth, money from the profession and
through personal recognition is shown; if the ruler of the twelfth is with
the ruler of the eighth, illness and prison will prove to be dangerous to
the native's life.
Furthermore, it must be said that the meaning of the eighth house —
death—is not something tangible, is not a causative thing and can bring
on no further event but instead can only be caused through the affairs of
some other house. And therefore, the ruler of a house in the eighth
causes death through the affairs of the house which it rules, which are, in
effect, resolved into the eighth house meaning. For example, the ruler of
the twelfth in the eighth foretells that an illness will be the cause of
death, or that the native will die in prison; the ruler of the seventh in the
eighth—the wife, or a conflict of some kind; the ruler of the tenth —the
profession or rank; the ruler of the first — the native himself will cause
his own death; the ruler of the second — greed, or even theft, etc. On the
other hand, the ruler of the eighth in some other house is an indication of
an indirect cause of death

=== Page 67 ===
through the meaning of that house. For example, the ruler of the eighth
in the seventh foretells the native will die, not by the action of the wife
herself, but through the wife as some indirect cause or agent; in the
eleventh on account of a friend, and so forth. When a planet in the eighth
rules two other houses one should observe through a consideration of the
various house meanings with which one the eighth house more readily or
reasonably combines, and with which one the planet in the eighth house
would be more likely to join in causing the native's death; and judgment
is made accordingly.

=== Page 68 ===
CHAPTER VI
Two planets as co-rulers of a single house; a
single planet ruling more than one house
When a planet rules over the house where it is located the con dition
of the affairs of that house will be easy to evaluate, and even easier if the
planet is in domicile; but it will be easiest of all when it is both in
domicile and ruler of the house, because the affairs of that house are not
then directly influenced by any other factors.
But when more than one planet rules the same house the affairs of
this house are subject to forces different in kind and nature; therefore,
their condition is a mixture —without unity, and sometimes
contradictory. And this is more likely to be so when one of the rulers is a
benefic while the other is a malefic, but is most evident if, in addition,
one is strong by celestial state while the other is weak and both are in
square or opposition.
However, the planet which rules the cusp takes precedence when
evaluating the affairs of that house, but the other planet should by no
means be neglected. This is reasonable because the cusp of a house is the
most effective point of that house, as we have shown elsewhere; and as
the effect of the degree of the sign on the cusp is measured by the quality
of its ruler, it follows that this planet is more powerful than any co-ruler,
particularly if it has an analogy with the meanings of the house, is
stronger by celestial state, and in addition is in that house or in strong
aspect to a planet in that house. The following points are to be observed:
whether both are benefics or malefics; whether one is benefic and the
other malefic; whether one is strong and the other weak; whether both
are strong by celestial state or both weak or whether one is strong and
the other weak; whether both are in the house itself, both outside it, or
one in and one out; also, which rules the cusp or is the nearer to it, or has
the stronger aspect to it or to a planet in the house itself. Judgment is
made from the conditions found after a consideration of all these factors.
1 The "co-rulers" refer to a house which contains an intercepted sign.

=== Page 69 ===
When the same planet rules more than one house —even if it does
not occupy any one of these —a combination of the meanings of each
house ruled is nevertheless indicated. For example, the same planet
ruling the Ascendant and the MC promises recognition in professional
activities. The same planet ruling the seventh and eighth promises danger
or death from enemies, especially if it is a malefic and in adverse
celestial state. However, one should note to which house the planet has
the most evident analogy, for the meanings of that house will take
precedence. But when this ruler is in some other house judgment must
proceed according to the method outlined in ch.4

=== Page 70 ===
CHAPTER VII
The determinations of the planets
by exaltation and triplicity
That a planet located in the sign of its exaltation has greater in-
fluence for good or ill on the meanings of the house in which it is located
or over which it rules is a commonplace among astrologers of any
experience. Also, it is acknowledged that an exalted planet strengthens
any other planet by its conjunction or aspect. What we will determine
here is whether a planet which is not in its exaltation has any influence
on the affairs of the house where the sign of its exaltation falls, or on the
significance of any planet which may occupy that sign. For example,
when the Sun is in the tenth and in Cancer but Jupiter is not in the tenth,
will Jupiter, through Cancer —the sign of its exaltation —have any
influence in the tenth house and on the Sun?
That this would in fact be so is attested by all astrologers including
Ptolemy. For Ptolemy in Book 2, ch. 2, of the Tetrabiblos, concerning the
ruler of an eclipse, and also in Book 3, ch. 13, concerning the election of
the apheta, claims that a planet is stronger in the important places of the
horoscope when in domicile, exaltation, or triplicity. From this it follows
that if a planet has influence over the significance of an eclipse because
of its rulership over the sign in which the eclipse occurs, it would also
have some influence if it were in exaltation in that sign. And the same
principle will be applicable when deciding which planet of those in the
principal places of the horoscope is the strongest in the horoscope, or at
any rate, which one is the strongest of the several in one place.
And so, although in almost all horoscopes experience shows that
scarcely any effect cannot be reduced to the causes shown by location,
rulership, and aspects, the house-location of the sign of a planet's
exaltation sometimes exhibits its own special effect also. For example, in
the horoscope of Prince Gaston de Foix Saturn is in the seventh, and the
sign of this planet's exaltation is in the fourth, showing that it was
through his wife that he became owner of very extensive

=== Page 71 ===
estates—and even two provinces. And in my own life an almost con stant
desire for fame is shown in my horoscope by Mars ruling the Ascendant
while located in the sign of Jupiter's exaltation, and all the other planets
except Mercury in the sign of the exaltation of Venus, which is co-ruler
of the first; but perhaps mainly, through the exaltation of the Sun and
Moon in the first house referring, of course, to my character and
temperament. As a result I am excessively in clined to consider myself
superior to others on account of my in tellectual endowments and
scientific attainments, and it is very dif ficult for me to struggle against
this tendency, except when the realization of my sins troubles me and I
see myself a vile man and worthy of contempt. Because of all this my
name has become famous throughout the world. And many similar
examples can be found of this sort so that it does not seem idle to make a
judgment on the affairs of a particular house from a consideration of both
the planet ruling that house and also the planet which is exalted in the
sign
there. For example, if Libra is on the Ascendant the character should be
judged from a consideration of the condition of Saturn as well as Venus.
And similarly, if Saturn were in Libra one would have to judge Saturn's
effects both from the fact of its exaltation as well as from its ruler Venus,
and from any relationship between them; for if Venus were in good
celestial state and applying to Saturn by conjunction or trine, Saturn's
power would be increased. Again, if the Sun is in Pisces its action there
is affected by the condition of both the signs of Jupiter, and therefore by
Jupiter itself as well, but also by the condition of Venus which is
exalted in Pisces. This is proven by authority, reason, and experience; the
authority is the testament of the ancients who stated that at any point of
the caelum that planet is more power ful which has the dignities there of
domicile, exaltation or triplicity. It
is reasonable because through no other cause is the planet said to be
powerful in that place except by virtue of these dignities, and if it had
no influence proceeding from these dignities it would be falsely said to
be powerful in that place. And finally, experience makes it clear from
the examples given above. Nevertheless, other factors being equal, the
ruler of a sign does take precedence over the planet in exaltation
there, but both are to be taken into consideration.
With respect to the triplicities, the Arabs customarily predicted
almost everything from the rulers of the triplicities, and this can be found
out by reading their books; but because up to now there was no certainty
among astrologers regarding these triplicity rulers it is no wonder that
their judgments abound with errors. In fact, they were accurate only
insofar as the erroneous use of the triplicities of the ancients happened
accidentally to agree with the logical and more valid system given by us
elsewhere; this can be proved by comparing

=== Page 72 ===
the triplicity rulers given by us with those given by Albohali,1 who judges
happiness or misfortune for the native from the rulers of the Sun's
triplicity when the horoscope is diurnal, but from the rulers of the Moon's
triplicity when it is nocturnal. Such judgments, however, would be
completely universal ones and common to the entire earth, and therefore
absurd. The fact is, nothing can be predicted from the rulers of the
triplicities which from the planet's location, rulerships and aspects cannot
be predicted with greater precision or certainty.
For example, in the first horoscope of Albohali, which is noc turnal,
the Moon rules the second and is in the sixth, conjunct Saturn in Scorpio,
where the Moon is in fall. However, Mars, ruler of the Moon, is in
Aquarius and square to the Moon and Saturn; what clearer indications of
poverty could the ruler of the second house possibly show? And so, the
cause of poverty was quite evident without resorting to the triplicities,
but by means of the triplicity rulers given by us, poverty is also shown.
However, according to Albohali, the Moon is by night the principal ruler
of its triplicity, with Mars as partner; the Moon and Mars are in cadent
houses—the Moon in the sixth and Mars in the ninth —and this is
sufficient evidence according to the method of Albohali. But I think that
the Moon in fall ruling the second and afflicted by the conjunction of
Saturn and the square to Mars is a much more significant and reliable
indication.
In Albohali's second horoscope, which is diurnal, the Sun is in
Aquarius in the eleventh and conjunct Mercury. According to both
Albohali and myself Saturn and Mercury would be the Sun's triplicity
rulers. But Saturn is conjunct Mars in Scorpio in the eighth, and Sat urn
and Mercury are in succedent houses, from which Albohali fore told that
the native would attain the highest public office and great prosperity.
Such things, however, could not take place through Saturn and Mercury
as they are in square, but instead from other stronger and more evident
causes—through Venus, ruler of the second, in the tenth and trine the
second house cusp, and therefore in its own trip licity; and also from
Jupiter in the fourth and in its exaltation, as well as in mutual reception
with the Moon. Therefore, since Jupiter and
1 Albohali Alchait (Abu 'Ali al-Khayyat), Arabian astrologer who lived in the ninth
century. His Kitab al-mawalid was translated in 1153 into Latin by John of Seville, and
was later printed at Nurember in 1546 under the title Albohali Arabis Astrologi
antiquissimi, ac clarissimi de judiciis nativitatum liber unus, antehac non editus. The
book had long been known under its translated title De judiciis nativitatum in manuscript
and was widely read. Francis Carmody in his Arabic Astronomical and Astrological
Sciences in Latin Translation: a critical bibliography states regarding the work:
"contents: routine astrology; horoscopes for illnesses; many short quotations from
Ptolemy and Hermes on pars fortunae. Divided systematically into substantial chapters
by topics. Significance: frequently quoted by scholastic writers in Europe as a secondary
authority." The horoscopes which Morinus describes appear in ch. VII "De prosperitate et
adversitate nati."

=== Page 73 ===
Venus are in such a favorable condition, and are by nature analogous to
wealth as well as in positions indicative of position and wealth, honors
and prosperity will proceed from them. And the malefics in trine to
Jupiter and sextile Venus will not stand in the way, but will also assist as
they are in the eighth house, which through opposition to the second
indicates money. These conclusions are, of course, in conformity with
the method of interpretation outlined above.
From Albohali and other ancient and modern astrologers I could cite
many examples showing a similar approach. Let us say now that the
rulers of the triplicities have a certain influence and it is possible to make
a judgment from them, for when a sign's influence undergoes any
modification at all it will affect in a certain measure the other signs of
that triplicity because of the similarity of their natures. But the signs act
in accordance with the nature and state of their rulers, as has frequently
been stated, and a judgment based on a sign's ruler is much more reliable
that one based on the ruler of the triplicity, because the ruler of a sign is a
more proximate cause and one on which the sign's action essentially
depends; the ruler of the triplicity, however, is a more remote cause, and
one on which the sign's action does not essentially depend. I maintain
also that the influence of the aspects is much more important than the
power of the triplicity rulers alone, to which I ascribe a minimal value
resulting from that general conformity in the fundamental nature of the
signs of the same tripli city, however much the signs may differ in other
respects. Indeed, Cancer is a sign lunar in nature, while Scorpio is martial
and Pisces jovial, but they are of the same watery nature. And also, I
think that a consideration of the triplicity rulers is more valid in matters
of temperament and character than in the judgment of other circum -
stances and events.
And so, dignity by rulership of a house —other things being equal— is
more significant than by exaltation in that house, but this in turn is more
significant than by triplicity. But it is certain that a planet influences the
affairs of the houses by virtue of its dignities of ruler-ship, exaltation,
and triplicity—wherever that planet may be—and whether or not it sends
any aspect to those houses. The explanations given earlier refer to
domicile and exaltation, which pertain to a single planet, but since for a
triplicity three planets refer to the same sign, one should observe
whether the horoscope is diurnal or noc turnal so that only two planets
need be taken into consideration; one of these will be the principal ruler
of the triplicity while the other will only be the secondary.
The opinion is widespread that a planet in domicile shows stabil ity
or indicates stable things; in exaltation —sudden and important changes;
in triplicity—some association of meaning of the houses involved.
Ptolemy, in aphorism 72 of the Centiloquy, judges the

=== Page 74 ===
upbringing and education of the native from the triplicity ruler of the
Ascendant, and his "matters of life" from the Moon's triplicity ruler.
Cardanus claims that planets located in different triplicities give one
capabilities in many directions, but if located in one triplicity—the
capacity for fewer things but with greater excellence in these; and this I
find to be quite true.

=== Page 75 ===
CHAPTER VIII
The determinations of the planets
by exile and fall
A planet located in exile or fall is said to be in an adverse celestial
state because it is in signs contrary to its own nature and quality; this
state is, of course, universal and refers to the entire world. In exile its
power is vitiated while in fall it is made weak and more inactive. When a
planet is peregrine it is not in a state of debility, as the sign is neither
contrary to the nature, essential quality nor influence of the planet. A
peregrine planet is not in its own signs —domicile or exaltation —nor in
the opposing signs, but simply in some other one. The Sun in Aquarius
and Libra is in its respective exile and fall, while it is peregrine in the
water and earth triplicities, as well as in Gemini; and so on for the other
planets. Therefore, a planet which is peregrine acts in a manner
intermediate between either good or adverse celestial state; this is always
to be understood Essentially, however, because a peregrine planet could
accidentally be in a better state and have greater effect than another one
essentially well-placed provided it had strong and favorable aspects with
other planets.
But the question here is not whether a planet in exile or fall has an
influence on the affairs of the house in which it is located for this is a
fact, as experience adequately proves. For example, Saturn in exile in the
twelfth causes the very gravest illnesses, in the eighth a fearful death;
and in fall in the tenth it makes the native sluggish and lazy, or indicates
a mean occupation, or completely prevents honors and prestige or causes
a fall from them, or brings disgrace upon the native. Saturn, however,
would not cause such things if not in exile or fall in those places.
Likewise, the ruler of the Ascendant or MC in exile or fall bodes ill for
the affairs of those houses. Instead, the question now is whether a planet
has any influence on the affairs of the house which the sign of its exile or
fall occupies when the planet itself is in some other house.
Although in this matter it may seem that the astrological causes of any
particular effect have already been given sufficient explanation

=== Page 76 ===
and there is, therefore, no need for further determinations, logic as well
as experience do show that this determination may exhibit a per ceptible
influence. It is clear that every planet located in a given house and in
domicile or exaltation would be in exile or fall in the opposite house,
where it would also be evil for the affairs of that house, for the meanings
of opposite houses are to a certain degree reciprocal or related. This fact
led astray many astrologers of the past including Ptolemy, since they
believed the sixth house referred essentially to diseases, and the eleventh
to children, when actually they merely have these meanings accidentally
and by virtue of their opposition to the twelfth and fifth houses.
Therefore, a planet in domicile in the sixth will have an influence on the
affairs of the twelfth house, but it will be adverse for two reasons: first,
by virtue of the opposition which is by nature evil, and second, by virtue
of being exiled in the opposite house — for what good could a planet
bring to a place where its nature and quality would be vitiated?
Experiences which illustrate these facts occur frequently, but I will
only speak here of my own. I have Jupiter and Venus in the twelfth house
in Pisces — the domicile of Jupiter and the exaltation of Venus — and I
have been saved from many serious illnesses and frequently managed to
avoid incarceration. I have won out over hidden enemies, even those very
influential ones shown by the Sun, so that for all their power and ill-will
they were unable to do me irreparable harm. But in any kind of service to
others I have always been unhappy, with the sole exception of two
occasions when I was a young man and a student.
Therefore, I think it is sufficiently clear that this determination too
should not be entirely disregarded, however much the cause of ef fects
can usually be explained sufficiently in some other way. Con sequently,
Mars in Libra should be considered to be in exile in the domicile of
Venus, the exaltation of Saturn, and the triplicity of Saturn, Venus, and
Mercury; and so on for the other planets.
It may be objected that if this determination really has any sub -
stantial effect it is clear that in making predictions and judgments it
should always be taken into consideration, which in fact would result in
hopeless contradictions and confusion. Therefore, it has no effect.
I say that this is false, for in the examples given above no con fusion
or contradiction of meanings is to be found; besides, the meanings of
opposite houses are most certainly related, and therefore, such a
determination is not to be neglected, just as the determinations by both
dexter and sinister aspects must always be considered for any planet. It
is now plain how many things are to be taken into consideration for a
given planet—its action by location and through the house opposite, its
domicile, exaltation, triplicity, exile, fall, and aspects, as well as the
domicile, exaltation and triplicity of any other

=== Page 77 ===
planet which may be its ruler must all be studied. This makes an accurate
judgment difficult —at least for human faculties —but not im possible,
because an effect always follows the nature and state of the most
powerful or significant planet.
Moreover, when Aries is on the Ascendant that sign influences the
Ascendant according to the nature of its ruler Mars but contrary to (he
nature of Venus; or the influence of Leo rising is in accordance with the
nature of the Sun, but contrary to the nature of Saturn. But Venus or
Saturn cannot because of this fact be said to influence the meanings of
the Ascendant, for they cannot act other than through their own nature
which would be non-existent in the Ascendant because of their antipathy.
But if Jupiter were ruler of the Ascendant and in trine to it, the benefic
influence would be increased through the dignity Jupiter had in the
Ascendant, while if Saturn were in exile in the Ascendant and in square
or opposition to it, the evil of the square or opposition would be
increased because of the nature of Saturn, which is contrary to that of the
ascending sign. It follows that such a contrary nature is inherent in the
ascending sign itself since its influence is in accordance with the nature
of its ruler, but Saturn could have no influence there without an aspect
into that sign. Therefore, when evaluating the Ascendant and any adverse
influences there, Saturn would not be given consideration without the
aspect of a square or opposition; and so on for the other signs.

=== Page 78 ===
CHAPTER IX
The determinations of the planets by aspect; the
general significance of the aspects
The importance of the aspects or rays of the planets —especially
when directing the planets —has been observed by all astrologers and
they deserve the closest attention.
The influence of the conjunction of a planet is directly in ac -
cordance with the fundamental quality of that planet. But its other
aspects—the opposition, quincunxes, trines, squares, sextiles, and semi-
sextiles — must work through those eleven points of the primum caelum,
which are modified by that planet and the nature of those aspects. In
other words, those points which receive a determination through the
different aspects have an influence in accordance with the nature of the
aspect which they form, and depend as well on the nature, power, and
state of the aspecting planet. A planet communicates universally — that
is, to the whole earth — its own qualitative power through its aspects, but
in different and more specific ways depending on the nature or kind of
aspect; and therefore, though that power is universal, there are diversified
effects resulting from it. But even with the same aspects it affects a
particular individual through the affairs of the houses in which the
aspects fall.
Properly speaking, the planets do not have any good or bad effect
on each other by their aspects. For instance, when the Sun is said to be
square Mars the correct meaning is that the point of the square of Mars
falls upon the same place the Sun occupies, and so upon the Sun itself,
and together they act on the sublunary world in much the same way as
the planets act with the signs —as partners in the same action. The
partnership of benefic aspects from benefic planets is good; of malefic
aspects from malefics is evil; but of benefic ones from malefic planets or
of malefic ones from benefic planets the combination is intermediate in
effect. The aspects to the cusps of the houses are also to be considered.
Therefore, in these two ways a planet has specific ac tion through its
aspects and can be said to determine particular things.
Hence it is clear that a power of action is inherent in the aspects,

=== Page 79 ===
as well as in the signs, which is dependent on the qualitative power of
the planets. In fact, the planets seem at times to act with greater strength
through aspect than through rulership. For example, ex perience has
proved it is a more serious matter when the Ascendant is afflicted by the
square or opposition of Mars or Saturn than when it is under their
rulership, while on the other hand it is better if the Ascen dant is trine
Jupiter than if Jupiter rules the Ascendant —all other factors being equal
—for if Jupiter rules the Ascendant and is in the MC and in good
celestial state, it is much more favorable than if it were in the eighth
house in adverse celestial state but trine the Ascendant; and so on. For a
similar reason it can be understood that a planet might have greater
significance for the house to which it is opposed than the ruler of that
house would have if it were located in some other house, especially if it
were weak and did not aspect that house cusp.
In addition, one should note that an aspect to a planet has beater
effect in the house in which that planet is located than in the house over
which it has rulership. Thus, Mars ruling the third and placed in the
fourth and trine the Ascendant would make the native disliked by his
brothers or sisters but esteemed by his parents.

=== Page 80 ===
CHAPTER X
The aspects of the planets and how they work
for good or ill
Some of the planets are benefic in nature, as Jupiter and Venus are
commonly said to be, while others are malefic, as Mars and Saturn; but
benefics do not produce good through all of their aspects because of the
different nature and quality of the aspects, as some are by nature benefic
or inclined to produce good, while others are malefic. Therefore, a given
planet produces good and bad at the same time, because it sends from its
point in the caelum both benefic and malefic rays. The distinction should
be observed, however, that the favorable rays of benefic planets are more
prone to good, and the unfavorable rays are less prone to evil, than is true
for the malefic planets. Therefore, a given planet has a good influence
through the trine, sextile and semi-sextile aspects, which are by nature
benefic, and of which the trine is the strongest, the semi-sextile the
weakest and the sextile intermediate in strength. And the same planet has
an adverse influence through the opposition, square, and quincunx,
which are by nature malefic, and of which the opposition is the strongest,
the quincunx the weakest, and the square intermediate in strength. But
the conjunction to a particular degree of the caelum is not properly
speaking an aspect —although it is counted among them —but is rather
the point of origin of the aspects and is in different to the quality of its
effect. In general, the conjunction of a benefic planet is good, but that of
a malefic is evil.
Moreover, a benefic planet's favorable rays produce good with ease
and in abundance, and cause good in the fortunate houses as well as
prevent or mitigate evil in the unfortunate ones, but its un favorable rays
bring difficulties, hindrances, or misfortunes to be surmounted. If a
benefic is in an unfavorable celestial and terrestrial state, its benefic rays
do very little good, while its malefic rays do much harm. For example,
in the horoscope of Cardinal Richelieu the benefic Jupiter is in exile in
the eighth house, and therefore is inimical to life, and is at the same time
conjunct the fixed star oculus Taurus; when by direction it reached the
opposition to the Ascendant, the

=== Page 81 ===
prime significator of the duration of life, he died.
On the other hand, a malefic planet's malefic rays are extremely
harmful, causing evil in the unfortunate houses and preventing or
spoiling the good in the fortunate ones, unless it rules over the location
where the adverse aspects falls, for in that case the aspect produces good
in fortunate houses, but this good will be accompanied by violence, evil,
or misfortune. In the unfortunate houses the result is even worse; for
example, Mars ruling the eighth and placed in the second almost always
is the cause of death. And again, the favorable rays indicate something
good gained by difficult means; for example, in the horoscope of the king
of Sweden 1 Saturn ruled the second, and its trine to the Sun in the first
house indicated great wealth, which he would acquire through war
because Mercury, ruler of the seventh, is placed in the second; and in
obtaining these things he had good fortune since Jupiter, Mercury, Venus,
and the part of fortune were in the second house—and all ruled in turn by
Saturn. Nevertheless, if both the celestial and terrestrial states of malefic
planets are unfavorable, even their benefic rays are very harmful; for
example, in the same king's horoscope Saturn in exile in the eighth, in
square to Mars in the twelfth as well as trine to the Sun in the first,
foretold a violent death, especially since Jupiter, ruler of the Ascendant
and the Sun, was applying to the opposition of Saturn and the square of
Mars. For one must always observe the house of the aspecting planet and
determine whether it favors the good or evil of the house into which it
throws an aspect. And by now it is clear that the same aspect can be
benefic for one thing and malefic for another —a fact which should
always be noted.
In addition, the effect of a malefic in an uncongenial sign and in
adverse aspect to another planet malefic by nature or determination is
evil, while in good aspect to a benefic it is not as bad; and a benefic in an
uncongenial sign is quite harmful if it is afflicted by the bad aspect of a
malefic.
Moreover, note carefully that a planet's influence by aspect is
threefold. First, it works through its own nature —for the Sun's effect is
always solar, the Moon's is always lunar, and Saturn's is always
Saturnian, etc. Second, it works through its celestial state and any
resulting relation to other planets —for a planet depends on the ruler of
the sign it occupies and is like a partner in an action, as we have
frequently stated. Therefore, if well-placed it brings good results, at least
by its benefic rays; if badly-placed it is harmful, at least by its malefic
rays. Third, it words through its terrestrial state —that is, house location
and rulership. For the influence of the aspect of a planet is always
determined by its nature and celestial state, but not
1 Gustav Adolf; this monarch was killed in the battle of Lьtzen in 1632.

=== Page 82 ===
always by its location and rulership at one and the same time, but
sometimes by one and sometimes by the other, and sometimes both
together. For example, Jupiter in the first and trine the MC brings good
fortune to the native in his worldly position or profession in ac cordance
with the nature and celestial state of Jupiter; and if, in ad dition, Jupiter is
ruler of the MC the good fortune is even greater and more certain. And if
beyond that, it aspects the Sun in the tenth house, the greatest possible
good fortune is in store. And the same reasoning is to be used for the
other aspects whether good or bad. In general, a given planet, by its
aspects to the planets or cusps or through directions to these as
significators, brings fortune or misfor tune to the corresponding affairs
through its own condition based upon its location and rulership, as well
as the nature of the aspects formed. Therefore, Mars in the seventh and
ruler of the fourth and eleventh houses, and trine the Sun in the MC, will
promote the prestige of the native through litigations, conflicts, spouse,
parents and friends. And these will certainly occur should Mars trine the
Sun by direction. But in addition to the three points already mentioned,
one should also note whether a planet's aspect is applying or separating,
since—all other things being equal —application has greater effect than
separation; and when one planet applies to another, this latter one is also
to be considered in terms of its nature, celestial and terrestrial state, and a
judgment made accordingly. For example, in the horoscope of the king of
Sweden Jupiter, ruler of the Ascendant, is applying to the opposition of
the malefic Saturn in exile in the eighth, and to the harmful square of
Mars as well, which are all indications of the king's violent death.
It is now clear that just as a planet by its house location and
rulership either grants or denies the good or evil of those houses, so they
do this also through their aspects, in accordance with their deter -
minations, and plainly, two planets in aspect have an influence on the
affairs of the houses in which they are located. So, if Jupiter is in the first
and trine to the Sun in the tenth, the Sun's aspect will incline Jupiter to
influence the affairs of the tenth house —that is, honor and prestige —and
Jupiter's aspect to incline the Sun to influence the af fairs of the first —
that is, character, or fame and glory. Similarly, if Saturn is in the eighth
opposing Jupiter in the second and ruler of the Ascendant, the opposition
of Saturn to Jupiter will color the Jupiterian character and give it a
Saturnian touch. And this particular opposition of Jupiter to Saturn could
indicate death by judicial decision. Therefore, the same aspect always
has various meanings, and this fact was most certainly never noted by the
ancients when they handed down to us their versions of the effects of the
aspects. In addition, the aspects of a planet can increase, diminish, or
vitiate the power of the significators —sometimes remarkably so,
sometimes only

=== Page 83 ===
to a moderate degree; for example, if Jupiter is in the tenth it is a
significator of honor and prestige, but if the Sun favored it by a trine,
Jupiter's power to bring honor and prestige is very greatly enhanced. But
if Saturn afflicts it by square this power is not only decreased but vitiated
as well, and foretells some misfortune connected with posi tion, rank, or
the profession. Moreover, the essential significations of the planets and
their positions in the horoscope give an indication of the nature or kind of
effect of the aspect; for example, Jupiter signifies foresight and Mars
daring, and if both are conjunct in the tenth house and in good celestial
state, considerable authority and power acquired through that foresight
and daring are indicated in the area of the profession. In the second house
these planets would show money acquired by foresight and daring action,
as well as extra ordinary expenditures. And what is said here concerning
the conjunction pertains as well to any of the stronger aspects, for one
must always consider the nature of the aspects and the planets involved
as well as their celestial and terrestrial state.
The objection may be raised that if the total effect of a planet were
determined by all of its aspects, 1 in terms of the affairs of all the houses
into which they fall, that planet would have an influence on all the affairs
of the native. It would therefore have to be considered the significator of
everything—of the physical constitution, finances, brothers, parents, etc.,
and for each of these houses judgment would have to be made from all
the aspects formed by each of the planets. But in fact such a judgment of
stellar effects could not but present inextricable difficulties and the
greatest possible confusion, which would be impossible to sort out.
Therefore, the planets either have no influence through their aspects or
valid judgments are too uncertain to be of any use.
I would reply that the action proceeding from stellar causes is both
perceptible and imperceptible. The action of the Sun is per ceptible to all
while the action of a fixed star of the sixth magnitude is perceptible to no
one; but that it has some effect cannot be gain said. And so it is in
astrology; whatever is shown in the stars depends in some way on all the
planets and on all the aspects of each of them, but does not depend on
these equally, but more on some and less on others, and very little at all
on still others. In fact, the astrologer judges effects only from the most
important and powerful causes —that is, from the celestial state of the
planet ruling the house pertaining to the affair of interest or its ruler, and
also from the
1 The reader should bear in mind that Morinus continues to use the word "aspect"
frequently in the sense of the eleven possible angular "rays" which a given planet sends
out whether these "rays" meet with another planet or not: otherwise some of his
statements—such as the one above—would not make much sense.

=== Page 84 ===
stronger aspects to that house. These include the opposition, trine, square
and sextile, as they were employed by all the astrologers of an tiquity; the
remaining semi-sextile and quincunx rarely have any ef fect unless
partile. An appreciable effect is sometimes extended to the secondary
ruler of a house, but no further. Similarly, although each planet affects
each of the houses through its rays in all directions, the stronger of the
several rays affecting a given house take precedence over the weaker
ones. So, after considering the strength of the influence of the planets and
everything else on some area of interest, the astrologer bases his
judgment in accordance with the testimony of the most significant
elements involved. Far be it from the truth that judgment cannot be made
without slipping into hopeless confusion, for even on the first inspection
of the horoscope an accurate judgment can frequently be made by
observing the benignity or malignity and the strength or debility of the
main influences on some particular area of interest, as these always win
out over the less important ones.
Finally, do not let your judgment be over-hasty, but carefully
thought out, so that it does credit to yourself and to the science.

=== Page 85 ===
CHAPTER XI
The aspects of the planets;
their analysis and comparison
First. The aspects to the house cusps are to be considered, for by the
prime motion from east to west the planets move to the cusps, and of
these the dexter aspects, or those preceding the cusp (earlier in the
zodiac) are generally said to be more effective than the sinister aspects, or
those of the same kind following the cusp (later in the zo diac). But this is
not at all times true and a distinction must be recog nized, for if a planet
applies by dexter square to a cusp —such as the MC — but by sinister
square it is passing from another — such as the Ascendant (which could
only occur in a comparison of two horoscopes)—the dexter will have the
greater effect; but if by dexter square it is passing from the MC but is
applying through the prime motion to the Ascendant by sinister square,
the sinister will have the greater effect, and so on for the other aspects.
But note that the As cendant here refers to the cusp itself, or the point in
the circle of houses where the first house begins, but not the degree of the
caelum which occupies that point or cusp. For when a planet in direct
motion applies to that cusp through the prime motion, it is separating at
the same time from the degree of the caelum it occupies through its own,
or secondary motion. It is because of this fact that application has greater
effect than separation—all other things being equal.
Second. The aspects between the planets are to be considered, for by
their own, or secondary motion from west to east the planets come into
aspect with each other. Of these the sinister aspects will generally be
stronger than the dexter; again a distinction is required, for if Venus
applies by sinister trine to Mars, in either direct or retrograde motion,
that aspect is stronger than a dexter trine of Mars to Venus — thai is,
Venus has a greater influence on both the essential and acci dental
significations of Mars than Mars can have on those significa tions of
Venus. But if, on the other hand, Venus applies to Mars by dexter trine,
the dexter will be stronger than the sinister trine would be, since in the
latter case, Mars would be separating from Venus; and so on for the other
aspects.

=== Page 86 ===
Third. The same aspect by the same planets is to be considered in
reference to the different possible locations of the planets; for exam ple,
Mars and the Moon in square do not always produce exactly the same
effect, as is actually presumed by those astrologers who set up tables on
the effects of the planets' aspects, for this aspect could have twelve
variations because of the twelve zodiacal signs in which Mars or the
Moon may be found. The effect of Mars is one thing in Aries and
something else in Taurus, and the same is to be said for the Moon;
therefore, although their square may in general indicate something
unfortunate or harmful, the kind of misfortune will be one thing when
Mars is in Libra and the Moon in Capricorn, but something else when
Mars is in Capricorn and the Moon in Libra. And even more specifically,
the kind of misfortune will be one thing with Mars in the first house and
the Moon in the tenth and something else with Mars in the tenth and the
Moon in the first. These variations should be clear through an
understanding of first principles, and show how worthless are the kind of
tables mentioned above.
Fourth. An aspect between two planets is to be considered in terms
of the supremacy of one of the planets over the other, for when two
planets are conjunct, square, or in opposition, and the question arises as
to which will be more powerful, the answer will be found by a
consideration of four points: 1) The dignity of the planets in aspect, for—
other things being equal —the Sun and the Moon supersede the other
planets in importance because they are the principal bodies over the
earth, and of these the Sun supersedes the Moon. Furthermore, the
superior planets Saturn, Jupiter and Mars are more powerful than the
inferior ones Venus and Mercury. Therefore, when Venus is square
Saturn, Venus is affected more strongly by the square of Saturn than
Saturn is by the square of Venus. 2) The celestial state, for the planet
stronger by celestial state —that is, by domicile, exaltation, triplicity, and
position with respect to the Sun, etc. —wins out over the planet which is
weaker. Therefore, Mars in Capricorn square the Sun in Libra afflicts
very strongly the Sun, or its significations, because Mars is in its
exaltation while the Sun is in its fall. 3) The terrestrial state, for that one
of the aspecting planets which through its local determinations influences
for good or for ill the affairs of the houses into which the aspects fall will
prevail, so that if Jupiter is in Sagittarius and in the Ascendant, that
planet's nature and location, as well as rulership, determine the physical
constitution, etc. Therefore, if it were conjunct or square the Moon ruling
an eighth house not otherwise afflicted, Jupiter's influence on the
duration of life would be even stronger, notwithstanding the square of the
Moon to the Ascendant, but if Jupiter were in exile in the Ascendant and
conjunct Mars ruling the eighth house, the influence of Mars as harbinger
of death would prevail, because by its nature and through its

=== Page 87 ===
rulership it clearly refers to death, and strongly afflicts the significator of
life as well. 4) Application and separation, for a planet which applies to
another by aspect is said to be the stronger of the two, as was explained
in ch. 10.
Moreover, after finding the most powerful planet, one must ob serve
whether it is more powerful by a little or a lot; and one must always
consider the other planet, because both concur in the same ac tion as
though they were partners. The square of Saturn to the Sun or the Sun to
Saturn, for example, cannot be ineffective even while separating; and the
more a planet is stronger by celestial and terrestrial state for good or evil,
the more carefully should be observed into what houses its aspects fall,
because the meanings of those houses will be affected more strongly —
whether for good or ill—according to the nature of the aspect.
Fifth. Two different kinds of aspects are to be analyzed in two ways:
1) From the standpoint of one planet. And so, the opposition of a given
planet is in itself stronger than the square, and the trine is stronger than
the sextile. I say "in itself in a universal sense because the square is half
of an opposition and the sextile is half of a trine, but accidentally, and
because of both the determinations and aspects of the planet, it can turn
out contrariwise; for Jupiter, ruler of the Ascendant and placed in the
eleventh, has a greater influence on the native's temperament, character,
and disposition by virtue of its sextile to the Ascendant than on the affairs
of the native's brothers by its trine to the third. And Mars, ruler of the
eighth, placed in the tenth has greater influence against the native's life
through its square to the Ascendant than on his parents or inheritance
through its opposition. 2) From the standpoint of two planets in aspect to
the same significator. For example, if the trine of Jupiter and the square
of Mars fall in the Ascendant each has an influence on the duration of life
as well as the character of the native, but the result is mixed since the
rays are mixed, and the planets will act together as in a mixture of told
and hot water from which something intermediate is obtained. In this
problem there are five points to take into consideration: A) Note the
aspect itself; the trine is the aspect first in power of doing good while the
square is second in doing evil, because the latter is only half of an
opposition, and therefore, the trine of Jupiter is stronger than the square
of Mars, and the latter threatens life to a lesser degree than the former is
able to assist it. B) Note the celestial state of Jupiter and Mars; for if
Mars is strong, as in Scorpio or Capricorn, while Jupiter is weak, as in
Gemini, the square of Mars could do greater harm than the trine of
Jupiter would be capable of resisting. C) Note their terrestrial state, or the
effect of local determinations on the affairs which are under
investigation; for Mars ruling the eighth and in square to the Ascendant
threatens life to a greater degree than the

=== Page 88 ===
trine of Jupiter ruling the eighth or twelfth could assist it, because,
although Jupiter's trine is of great benefit for health, its location, rulership
and aspects should be such as to promote health, and should be free of
any implications of illnesses or death, which would not be the case if it
were in the eighth or ruler of the eighth or twelfth. And this is the
reasoning to be used for other aspects contending with each other for the
same significator —such as of character, profession, marriage, or
whatever. When the concurring aspects are in agreement —whether for
good or ill —there is no difficulty in making a judgment. D) Note the
distance from the significator; for of the aspects of two planets to the
same significator —such as to the Ascendant or Sun—the one which is
closer, or more partile, is given preference over the one more distant,
especially if the former will become exact first. E) Note whether
applying or separating, as the planet applying is given preference over
the one separating, as has frequently been stated.
Sixth. The aspect is to be analyzed with respect to whether it comes
from a planet which is favorable or unfavorable by celestial state, for it is
doubtful whether the square or opposition of Saturn from its domicile or
exaltation is as harmful as it would be from its exile or fall. Doubt is
removed, however, by considering Jupiter, which, if it is favorable by
celestial state, produces more through its trine than if it were
unfavorable; and in adverse celestial state it does more harm by its
square than it would in good celestial state — a fact which no astrologer
ever doubted. Why then should not Saturn in an adverse celestial state do
greater harm through its square than if in a good celestial state?
Therefore, Saturn's square is always harmful, but even more so if its
celestial state is adverse. This is shown in the horoscope of the king of
Sweden when by direction the MC came to the square of Saturn in Leo
in the eighth house and he was killed. Thus, Jupiter's trine from its
domicile is the best, while its square from there is harmless or only very
slightly harmful, while the trine from its exile is useless or only slightly
helpful, while the square is harmful. And similarly, Saturn's trine from its
domicile is beneficial while its square is not, while from its exile its trine
is useless, even evil, and its square is quite pernicious. Of course, these
general statements are valid only when all other factors are equal.
Seventh. Aspects of the same quality are to be considered with
respect to their good or ill nature; for although all squares and oppo -
sitions are in themselves evil, they are worse from the malefics Saturn
and Mars, and still worse if these planets are spoiled or vitiated through
their celestial state; and worse still if they refer by location or rulership
to the affairs of the unfortunate houses or the ones opposite to them;
worst of all if, in addition to being the rulers of the first or tenth, they
also rule the eighth or twelfth houses, or planets in those

=== Page 89 ===
houses, especially should these afflict the Sun and Moon. Particularly
evil is the opposition when partile or diametric, especially between Mars
and Saturn, for these can cause death when one of them is the ruler of the
Ascendant. On the other hand, although all trines and scxtiles are in
themselves good, those of Jupiter, Venus, the Sun, Moon and Mercury
are particularly so, and even better if they are in a favorable celestial
state, and better still if they refer by location or rulership to the affairs of
the fortunate houses. But best of all is when, in addition, they aspect the
houses signifying fortunate things, or planets in them, especially Jupiter,
Venus, Sun, Moon or Mercury. And therefore, the opposition of Saturn in
Leo and the Sun in Aquarius would be very bad, while the trine of
Jupiter in Pisces to the Moon in Cancer would be excellent.
Eighth. Aspects are to be analyzed in the light of any other aspect
preceding or following, for if a benefic immediately follows a benefic
the good shown comes with ease and certainty, and if a malefic follows a
malefic, evil is shown with certainty and no delay. But if a malefic
follows a benefic, the good which is apparent is changed into evil; if a
benefic follows a malefic, the contrary takes place. One should always
observe the strength of the aspect which follows —that is, its nature, the
planets involved, and their celestial and terrestrial slate; for the stronger
it is the greater the certainty will be that what has been explained above
will take place. In addition, one should note the aspect or planet which is
immediately preceding, for a planet separating from one good aspect
towards another is fortunate; from an evil one towards another evil one is
unfortunate, while other combinations have intermediate effects.
Ninth. Aspects are to be analyzed with respect to the planets ruling
over the aspects; for example, the ruler of the first conjunct the ruler of
the eighth and partile, or both applying to each other, incline to the same
effect—a premature death. Also, the house wherein they conjoin must be
taken into consideration, for if they come together in the twelfth, death
from disease, prison, or exile is indicated; if in the leventh, death will be
through a conflict, battle, litigation, or rob bers, in accordance with the
way the ruler of the aspecting planets, or the aspects of other planets,
may act upon them. If they are separating, the dangers which appear will
be avoided. Finally, the manner in which one planet applies to another
must be considered, for if the ruler of the first applies to the ruler of the
eighth, an early death may claim the native, and it will be through his
own fault; and so on for the other planets and aspects.
Moreover, from all that has been said it is clear that one can pass
judgment on the affairs of a particular house from the nature of the ssgn
occupying that house and from the nature, celestial, and terrestrial state
of the planets which affect that house by location or

=== Page 90 ===
aspect, or have there the dignity of domicile, exaltation, or triplicity. And
so, a wide field arises for making predictions, and if only human
ingenuity could be so far refined to be equal to the task it could predict
even the smallest events that fate had in store, but since the human
intellect is feeble it must err except in the more evident situations.

=== Page 91 ===
CHAPTER XII
The principal points to be observed
in making an accurate evaluation
of a planet and its aspects
These points are assembled from all that has been stated in the
preceding chapters of this work.
First. In evaluating any planet the first thing to consider is its nature
—that is, whether benefic or malefic —for from benefics more is to be
hoped for and less is to be feared, while from the malefics the contrary is
true—at any rate, when all other things are equal.
Second. Observe whether the planet is in domicile or not, for in
domicile its action is unqualified and independent of any other planet, at
least in this respect. But when it is conjunct another planet its action
depends on that other, as if on a partner whose nature, however, is
different. So, if a planet is not in domicile, one should first find out what
planet rules over it and whether that planet is a benefic or a malefic.
Then, observe in what house or sign the planet has dignity through
exaltation or triplicity, or in what house its influence is unfavorable by
exile or fall, or in which ones it is simply peregrine. If it is exalted it will
act strongly and with no delay on the affairs over which it has control; if
it is in exile or fall it bestows no good, or will act as though vitiated and
may even bring disaster; if it is peregrine its influence is simply
somewhat weakened.
Third. Observe whether it is direct, retrograde, stationary; moving
rapidly, slowly, or at an average pace; for its action and significance are
affected by these differences, according to their evident analogies, as has
been mentioned elsewhere in this work. The planet is strengthened or
weakened thereby.
Fourth. Observe its position in relation to the Sun and the Moon, for
oriental to the Sun and above earth during the day, and similarly,
occidental to the Moon, are more effective and bring forth more striking
results; in the contrary positions planets are weaker and their action more
obscure.
Fifth. Observe its aspects to other planets. If a strong planet has no
aspect with another planet it is said to be feral and will act simply

=== Page 92 ===
in accordance with its own nature, especially if located in its domicile.
Every feral planet indicates something unusual —good or ill—depending
on the nature of the planet; for example, Saturn feral in the first indicates
the hermit or monk. But if it aspects another planet, observe whether this
one is strong, weak or intermediate in its dignities or disabilities, or
whether it is simply peregrine; for if strong, a con spicuous effect will
follow; if weak, an obscure one; intermediate, an intermediate one; and
the good or ill nature of the effect, as well as the facility or difficulty of
its manifestation, will be in accordance with the nature of the aspect. If a
weak planet —that is, in exile or fall or peregrine —is feral it portends
something less unusual; but if it aspec ts another planet one must
determine whether the latter is weak, strong, or intermediate; if strong,
there will be at the beginning scarce ly any effect, but later on the second
planet will help out, or, at the beginning there will be difficulties and
hindrances, but in the end these will disappear and the evil will turn into
good, rewards will follow labors, victory will follow conflict, and
recuperation— disease, etc., by virtue of this aspect to the weak planet.
This will only apply, however, to a favorable aspect which is applying,
for if it is unfavorable, no good is indicated, or the good is beset by
difficulties; if weak, it portends evil or loss of the good to the extent of
that debility; if intermediate, there will be almost no effect, or at any
rate, nothing is to be hoped for.
Sixth. Observe whether a planet not in domicile is in aspect to its
ruler and if so, note the aspect and the state of each planet, for the ac tion
of a planet in aspect to its own ruler depends greatly on that ruler, and
both work with greater effect, especially if the aspect is both strong and
appropriate. In addition, if the planet is in adverse celestial or terrestrial
state, or both, while its ruler is in a good state, misfortunes are indicated
at the start, but these will be followed then by good fortune, especially if
the planet is in favorable aspect to its ruler and applying; but if the planet
is in a good state and its ruler in an adverse state, the good is changed
into evil and hopes will be futile. Of course, both planets in a favorable
state is the best possibility of all, and if one of the planets is in a
fortunate house the good things of that house will come to pass, or, if in
an unfortunate house, the evils of that house will be prevented or
mitigated. Finally, if both are af flicted it is the worst possibility of all
and either the planet in the unfortunate house causes the evil of that
house, or if in a fortunate house, hinders or prevents the good of that
house.
Seventh. Observe which of the fixed stars are conjunct the planet,
or with which one does it rise, culminate, or set; for the brightest stars
produce important and unexpected effects, as experience frequently
makes clear.
Eighth. Observe to what the planet refers by its determinations of

=== Page 93 ===
location, rulership, and aspect; and note the same for its ruler, if it is ruled
by another planet. When the benefic planets refer to good things, it is
always a good indication; for example, Jupiter referring to finances,
Venus referring to marriage or children, or either of these to character or
prestige and profession is favorable, and even more so if they are in
favorable celestial state. When the determinations of the benefics refer to
unfavorable things, however, it is less evil, because they release the
native from evil, or at least mitigate it. When the malefics Mars and
Saturn refer to something good, it is unfavorable unless they are in good
celestial state; and even that notwithstanding, if they are in square or
opposition to the Sun, Moon, Ascendant, or MC or their rulers they
always cause evil things. Even when conjunct to benefics they do not
lose all their malignity, as is shown in my own horoscope where Mars is
trine Jupiter, but the latter is conjunct Saturn; and nonetheless, from
Saturn and Mars I have suffered and still suffer from abundant evils. For
when the determinations of these planets refer to evil things —such as
illness, prison, litigations, death—it is very unfavorable, and still worse if
they are also in adverse celestial state. But the Sun and Moon in fortunate
houses cause good things, especially when in favorable state and with
good aspects; in unfortunate houses—unfortunate things, especially when
in adverse celestial state and with bad aspects. Moreover, the deter -
minations of a planet refer to different things at one and the same time —
that is, to one thing by location, to something else by rulership, and still
others by aspects. And although determination by location is usually the
strongest, it can happen that a determination through rulership or aspect
is stronger, if, for example, the house in which an aspect or sign rulership
falls bears an analogy to the planet which is ruler or which throws the
aspect, without this planet having an analogy to the house which it
actually occupies. However, the same planet can through its
determinations refer in several ways to the same effect, or to one which is
similar, and when this happens the effect will be greater and more certain
than if there were only one deter mination showing it. In addition, if a
planet out of domicile and its ruler operate along the same lines through
their nature and deter minations of location or of rulership, a striking
effect will result, especially if they also aspect each other in some way
appropriate for that effect; for example, if benefic planets were in the
second and their ruler —also a benefic —were in the tenth and trine the
second-house planets; or, if malefic planets were in the twelfth and their
ruler—a malefic—were in the sixth or eighth and afflicted by a square or
opposition from them; for a planet acts only in accordance with its own
nature, celestial state and determination in the horoscope.
Planets in the first or tenth house and their rulers are of prime
Importance, and their celestial state and determinations in the

=== Page 94 ===
horoscope should be well noted. These planets in adverse celestial state
bode ill for the affairs of these houses, especially if they apply by bad
aspect to other planets also in an adverse celestial state, for if they apply
by good aspect to planets in a favorable state good things will ultimately
proceed out of the bad. But it would be much worse if, in addition, these
latter planets or the first ones refer to evil things by determination; for
example, if the ruler of the first is in the twelfth or eighth, or vice-versa,
or the ruler of the first and twelfth or the first and eighth are the same
planet. And in a similar way a planet in the tenth and its ruler are to be
judged. In fact, from the sole con sideration of the planets in the first or
tenth houses, and their rulers, one can make a judgment at the outset on
whether the horoscope is fortunate or unfortunate; and one can, of
course, pass judgment on any of the houses by the same procedure.
Ninth. Observe whether a planet is in a house that has some analogy
to its nature, for when this is so its action is strongly in ac cordance with
that nature; so, Jupiter in the second brings money; the Sun in the tenth
brings honor and prestige and in the first — prominence. Saturn in the
twelfth brings serious illnesses, prison, servitude, hidden enemies; Mars
in the seventh—enemies, litigations, conflicts; Venus in the seventh—a
spouse, in the fifth—children. All of these are to be understood as
indications by nature for, depending on the sign involved, its ruler, and
any possible aspects, the contrary could occur. Planets in houses not
analogous to their nature prevent, suppress, or overthrow the usual
manifestations of the affairs of that house. Thus, Venus in the twelfth by
nature prevents illnesses, while Saturn in the tenth prevents honors; I say
"by nature" for if Venus were in adverse celestial state in the twelfth, it
would produce illnesses, and Saturn in good celestial state in the tenth
would cause honors and prestige.
Tenth. Observe whether a planet is in the angular, succedent, or
cadent houses; for planets in the angles indicate effects which are con -
tinuous—especially when also in the fixed signs—as is clearly shown by
Mars and Venus in fixed signs in the first and tenth houses in Car dinal
Richelieu's horoscope, and as a result he was always of a mind for war
and held continuous power right up to his death. But in cadent houses
and moveable signs the planets indicate things which are unstable; in the
succedent houses the effects are intermediate.
In connection with the aspects, seven things are to be considered in
every case: 1) the planet's nature; 2) its celestial state; 3) its references
by location and rulership; 4) the aspect's nature; 5) the sign where the
aspect falls and the planet ruling that sign; 6) the house; 7) the
circumstances before and after the aspect. As each of these seven factors
vary, so also vary the resulting effects.
Similarly, seven conditions of the planets with respect to the

=== Page 95 ===
houses and the rulers of these houses are to be considered; these points
are also very important in mastering the secrets of astrology.
1)A planet in the first house which is strong by sign and through
aspects with benefics or strong planets has great influence on the
significance of this house, in accordance with its nature and state;
the native's temperament, character and disposition will be clearly
and continuously described by that planet.
2)A planet which is weak in the first house, but in aspect to its ruler
or the ruler of the Ascendant, has a correspondingly weaker in -
fluence depending on the planet's debility in the first house, the state
of the aspecting planet, and the quality of the aspect.
3)A planet which is weak in the first and not in aspect to its ruler or
the Ascendant ruler has the weakest influence of all on the first
house and its significance.
4)A planet located outside of the first house which has strength in
that house (especially the ruler of the first) as well as an aspect with
a planet in the first or with the Ascendant draws the native's charac -
ter, temperament, and well-being into some relationship with the af -
fairs of the house in which it is located.
5)But if such a planet is not in aspect with a planet in the first or
with the Ascendant the bridge between the affairs of the two houses
as described above may not take place.
6)If a planet located outside the first house is debilitated therein and
is connected with the ruler of the first through rulership or by
aspect, or itself aspects the Ascendant, it will have a very
debilitating influence on first house affairs.
7) But if such a planet is not so connected with the ruler of the
first or the Ascendant it has no influence on first house matters, except
perhaps, very remotely through its debility of exile or fall in the first.
What is stated here concerning the first house should be un derstood
as pertaining in a similar way to the remainder of the houses. Therefore,
never make a judgment on marriage, for example, before considering the
planets in the seventh, the ruler of the seventh, the ruler of this ruler, the
planets aspecting the seventh house cusp or its ruler, and the way these
planets are related to each other by ruler-ship over, or aspect to, planets
analogous to a male or female spouse; and so on for the other houses and
planets.

=== Page 96 ===
CHAPTER XIII
The accidental determinations of the planets and
their relation to the positions of the planets or
principal significators in some other horoscope
The 47th aphorism of Ptolemy's Centiloquy is the basic of the
material discussed in this chapter. It reads: "When a malefic in one
horoscope falls on the place of a benefic in another, he who has the
benefic is affected detrimentally by him who has the malefic."
Actually, a more general extension of this concept should be un -
derstood, since the greatest fortune or misfortune regarding charac ter,
disposition, the profession, etc., befalling any two individuals for whom
such combinations might occur would be excluded if the aphorism is
taken quite literally. For this reason I insist that these determinations
should be considered to pertain to the signs as well as the planets.
If the sign in the first house of one horoscope is also in the first
house of another horoscope each native will have the same Ascendant
and the same Ascendant ruler. These rulers could have either the same
celestial and terrestrial state or not, but if they are in the same celestial
and terrestrial state (which is very rare) there will be maximum
agreement between the two natives with respect to first house matters as
well as to the house in which the rulers are located. If their state is not
the same the meanings of the first houses are to be combined with those
of the houses in which the ruler is found in both horoscopes, with
consideration for its celestial state, in judging the things in store for each
native.
If the sign on the second, third, fourth, fifth house, etc., of one
horoscope is in the first house of the other horoscope each native will
have the same sign and the same ruler for the two houses, which by
celestial and terrestrial state could be either the same or not; if the same,
the combination of the affairs of that second, third, or fourth house of the
former horoscope with the meanings of the first house in the latter
horoscope will be strongly felt. If their states are not the same, the affairs
of the second, third, or fourth house of the former horoscope must be
combined with the meaning of the first house of

=== Page 97 ===
the latter horoscope with consideration allowed for the different houses
in which the ruler is found, as well as its celestial state in each
horoscope. And what I say for the sign on the second, third, fourth
house, etc., of one horoscope in the first house of another horoscope is to
be understood as applicable to the sign on the second, third, fourth
house, etc., of the former horoscope in the second, third, fourth, etc.,
house of the latter horoscope.
The planetary combinations are to be regarded in two ways: first,
the planets of one horoscope may be found on the cusps or in the houses
of another horoscope, especially in the Ascendant or the MC; second,
planets of one horoscope may be found in the positions of the planets in
another horoscope.
If a planet in one horoscope is on the Ascendant of another
horoscope the first thing to consider is the planet's determination in the
former horoscope through the house it occupies as well as its nature and
celestial state; for in accordance with these three factors it exerts an
effect on the character, disposition, and physical well-being of the native
of the other horoscope. And so, if a planet is in the first, or ruler of the
first in the former horoscope —that is, referring to the affairs of the first
house—there will be between the natives con siderable similarity of
character, temperament and outlook, because these things will be caused
by the same sign and planet in each horoscope. If the planet had
reference to money or the affairs of the second house in the former
horoscope, that native will in some way be a source of money for the
other, or will obtain money from him. If it referred to the affairs of the
third house in the former horoscope, that native will be brought into
contact with the other one through a relative, on a journey, or through
religion. If it referred to the meanings of the seventh house —marriage or
litigations— and these are persons of the same sex, they will be involved
together in businesses or in litigations and contracts; if of different sex,
they will be partners through matrimony, or by litigations, contracts or
business involvements. If it referred to the affairs of the eighth house in
the former horoscope, that native has the significator of his own death in
the all-important first house of the other native: let him beware lest from
the latter danger of death is brought about. If it referred to the affairs of
the tenth in the former horoscope, that native will be dependent on the
other in his profession and his position, or will be used by him or
subordinate to him in these matters.
If a planet located in the second house of one horoscope is found in
the seventh of another horoscope, the meanings of these houses are to be
combined, and the natives will affect each other accordingly; and the
same reasoning is to be used for the other houses.
When a planet in one horoscope is found in the place of a planet in
another horoscope, always note first the determinations of each

=== Page 98 ===
planet in each horoscope with respect to house; then, the nature and
celestial state of each and whether benefic or malefic, weak or strong;
from these factors judgment is made by the method of combining shown
above. For the whole knack of these judgments turns on making
combinations both possible and appropriate, and interpreting what their
effects will be.
The prediction of what the effects of these combinations will be is
indeed easy for the angels because of their intuition and the
luminescence of their intellect, which suffers so little obstruction; but for
men the contrary is true and they find it difficult and even im possible
without frequent error. However, I will say here in truth how skill is to
be acquired: Study and practice until you become perfect, so that for any
two horoscopes you will be able to predict whether the natives can agree
or not and why.
The planets of one horoscope can also be combined with the planets
and significators of another horoscope through their aspects; it should
especially be noted whether these are benefic or malefic in nature.
Finally, I do not believe that in these combinations it is of any
importance which of the two natives is older; whatever the com bination
indicates for the first native will happen to him just the same, whether
through the agency of a younger person or of one older.
It should now be clear that this method is more extensive in ap -
plication than that of the 47th aphorism of Ptolemy, and that this
aphorism can even frequently be incorrect; for if a person had Saturn in
Aquarius in the first house and someone else had Jupiter in the same
degree and also in the first house, such a combination of first house
affairs would be agreeable and fortunate for both natives and the latter
would be more aided by the former through his prudence, advice,
seriousness, and authority, than otherwise harmed.

=== Page 99 ===
CHAPTER XIV
The interaction of the natal horoscope
with those of other individuals
The question here is not whether it is possible to make judgments
on the native's parents, spouse, children, etc., from the birth horoscope,
as every astrologer since Ptolemy has done so. Instead, the relation
between this possibility and its meaning for the other in dividuals
involved will be discussed.
It should be made clear that in a birth horoscope the essential
meaning of a house is an accidental thing which in itself pertains to the
native alone and to no other person—that is, the meaning of the first
house is the physical constitution, character, and temperament of the
native alone and not of another; the meaning of the twelfth house is the
illnesses of the native and not of any other; the significance of the eighth
house is the death of the native and not of any other; and so on for the
remaining houses. Therefore a planet, sign, or aspect in any house has
reference to its essential meanings for that native and pertains to him
alone; and so, a planet in the seventh would have significance for the
marriage, litigations and enemies of that native but not of any other
person.
Hence it is clear how much the ancients were in error when they
took no notice of this fact, and when from the eighth house they passed
judgments on the death of the native's parents, spouse, children, servants,
and friends and enemies alike, for they claimed that if, for example, the
ruler of the fifth were in the eighth, or the rulers of both these houses
were in square or opposition to each other, the death of the children
would be signified. And by the same token, if the ruler of the eighth were
conjunct the ruler of the seventh, the death of the spouse would be
shown, or if conjunct the ruler of the fourth, the death of the parents.
Similarly, if the ruler of the fifth were in the tenth, honor and position
would be indicated for the children, or if the ruler of the third were in the
tenth, the same for the brothers. However, the eighth and the tenth refer
only to the death or honors of the native and not of any other person, for
the reasons given above.

=== Page 100 ===
The objection may be raised that at any given geographical point the
space of the eighth house is the common or universal house of death for
all born or living at that geographical point, as would be established by
the universal horoscopes for the annual revolutions of the world, and for
eclipses and lunations, etc. For example, if an eclipse occurred in the
eighth house, or its ruler were located therein, it would indicate mortality
in that region; if they were in the seventh they would portend wars.
Therefore, from the ruler of the third in the eighth in the natal horoscope
the death of brothers would be indicated; and soon.
I would reply that universal horoscopes differ from individual ones
in that the latter are erected for the moment of a specific effect such as
the birth of a human being, and for whom and whose ex perience the
entire caelum is conditioned by the primary spaces or houses; but the
former are erected for the moment of some universal cause such as a
lunation or eclipse, and that cause acts universally or without
differentiation on the region for which the horoscope is erec ted. And
therefore, if an eclipse or its ruler were in the eighth, mor tality through
famine, plague, or war would indeed be indicated, depending on the
nature and the state of the planets —but only universally and
indiscriminately, and no more for one person than another, at least not
from the strength alone of that house. But in the horoscope of a particular
individual the ruler of the third in the eighth acts on the native through its
local determinations —that is, in the eighth house it acts on or has an
influence on the native's death; and because it is the ruler of the third its
influence works through the native's brothers. As the ruler of the third is
in the eighth both these considerations are combined with the result that
the planet will influence the native through the meanings of "death" and
"brothers" at the same time. Otherwise —and this is contrary to
experience—the native would not be affected by the rulers of the houses.
Therefore, death is not shown for the brothers when the ruler of the third
is in the eighth, but rather for the native through his brothers, or through
them as a cause; and so on for the other houses. For, most certainly, each
meaning of the houses, signs and planets in the horoscope refer primarily
to the native himself, and if the eighth house referred alike to the death of
the native, parents, spouse, children, etc., that house would, in the
horoscope of a particular individual, be being allotted a universal
meaning. This would be an absurdity for by the same token the first
house would have to be the physical constitution, character, and
temperament not only of the native himself but of his parents, spouse,
children, etc., as well, and the same would have to be true for the other
houses, all of which would create the greatest confusion in astrology and
is completely contrary to experience.
But since it is true that from the horoscope of the native many

=== Page 101 ===
things which happen to the parents, wife, brothers, children, etc., are
indicated, it can justifiably be asked through what celestial cause these
things come about and on what they depend, and whether only the
native's own horoscope, or the horoscopes of these others, or something
common to both is at work.
Lucio Bellanti in writing against Pico Mirandola, claims that the
horoscopes of parents—since these are prior in time—have the force of a
universal cause with respect to the horoscopes of their children as well as
their other descendants, and therefore have the power to exert a certain
influence on those horoscopes and on the future events oc curring in the
lives of those natives, just as the annual revolutions of the world are
determined by the lunations. Moreover, he states he was acquainted with
a nobleman who had the house of children afflicted and all of whose
children died a violent death. Such a commentary, though perhaps true
and indeed plausible, is not satisfactory because although the horoscope
of the son would be subordinate to the father's by the latter's priority in
time, as a particular is to a universal cause, the same thing could not be
said for the native's brothers, relatives, spouse, servants, friends, etc.,
whose horoscopes could not admit of such a subordination or
dependency. Besides, the example cited by Bellanti is contradictory to
his own reasoning; for the horoscope of the father must have influenced
the horoscopes of the children with respect to their violent death, but it
could not be said that the horoscopes of the children had an influence on
the horoscope of the father with respect to their own death, since this
would imply that the father's horoscope would have been the one
affected; therefore, another reason must be found.
But neither can it be said, in judging from the native's horoscope
only, that his brothers or spouse may die before him; for —at least in a
natural death—more would depend on their own fate as an im mediate
cause than would depend on a different and more remote one. And
similarly, if a horoscope shows that the native will be killed by the
spouse, the servants, or the brothers, this event does not proceed from the
horoscope of the spouse, servants, or brothers, but clearly from the
native's own horoscope, where such an event must be shown. Therefore,
we must say that such effects are produced by causes that are in
conformity with all the persons involved, in other words, not one specific
horoscope distinct from all others, but a combination of horoscopes that
is reciprocal and cooperates in producing such an ef fect, whose inherent
powers precipitate the final event. Therefore, the father's children will die
a violent death because it is shown not only in the father's horoscope but
also in the horoscope of each child and through this consensus the result
is confirmed by both testimonies. Similarly, some individual might be
told he would survive his wife because, not only was it shown in the
native's horoscope but also in

=== Page 102 ===
the wife's horoscope, or at least from a comparison of both horoscopes it
became clear that she would die before her husband. And in the same
way one considers any other events or experiences in volving different
persons.
Divine Providence is wondrous indeed when in its in -
comprehensible mystery it brings together those horoscopes which are
appropriate for whatever must be shared, and permits the natives' lives to
interact in such a way that an assassin will be at hand when a man is
destined to be killed by enemies, or a suitable wife will be found by him
who is destined to unhappily married.
However, wondrous as well are the determinations of the celestial
bodies in a horoscope with respect to the affairs of the native's parents,
spouse, children, etc., and which have not up to now received suf ficient
attention. For the ruler of the third in the tenth —especially a malefic in
adverse state—indicates the death of the brothers, because the tenth
house is the eighth counting from the third; and similarly, the ruler of the
fifth in the twelfth foretells the death of the children for the same reason
— especially if Saturn or Mars are in the twelfth — because the twelfth
is the eighth counting from the fifth. This procedure is justified by the
fact that the eighth house counting from the first represents the death of
the native, and so the eighth counting from the fifth represents the death
of the children. However, more will be said elsewhere on what can be
deduced from the native's own horoscope regarding the horoscopes of his
parents, spouse, etc. Following Ptolemy and other astrologers of the past
we will illustrate this procedure with case histories.
The directions of the universal significators, which Cardanus calls
"significators through essential nature," where the Sun, for example, is
taken to represent the father and the Moon the mother, will be examined
elsewhere and refuted as being contrary to reason and experience.
It might be objected that Lucio Bellanti in writing against Pico
Mirandola does not state that the main significator of the father is the
Sun or Saturn, or of wealth—Jupiter, of the mental qualities —Mercury,
and so on, but instead states that the ruler of the fourth should be taken
for the father, the ruler of the second for money, of the first for the
mental qualities, etc. Therefore, it must be allowed that at least some
astrologers have not erred in this matter.
I would answer that indeed Bellanti has studied this matter a lit tle
more attentively than his predecessors, but that he is still in error to some
extent. Bellanti claims that four things are the significators of money, for
example. They are: the sign on the second house; the planet by nature
analogous to wealth—that is, Jupiter; any planet in the second house; the
planet ruling the second house. Here he agrees with other astrologers,
and rightly so, but he goes on to stale that a

=== Page 103 ===
sign could not be the primary significator on account of its inability to
act, and claims that the signs are a sort of material to which the planets
located in the signs give form. Nor could the primary significator be a
planet actually in such a sign, since the sign could be the planet's exile or
fall, and moreover, a planet is not always in the same sign. He is of the
opinion that the primary significator should be something fixed and
permanent and not the planet by nature analogous to wealth—that is,
Jupiter—for he states that the houses of the horoscope cause a greater
diversity in modifying the influence of the celestial bodies than do the
signs, and that the most significant ex pression of stellar influence is in
fact through the houses. Therefore, he concludes that the ruler of the
second house is the primary significator of wealth, then Jupiter, and then
any planet actually in the second house or sending an aspect there, and
lastly, the sign in the second house; this is also their rank by strength —at
least when all other factors are equal —since it could happen that the first
in rank would be so debilitated that the second or the third would be
preferred to it.
However, Bellanti's theory is incorrect on the following points.
First, he is wrong when he claims that the signs are a kind of material or
substance—that is, they are passive rather than active —and that they are
shaped, formed, and made effective by the planets located in them, since
in actual fact the signs do act on their own, as we have stated elsewhere;
and from the sign and the planet therein, as well as the sign ruler, there
results a combination of qualities which are joined together in action.
Second, he is wrong when he rejects a planet located in the second house
because the sign it occupies could be its exile or fall; for a planet in the
second house does not assume any significance for money from the sign
in which it is, but by its location in that space of the second house, which
causes it to be said to have an influence on finances. Nor does it matter if
the sign in the second house is the exile or the fall of the planet, since a
planet in the second refers only to financial circumstances, and in good
celestial state it will signify the acquisition of money, but in an adverse
state it shows either little or no money or the squandering of whatever
resources there may be. Moreover, even Jupiter's good state would show
nothing if it did not refer by location, rulership or strong aspect to wealth,
or similar things. So we can see that a planet in the second should be
taken as the primary significator of finances. And in this matter Bellanti
errs along with many others, in that for the primary significator of
finances he desires to select the planet which is strongest, or which is in
the most favorable celestial state, as if money could be indicated for
everyone—which is clearly contrary to ex perience; and they make the
same error when selecting the significators of honors, or of marriage, etc.
Third, he is wrong when

=== Page 104 ===
he states that the houses cause a greater diversity of the influence of the
planets than do the signs, and it is false that a planet's action varies from
one house to another rather than from one sign to another, because a sign
and a planet located therein act as partners whose qualities are mixed or
combined, and are universal for the en tire sublunary world. So, when a
planet goes through a sign other than its own, the qualitative power of the
sign and that of the planet are joined together to perform a simultaneous
action, while the houses have no active power, but only the power to give
a deter mination to the quality of a planet or sign, as we have stated
elsewhere. And therefore, the quality of a planet moving by prime
motion from the third house to the second does not vary, but remains the
same, while its local determination merely changes to that of finances.
Therefore, the primary significator of money will be the planet in the
second house, after that the ruler of the second, then the sign in the
second, and last —the aspects to the second. Jupiter, however, located
outside of the second house, without rulership or exaltation by sign
therein or aspect to any planet which meets these conditions, will not
normally have any influence on the wealth of the native; I say "normally"
for if it were in a good state in the seventh it would indicate money
accidentally from marriage; if in the tenth, money through honors and
the profession.

=== Page 105 ===
CHAPTER XV
The intrinsic and extrinsic determinations
of the essential meanings of a house
The primary houses actively determine the celestial bodies, while
those bodies passively determine the essential meanings of the houses, as
has been already explained. Further, the essential meaning of a house is
generally determined in two ways —intrinsically and ex-trinsically. It is
determined intrinsically through all the factors which fall into that house,
be they sign, planet or aspect. Thus, Mars in the first house confers a
Martial character as is shown in the horoscope of Cardinal Richelieu;
Jupiter a Jupiterian character as in the horoscope of Charles de Condron; 1
the partile sextile of Mercury to the Ascen dant—a Mercurial character as
is shown in my own horoscope. Such a determination is called intrinsic
because it proceeds from celestial causes intrinsic to that house, and any
determination other than by these causes is extrinsic. Therefore, the
native with Jupiter in the Ascendant will indeed have a Jupiterian nature,
and if it also happens that Jupiter is the ruler of the Ascendant as well he
will have a Jupiterian nature which is quite unmixed with other elements
or influences. But if Jupiter rules the Ascendant and is placed in the tenth,
the native will be of a Jupiterian nature which is inclined to seed, honors;
if in the ninth, inclined to religion and sacred matters; if in the fifth, to
pleasures, etc., and therefore the essential meaning of a house is modified
intrinsically by the celestial causes actually existing in that house;
extrinsically, however, through causes coming from outside of that house.
These intrinsic determinations occur in nine ways: first, by a planet
in a house and its own sign in aspect to another planet; second, by a
planet in a house and its own sign but without aspect to another planet;
third, by a planet in a house outside of its own sign but with an aspect to
its own ruler; fourth, by a planet in a house outside of its own sign but in
aspect to another planet not its ruler; fifth, by a planet in a house outside
of its own sign without the aspect to another; sixth,
1 Confessor to Gaston de Foix, the Duke of Orleans.

=== Page 106 ===
by a sign in a house and an aspect from its ruler; seventh, by the aspect of
a planet not ruling that house; eighth, by a planet in the op posite house;
ninth, by only a sign in the house and no aspect or anti-scion to it. In
these nine ways the significance of a house is intrinsically modified
through the nature of the planet which occupies, rules, or aspects that
house, and in the rank order given here. And these ways can be either
simple, as given above, or complex—that is, when there is more than one
planet, sign, or aspect found in the same house, all of which must be
given an individual evaluation. But extrinsic determination also occurs in
nine ways: first, by the ruler of a house in another house but in its own
sign and in aspect to another planet; second, by the ruler of a house in
another house and its own sign without aspect to another; and so on, as in
the intrinsic deter minations. And a planet aspecting a house is to be
regarded in the same way.
And so, what has been said heretofore concerning the active
determinations of the celestial bodies and their influence on the
sublunary world will have to be considered sufficient. One should now
be able to recognize whatever good there may be in the books of the
ancient Roman, Greek, and Arabian astrologers, who only received the
truths of this divine science through that tradition handed down by Adam
and his successors, and then left it to us devoid of an un derstanding of
principles and spoiled by inventions, absurdities, and so much that is
worthless. Nevertheless, compelled by those truths, they perceived that
the planets' locations and rulerships in the houses of the horoscope
resulted in effects that were striking, but they did not give thought to the
general cause of this, which is none other than the determinations of the
celestial bodies as given above and described by no one else before now;
for truly the celestial bodies only act in ac cordance with their quite
specific determinations.

=== Page 107 ===
CHAPTER XVI
The celestial bodies as causes in nature
depicting God's action in the world
The action and power of the caelum and the stars and the won drous
things described in this book are proved by experience. In this chapter, as
a final summation, we will show that no causes in nature depict God's
action in the created universe more perfectly than do the celestial bodies
through their power and influence.
It should be noted that in addition to the celestial bodies there are
only four elements found in nature to which the three principal chemical
substances salt, sulphur, and Mercury correspond, and from them the
sublunary objects are compounded, whether they be meteors, minerals,
vegetables or animals. But in none of these sub stances or compounds is
found a power to be compared with the in fluence of the celestial bodies.
Indeed, man's intellect has been held rapt in admiration of its power,
especially in this century when it has become more widely understood;
nor is anything known in the sublunary world more wondrous in the
power of its action. And so it is that the Omniscient and Omnipotent God
has imprinted His nature in a most excellent way on the celestial bodies
—His representatives in the world of nature —through which He governs
and settles the fate of all natural effects, and allows that we may
understand the manner of His action.
First. As God's power of action is something very simple and
ineffable which we call God's will, the power of the primum caelum and
the planets is something very simple and —at least to us —ineffable; it is
known to us from their influence.
Second. As God's power of action is omnipotent, so also the power
of the primum caelum and the planets is omnipotent, and there is no
natural effect in which the primum caelum and the planets do not concur.
Third. As no creature is able to resist God's power, there is nothing
in the sublunary world which has the power to resist the in fluence of the
celestial bodies; for the quality of the celestial configuration is
continually imprinted on these sublunary things, which

=== Page 108 ===
are always subject to it, as this power penetrates to every part of the
earth.
Fourth. As God, by the very act of His will, effects in stantaneously
whatever things arise, the power of the primum caelum and the Sun
effects instantaneously whatever it is able to effect through that influence
or power. And the same is true for the Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, etc.
However, the Sun does not effect that which is proper to the Moon or
Saturn because the specific natures of the planets are different, and each
acts according to its nature on each and all sublunary things which come
into being.
Fifth. As God effects whatever the primum caelum. Sun, Moon,
Saturn, Jupiter, etc., effect, or as He concurs with each of them as ab -
solute first cause, the primum caelum effects whatever the Sun, Moon,
Saturn, Jupiter, etc., effect —that is, it concurs with each as a first cause
within nature. Therefore, among the natural causes the primum caelum is
the one most similar to God, as befits a first natural cause.
Sixth. God's power or will effects at the same time things diverse in
kind, class, and number —not only in different subjects, but also in the
same subject, as in man. For example, in man the health, position,
marriage, etc., are matters different from each other through the nature of
the houses. But God affects simultaneously all these things, in different
men as well as in the individual —that is, He concurs at the same time
with both the natural cause and its effects. Therefore, in different men, as
well as in the individual, things dif ferent in kind and number may occur,
and God concurs with the secondary causes effecting those things. And
in the same way the Sun imitates God through its location in the different
houses for all of earth's inhabitants, and thus it effects simultaneously for
all people things diverse in kind and number. Not only does it effect
these things by location, but also by rulership and aspects, and it can
effect one thing by location, something different by rulership, and
another quite different thing by its aspects with other planets; and the
same is true for the Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, etc. But the primum caelum,
to which rulerships or aspects do not refer since it is beyond these things,
effects in its simplicity and eminence all things together as well as in -
dividual things through its universal presence. But for individual things
its effects are different according to its varying positions. However, each
separate effect of the caelum on the same individual does not proceed
from the whole caelum, but from its various parts occupying the
different houses of the horoscope.
Seventh. As God acts in nature as a universal cause and sometimes
as a particular cause, so do also the caelum and the planets. For when
God acts through his participation in natural causes He always acts
as a universal cause, but when during

=== Page 109 ===
pharaoh's time He caused the Sun not to shine over Egypt, but to shine in
the land of Goshen, and caused fire to warm the Hebrews in the furnace
of Babylon, when it consumed all others present, He ef fected this as a
particular cause; for no natural cause besides God, or subordinate to
Him, could be found which would be able to effect that. Similarly, when
man is born the Sun is a universal cause of the birth; but a solar character
produced by the Sun's location or ruler-ship in the first house is a
particular cause effected by the Sun.
Eighth. As everything God effects is subject to His rule, whatever
the caelum and planets effect remains subject to control by their in -
fluence, including the fixing of the time of events. And this harmony
between God and the celestial bodies is of all things the greatest possible
wonder.
Therefore, from all that has been shown in this book it is clear that
the celestial bodies imitate God's way of acting on His creation more
perfectly than any other natural cause would be able to do. To Him alone
all honor and glory. Amen.
*LIBRI VIGNESIMI PRIMI FINIS*
