=== Page 1 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Astrologia Gallica
Book Thirteen
The Proper Natures and Strengths of the
Individual Planets and the Fixed Stars
Book Fourteen
The Primum Caelum and its Division into
Twelve Parts
Book Fifteen
The Essential Dignities of the Planets
Book Nineteen
The Elements of Astrology or the Principles
of Judgments
Translated from the Latin
By
James Herschel Holden, M.A.
Fellow of the American Federation of Astrologers

=== Page 2 ===
Table of Contents
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
Astrologia Gallica Book 19
This is an omnibus edition of the translations of Books
13-15 & 19. Each book is complete with its own Title Page,
Table of Contents, Translator's Preface, Text, and
Index of Persons,
iii

=== Page 3 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Astrologia Gallica
Book Thirteen
The Proper Natures and Strengths of the
Individual Planets and the Fixed Stars
Translated from the Latin
By
James Herschel Holden, M.A.
Fellow of the American Federation of Astrologers

=== Page 4 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Translator's Preface
Book Thirteen
Section 1. The Elemental, Etheric, and Celestial Nature
of the Planets.
Preface
Chapter 1. That Ptolemy, Cardan, and the other
Old Astrologers made many Errors in Handing down
the Elemental Nature of the Planets
Chapter 2. In which the Elemental Strengths of the
Individual Planets are Determined from the Experiences
of Astrologers with Respect to the Terrestrial Globe
Chapter 3. In how many Ways a Superior Planet by its
own Nature with Respect to us is Increased or Decreased
Chapter 4. The Ethereal Nature of the Planets in General
Chapter 5. The Celestial Nature of the Planets in General
Chapter 6. What the Planets Do with their Individual Natures
Section II. The Various Divisions of the Planets.
Chapter 1. Masculine and Feminine Planets
Chapter 2. Diurnal and Nocturnal Planets
Chapter 3. Benefic and Malefic Planets
Section III. The Proper Celestial Nature of the Individual
Planets. And also about the Fixed Stars.
Chapter 1. How Difficult it is to Define the Proper
Influences of the Individual Planets
Chapter 2. By what Theory, the Influences of the Planets, at
least with Respect to Men, can be Investigated and Defined
Chapter 3. The Strength of the Planets by Analogy
5
9
11
20
25
42
43
44
46
50
59
70
73
80
3

=== Page 5 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Table of the Universal Rulerships of the Planets 85
Chapter 4. The Influences of the Jovial Planets 106
Chapter 5. The Proper Influences of the Fixed Stars 106
Appendix 1. Table of the Bright Fixed Stars for
1 January 1600 115
Appendix 2. Table of the Bright Fixed Stars for
1 January 2000 116
Index of Persons 117
Bibliography 119
4

=== Page 6 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
4

=== Page 7 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
Translator's Preface
In Astrologia Gallica, Book 13, Morin discusses some of the
fundamental technical terms used in astrology and also sets forth
the influences of the seven planets in great detail in a very nicely
designed tabular format. Due to the smaller size of the pages of this
translation and my inherent dislike of text printed sideways, I have
not attempted to reproduce the tables in their original format, but
instead I have listed their contents sequentially.
As 1 have done in my translations of other books of the
Astrologia Gallica, I have tried to tum Morin's scholarly Latin
into readable English as literally as possible. But he had a large vo-
cabulary, and rather than attempting to match him by studding the
English sentences with uncommon words, I have used more com-
mon renderings of seldom encountered Latin words. I have also
tried to keep paraphrase to a minimum.
Also, as previously, I have retained the Latin word Caelum
'sky' as a technical term; it refers to the zodiac and the placement
of the Sun, Moon, planets, and fixed stars in it at a particular mo-
ment. 1 have also retained Primum Caelum 'first sky', which refers
to the supposed outer sphere of the universe more commonly
called Primum Mobile, which contains the signs of the zodiac And
the reader will find that in this book (from p. 62 on) Morin fre-
quently uses the word "space" as a synonym for "house."
As a writer, Morin resembles a college professor teaching a
course in astrology. He talks extensively about each topic that he
introduces, explaining the background and the justifications of the
rules that he introduces. From time to time he even raises objec-
tions to the rules and refutes them. And he cites the rules that some
of his predecessors have stated and discusses them. Thus, the
reader not only leams what Morin believed to be true, but he is also
introduced to some alternative theories that were current in the
17th century. Some of this may seem excessive, but Morin took
great pains to discuss all aspects of his topics.
5

=== Page 8 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
If this is the first book of the Astrologia Gallica that the reader
has taken up, he will be immediately struck by the length of some of
the sentences. Morin sometimes extends a sentence into half of a
page. His idea of the proper length of a paragraph also differs consid-
erably from ours. I have occasionally broken up some of his long sen-
tences into two or more shorter ones, but more often I have kept them
together with commas, semi-colons, and dashes. I have occasionally
used italics to emphasize a word where Morin did not, and I have
added some words in brackets where I thought they were needed.
Also, the reader may find that after having read one of
Morin's extra long sentences, he is uncertain whether he has un-
derstood it. In such a case, my advice is to read it again and think
about how the several clauses fit together. Morin is not an espe-
cially easy author. He should not be skimmed. To derive the maxi-
mum benefit from what he has to say, it may be necessary to
re-read some parts of it and think about them. Unlike most astro-
logical writers, Morin does not simply state a rule, but as men-
tioned above he also discusses the reasons for the rule.
One feature of Morin's discussion that is seldom encountered
in modem astrological texts is his quotations from the Bible and
his not infrequent digressions into religious or philosophical justi-
fications of the rules and explanations that he sets forth. Morin was
a devout Catholic, and he was at pains to try to show that nothing
in his book was contrary to Catholic dogma. This was partly due to
the sincerity of his personal religious beliefs and partly due to a de-
sire to avoid giving religious opponents of astrology obvious tar-
gets to attack. But he also tried to find Biblical justification for
some of his explanations or procedures.
The reader will also find frequent references to Claudius Ptol-
emy's Tetrabiblos (or Quadripartite, as the Latin translation was
called). Morin seems to have generally cited the Latin version
printed by Jerome Cardan in his voluminous Commentary on the
Quadripartite. Since the numbering of the chapters in that text
does not agree exactly with those in F.E. Robbins's edition and
translation of the Tetrabiblos in the Loeb Classical Library, I have
6

=== Page 9 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
generally changed the chapter numbers cited by Morin to agree with
the chapter numbers in the LCL version. And I have sometimes ex-
panded Morin's citations of passages in Cardan's book to agree
with the numbering in the Lyons omnibus edition of Cardan's
works published in 1663. (Morin of course used an earlier edition,
which I have not seen.) I do not have access to all of the books by the
other authors that Morin mentions from time to time, so I am unable
to augment his references to those. I have, however, supplied refer-
ences to their place and date of publication.
It will soon become obvious to the reader that Morin usually
cites Ptolemy or Cardan merely in order to disagree with their
statements. In the 17th century they were considered to be the two
leading authorities on astrology. And, since Morin had devised a
system of astrology that differed in important respects from the
tradition set forth by his two eminent predecessors, he felt obliged
to point out the differences and explain why he thought that his
system was preferable. He particularly cites numerous passages
from Cardan and delivers what he believed to be logical arguments
against them. And he also cites passages from Jofrancus Offlisius
(16th century) in order to show that from his point of view they too
were erroneous. Offlisius, like Morin, had discarded a good bit of
traditional astrology and substituted a system of his own devising.
But not surprisingly, Morin thought that his own system was better
than Offusius's, and he goes into detail to explain why. I think the
reader will agree with him. However, we must remember that Ptol-
emy, Cardan, and Offusius all lived before the invention of the
telescope. Consequently, some of their statements relating to the
structure of the solar system, while generally believed to be correct
as late as the end of the 16th century, were found to be incorrect in
the early 17th century.
In Section 1, Chapters 2 & 3, of the present book, Morin goes
on at great length about the strengths of the planets, even assigning
numerical values to them and criticizing the methods that Offusius
had used and the numerical values that he had assigned. This could
perhaps be called an excursion into physical astrology—that is, an
7

=== Page 10 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
attempt to quantify the actual strength of the astrological influences.
It is a topic that has not attracted many astrologers, and the 21st cen-
tury reader who is mainly interested in learning how to interpret
horoscopes may not find it especially helpful, but it was Morin's at-
tempt to apply scientific measurement procedures to astrology.
From time to time in the Astro logia Gallica, Morin mentions
some of the brighter fixed stars, and in Section 3, Chapter 5, of the
present book he lists the ones that he thinks are of the most impor-
tance. For the benefit of the reader, I have added two tables of
those fixed stars in Appendix 1 and Appendix 2. The longitudes
and latitudes are given for 1 January 1600 (I chose that date be-
cause it is approximately in the middle of the dates of the example
charts that Morin cites in the later books) and for 1 January 2000.
If the reader requires their positions for some other year not too far
removed from either of those dates, he need only change the longi-
tudes by adding (or, for earlier dates, by subtracting) 50 seconds of
arc for each year removed from 1600 or 2000. The latitudes will
remain very nearly unchanged.
Finally, I might mention that I previously published a transla-
tion of the "Table of Universal Rulerships of the Planets" in an ad-
dendum to my translation of Astrologia Gallica, Book 22.1 It is re-
printed here without any essential change. I would like to thank
Mr. Sriram Ponoda, who, at the suggestion of my friend Robert
Corre, prepared a CD-ROM containing the entire text of my trans-
lation of Book 22.1 no longer had a computer version of that text,
so I was able to copy the needed text of the Table from the
CD-ROM, thereby saving me the trouble of re-typing the previous
translation or scanning the individual pages.
And I also want to thank my friend Kris Brandt Riske for con-
verting my word-processor files to publishing files and seeing the
present book through the publishing process.
James Herschel Holden, January 2005
1 Jean-Baptiste Morin, Astrologica Gallica/Book Twenty-two/Directions
(Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 1994). This book is still available from the publisher.
8

=== Page 11 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
ASTROLOGIA GALLICA
BOOK THIRTEEN
PREFACE
In Book 9, the Planets were shown to be mixed from elements
of the Ether and the Caelum. And in Books 11 and 12, the celestial
bodies' various powers of acting were only set forth in general
terms. Now it seems appropriate to scrutinize the proper natures
of the Planets more thoroughly, to the extent that we have been
able to do this by logic and experience. In truth, the proper nature
of each Planet is twofold—namely, substantial and accidental.
The substantial form of the Planet is unique in number. But the ac-
cidental is found to be threefold—that is, elemental, ethereal, and
celestial—for a Planet is composed of a threefold kind of mixture
of these, as was stated in Book 9. For having thus mixed the
sublunars, the natures, accidentals, and strengths are diverse,
from the diverse mixture ofwhich they are composed; as is plain in
vinegar, the rose, opium, etc.; in which a nature that is hot and
cold, or watery and fiery is perceived at the same time, each of
which works by itself. Moreover, the elemental nature of the Plan-
ets is not unique and simple, because not all of them consist of one
and the same element, but rather of manifold elements; and all are
contained in them formally, on account of the mixture of elements,
and also eminently on account of the adjoined celestial material,
to which the strengths of the elements belong. And all of them are
apparent from the production of heat and cold in these inferior
things—the formal to be sure, because the Sun sensibly heats, and
Saturn, as well as the Moon in new Moons or eclipses, cools; but
9

=== Page 12 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
[it is] also eminent because when the Sun is subterranean, if it is
the ruler of the ASC, it impresses a hot temperament upon the na-
tive, which cannot be from the formal or actual heat of the Sun,
which cannot penetrate the entire Earth; but it is [also] found to
be especially ethereal from the diverse motion in men of the hu-
mors, spirits & corporeal faculties; and finally, it is celestial from
the various accidents of goodfortune or misfortune that affect dur-
ing life the body, the mental makeup, and external good events, as
will be explained in its own place. These natures must now be dis-
cussed individually, and first the elementals.
10

=== Page 13 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
SECTION I
The Elemental, Etheric, and Celestial
Nature of the Planets.
Chapter 1.
That Ptolemy, Cardan, and the other Old Astrologers
made Many Errors in Handing down the Elemental
Nature of the Planets.
This, moreover, must be begun with that prince of astrolo-
gers, Ptolemy,1 who indeed in assigning the individual qualities of
the individual planets, did not deviate much from the truth, but
with regard to their causes he lapsed into the absurd and contradic-
tory, namely since he expounds the arrangement of the planets and
their distance from the Earth, the Sun, and from each other for
causes in Book I, Chapter 4 of the Quadripartite. For if (as he will
have it), Saturn is cold and dry because it is very greatly distant
from the heat of the Sun and the vapors of the Earth; therefore, by
that same reasoning Mars will be colder than Venus, because it is
indeed more distant from the Sun. Moreover, Jupiter will be drier
than Mars, because it is further from the Earth. Besides, if Jupiter
is consequently of a temperate nature because it moves in the mid-
dle between the chilling Saturn and the burning Mars, therefore
Mars, which is in the middle between Jupiter and Venus, will be
the most temperate of all the planets. And yet all these things in
Ptolemy are absurd and contradictory. Besides, when he says that
the Moon is humid because it is closest to the Earth and adjacent to
its humid vapors, he is very much mistaken if he thinks that the hu-
mid vapors of the Earth extend to the Moon, so that it is thereby
1 Claudius Ptolemy (2nd century). The references are to his Tetrabiblos (or
Quadripartite). Morin usually cites that work from Cardan's Commentary, but I
have altered Morin's numbering of the chapters to agree with the Loeb Classical
Library edition and translation by F. E. Robbins (London and Cambridge, Mass.,
1940), which is a convenient source for the modem reader. Morin often disagrees
with Ptolemy.
11

=== Page 14 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
made humid; and it must not be sought here what sort [of body] the
Moon is from [those] vapors, but what sort it is inherently; for the
sort that it is inherently should produce effects of that kind, as is
plain from the Sun, which consequently heats because it is inher-
ently hot and fiery. Ptolemy is also mistaken when he says simi-
larly that the Moon does heat a little, and that is because it receives
the light of the Sun. For the light of the Sun does not heat, as we
have shown in Book 11, but rather its heat, which heats up the
Earth and the waters from their inherent coldness. And the very na-
ture of the Moon is not hot, but cold, as the sympathy of the Moon
with the waters testifies, and also as the Moon herself [does] in
eclipses. Finally, he wrongly asserts that Jupiter is humid, since a
moderate dryness agrees with it better, as will be shown in its own
place, and as has already been stated in Book 9, Section 3, Chapter
8.
Therefore, it was preferable to Ptolemy and more appropriate
to the science to hunt down the intrinsic natures of the planets from
their own characteristic effects, namely because these are assimi-
lated to their own causes, and consequently they can detect them at
least a posteriori; whence, Proclus1 rightly says "the effective
forces of the stars and the planets must be taken from that which
they exercise upon us," which nevertheless you should understand
as it is, and not from the vapors or prime qualities diffused through
the ambient, since it is certain that the stars affect us through the
medium of their own strength; and in the rigid winter [cold], men
are bom who are hot-blooded and peevish; just as in the fiery sum-
mer, cold-natured and phlegmatic ones are bora, as is proved by
daily experience.
But Cardan2 erred to begin with in his Commentary on the
1 Proclus the Philosopher (412-485) was the last important classical philosopher.
A Paraphrase of Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos is attributed to him. The Latin translation
by Leo Allatius (1586-1669) of the Greek text was published by Elsevir at Leiden
in 1635. It is probably that book to which Morin refers.
2 Jerome Cardan (1501-1576), Italian physician, mathematician, astrologer, and
prolific miscellaneous writer. His extensive Commentaiy on the Quadripartite
(in Latin) was first published at Basel by M. Petri in 1554 and subsequently re-
12

=== Page 15 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
Quadripartite of Ptolemy, because he held him to be an Evangelist,
from whose teaching down to the least detail he had received out
of reverence [not wanting] to depart [from it]; and he has delivered
himself up to defend Ptolemy in everything, [while] here and there
asserting that some particular thing had become known to no one
before himself. Then, in expounding those things he lapsed into
many errors, and frequently he proposes things that are the more
absurd, the more true, and the greater mysteries that he offers.
Therefore, I—the slave of no author—but free in my intellect to
philosophize, and intent on nature alone; I shall also comment on
Cardan's errors about the natures of the planets, because that is a
matter of great moment, as something that relates to the [funda-
mental] principles of astrology; and Cardan's authority has led
many persons astray who were too credulous or less perspicacious,
to the great harm of astrology and philosophy, although it may
frankly be confessed that many things have also been set forth ac-
curately and skillfully by him, so that among all the other astrolo-
gers who have philosophized on this most abstruse science, he de-
serves the first place. But we are men living here in a darkness,
which to penetrate and dissipate by the force of the intellect is trou-
blesome and very difficult; and I do not profess that I myself
among the other recent [authorities] am immune from criticism;
and also it is not required that I should rebut [all] the individual er-
rors of it, for that would be too lengthy, too tedious—indeed super-
fluous—and would require a special book even more extensive
than his Commentary on Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos is; but instead I
shall only rebut his principal errors, where it seems to be neces-
sary, for [the rebuttal of] the rest will be evident from the true prin-
ciples of astrology propounded by me.
And so, Cardan in Book 1, Chapter 4, Text XIX, of his Corn-
printed. It contains a Latin translation of Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos and Cardan's
Commentary. I have used the omnibus edition of Cardan's books (Lyons:
Huguetan & Ravaud, 1663. 10 vols; New York and London; Johnson Reprint,
1967. 10 vols. repr. in facs.). The Commentary is in vol. 5, and all references
hereafter are to the numbering and pages of that edition. Morin usually cites
Cardan in order to disagree with him.
13

=== Page 16 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
mentary supposes in the first place that "there are only two quali-
ties in nature, one acting celestially, and it is called heat, and the
other, which is moisture, called elemental but he says that cold
and dryness are only deprivations, the latter of moisture and the
former of heat. Which plainly erroneous opinion has already been
sufficiently refuted by us in Book 3, Section 1, Chapter 3. More-
over, from that false foundation he deduces that "all the stars are
hot, because they act,"2 as if only heat could be capable of acting;
and from that, would it not also follow that ice is hot, which to be
sure at least drives heat from the subject, which heat it would be
foolish to deny cannot be expelled except by some acting force.
Moreover, he is out of his wits when he says, "heat is not simply a
quality, but a substance in light;"3 first, because he will have it that
heat is a substance, and then because he will have it that light is a
subject of that sort of substance. As for that, when he says that heat
is not a quality, and when he confirms that same [statement] fur-
ther on, saying that neither the Sun nor any other star is endowed
with any quality, he contradicts himself, since he asserted earlier
that there are only two qualities in nature, namely celestial heat
and elemental moisture. But he contradicts himself again when he
says that heat is twofold and moisture is also twofold; once indeed
by substance by which, he says, the Sun is very hot and very
moist;4 and again according to an impressed quality, by which the
1 Cardan (p. 120, col. 2) actually says this: declarauimus .. . non esse nisi duas
qualitates, unam quidem agentem coelestemque, & vocatur color cui opponitur
priuatio quae est frigiditas, alterant quae est humidum elementale, cui siccitas,
tanquam priuatio opposita est.. . 'we have declared .. .that there are only two
qualities, one indeed acting and celestial, and it is called heat, to which is opposed
its deprivation which is cold, the other which is elemental moisture, to which dry-
ness, as its deprivation, is opposed'.
2 Cardan, loc. cit, Omnia igitur astro calida sunt, quia omnia aliqud operantur
'All the stars are hot, because they all do something'.
3 Cardan, Text XXX (p. 122, col. 2), Sednec simpliciter color qualitasest... sed
substantiam in lumine, vt icon dixi 'But heat is not simply a quality ... but a sub-
stance in light, as I have already said'.
4 Cardan, Text XXIX (p. 121, col. 2). He says that the Sun must be very hot and
very humid because, of all the planets, it promotes the longest life among men,
14

=== Page 17 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
Sun is moderately hot and a little bit dry; for when he makes the
Sun to be very moist by substance, he admits some moisture other
than elemental; which he only calls "according to the impressed
quality;" consequently, there will be many more qualities than the
two mentioned by him above. Well then, [you can see] how badly
Cardan's doctrine on the qualities of the stars hangs together!
But all the same, he tries to assert that Saturn is the author of
cold, and since it is colder than any other star, it always chills. And
he explains that in two ways: first, "because Saturn has less of any
kind of heat than any other star, and therefore joined to the Moon it
is said to chill, because it heats less than the Moon;" "for less
heat," he says, "mixed with more heat is moderated, as is plain
from lukewarm and hot water mixed together."1 Truly here Cardan
is mistaken, for in the case of water, the temperature is not made
by the reduced heat of the lukewarm [portion], but by cold allied to
it; and that is proved from this: because never does less heating re-
duce the effect of more heating by its own heat; even so, moreover,
less light by its own light does not reduce the light of a brighter ob-
ject; otherwise, it would be action from a proportion of a lesser in-
equality, which in nature is absurd. Since if heat can act upon heat,
it is agreeable to reason that a greater thing can increase a lesser
thing as much as the latter can reduce the former, or adulterate its
quantity. Secondly, "because Saturn impedes the work of the other
hotter stars," but by what strength does it impede? Certainly, not
by a greater heat, hypothetically, nor even a lesser heat; for, since
it is entirely certain that a united strength is stronger than a sepa-
rated one, as experience proves, it is necessary that by many heats
and that would require much heat and much moisture. But then he tries to recon-
cile that statement with Ptolemy's dictum that the Sun is very hot and a little dry
(for Ptolemy does not say that the Sun is moist). Morin seized upon this disagree-
ment and derides it at some length.
1 Cardan, Text XXX (p. 123, col. 1), . . . quia iunctus Lunae frigiditatem auget,
maxime hyemis tempore, sed id etiamfit, quia cum Saturni color minor sit quam
Lunae. vt tepida aquaferuenti mixta, minus calidam efficit seruente ' .. .because
joined to the Moon it increases the cold, especially in the time of winter, but this is
also done because since Saturn's heat is less than the Moon's, as lukewarm water
mixed with boiling water makes it less hot'.
15

=== Page 18 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
occurring together, a more intense effect is produced from all of
them than from any one of them as individuals; and it is ridiculous
to suppose that the light and heat of the Sun are impeded by the
light and heat of a candle; therefore, it is necessary that Saturn
chills by some other quality than heat, which cannot be anything
other than the actual cold of Saturn.
Besides, since Cardan has explained his own ideas in a rather
confused and outlandish way, intermixed too with many contra-
dictions, so that they can hardly be understood anywhere, I shall
explain them briefly here. And so, he would have it that no star is
affected formally by any elemental quality, as for example those of
heat and humidity, which he supposes to be alone in nature, but
they only contain them by strength, or especially when he says that
"a star is hot and humid by substance;" and yet he will have it that
those stars are effectively hot and humid—that is, such qualities
are impressed on sublunar bodies—when he says "a star is hot and
humid according to the impressed quality;" and this is the common
doctrine of Ptolemy, Aristotle, and the other old philosophers who
deny all generation or corruptive alteration in the Caelwn;1 which,
since that is erroneous, as was made plain in this century from the
generation of new stars, comets, and sunspots, it only remains to
be said here that Cardan also erred along with the old authorities.
Moreover, he erred more seriously in other things when he allows
[only] a unique active quality, i.e. heat, in the stars, since light is
another active quality arising from heat; besides, not only did
many of the older authorities2 think that there are influences that
are greatly active qualities, both in method and heat and light; but
we have most plainly proved that in Book 12, Chapter 27.
And so, having rejected his opinion on the qualities of the
1 Here and elsewhere below I have chosen to keep the Latin word Caelum as a
technical term rather than translate it as 'sky'. It of course designates the outer
space beyond the Earth and all the things in it.
2 Here Morin notes the contrast between the ancient views and the modem ones.
The ancients held that the Caelum was inalterable. The invention of the telescope
in the early 17th century disproved this by showing various changes in the
Caelum.
16

=== Page 19 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
stars in general, it must now be seen what he thinks about the indi-
vidual planets. And first, he says about the Sun that it is very hot
and very humid according to its substance, but according to its im-
pressed quality, it is moderately hot and a little dry; that is, not so
formally or by its action, but only by its strength is it very hot and
very humid; for in fact by its impression or action, it is moderately
hot and a little dry. But in Book 9, Section 3, Chapter 6, we have
proved that it is formally hot. And since according to Cardan every
star has the same sort of strength as it has (that is to say, makes) an
impression, how can he call it very moist according to its sub-
stance, if according to its impression it is a little dry? Here again he
contradicts himself. Besides, surely it will not dry up [things] be-
cause it is very moist? Indeed Cardan says—again contradicting
himself—that on the Island of St. Thomas on the equator,1 when
winter occurs with the Sun standing vertically [overhead], with
many vapors having been attracted into the air; therefore, the Sun,
according to its impressed quality, will not be hot and dry there,
but cold and moist; and for that reason it will also be that way ac-
cording to its substance. Therefore, it is plain from Cardan [speak-
ing] against himself that fiery qualities ought to be admitted to be
in the Sun—in fact, the greatest heat with a reduced dry-
ness—which is compatible with the airy or ethereal moisture
mixed in the body of the Sun itself, as is plain in a flame in our
country, which is nothing other than burning oil; for from those
two qualities all the superior effects of the Sun are produced, either
by itself or by accident.
But for the other celestial bodies, Cardan supposes that they
shine in two different ways like the Moon—namely by their own
light and by that of the Sun—but that is also erroneous in the case
of the fixed stars and the planets; for the fixed stars shine only by
their own light, and the light of the Sun does not reach them; but
the planets, not excepting the Earth, are lacking in light of their
own, and only their own opaque bodies receive their light on their
surface from outside, [namely] from the Sun, and that [light] re-
1 The Portugese Island Sao Tome off the coast of West Africa at 0N41 6E01.
17

=== Page 20 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
fleets upon these lower places,1 as is plain from the homed shape
of the Moon and Venus;2 and we have already proved all of these
things in their own place. Consequently therefore, Cardan errs
when he says that the Moon moistens by its own light and by at-
tracting vapors by the Sun's light, but it heats only by the reflected
light of the Sun. As for this, if it acts by both lights, then it heats by
both lights, and it cannot attract vapors by both unless it heats by
both, or it will have to be said that vapors are not made by heat, and
not raised up, which Cardan himself does not allow.
After that, expounding the natures of the other planets, he
says "Saturn receives the rays of the Sun only weakly because it
withdraws very much from it, and therefore it heats very little"
(and, with respect to us, it chills very much), but it dries a little be-
cause it is far distant from the moist Earth, from which it cannot
raise up many vapors." And this is Ptolemy's doctrine that was al-
ready rejected above as being plainly absurd, since the planets
themselves take their proper natures not more from themselves
and from their distance from the Sun or the Earth, than the Sun or
the Earth take from their own distance, or from the mutual distance
between them and the others; and those planets have proper na-
tures before they raise vapors. And about the rest of the planets,
Cardan agrees with Ptolemy, already refuted above, but about the
Moon (which he makes to be equally moist and hot with the Sun)
he disagrees, because he attributes its own heat to it, very similarly
to the heat of Saturn; and from that it follows that like Saturn it
chills, against Ptolemy's opinion. But the Moon according to Ptol-
emy himself and Cardan ought to be hotter too than Mars, namely
because it is nearer the Sun. And if someone says that Cardan is to
be understood here [as speaking] about the proper heat of the
Moon, not about its coming forth from rays and its distance from
the Sun, Why, I say, is the [amount of] heat determined in the case
of the other planets by that distance, and not in the case of the
1 By "these lower places,' Morin means the Earth.
2 It was observed in the telescope that Venus could assume a crescent shape like
the Moon.
18

=== Page 21 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
Moon? Indeed, why does he admit a proper heat in the case of the
Moon, and not in the case of the other planets, since all of them act
by their proper strength, and whatever they do, they do by means
of heat according to Cardan [as mentioned] above? But if he ad-
mits it in all of them, why does he determine their natures from that
which is extrinsic and alien to them, but not proper to them? It is,
therefore, most evidently plain how badly Ptolemy and Cardan
have philosophized about the natures of the planets; that is why,
having repudiated their doctrine, we believe that we must stand on
those things that were said by us in Book 9, Section 3, about such
elementary natures of the planets, since they agree with effects and
experiences.
And Marsilio Ficino' must also not be listened to in Book 2,
Chapter 6, of his [translation of the] Enneads of Plotinus,2 where
having followed the opinion of Averroes3 and Abraham
Avenezra,4 he asserts, "In the Caelum there is nothing of cold or
dryness, but only heat and humor; and the planets that abound
more in humor, such as Saturn, heat things less, and because of that
they are said to be cold; but those that abound more in heat, such as
the Sun and Mars, are said to be hotter and dry, because they are
less moist." For except that Plotinus and the other Platonists
scarcely ever prove any of those things that they offer; if moisture
would predominate in Saturn, it would moisten [things] by itself,
but on the contrary it dries [them], as is plain from the tempera-
ments of the natives over whom it rules, especially from [a posi-
tion in] fire or earth signs, by which its proper dryness is not mod-
erated.
1 Marsilio Ficino (1433-1499), famous Italian Greek scholar andPlatonist. Trans-
lator (into Latin) of works by Plato and Plotinus (the Enneads).
2 First printed at Florence in 1492, and reprinted at Basel in 1580 with the Greek
text edited by Petrus Pema.
3 Abu-I-Walid ibn Rushd(l 126-1198), Arabian philosopher, known for his com-
mentaries on Aristotle and the neo-Platonists.
4 Abraham ibn Ezra (1092-1167), famous Jewish scholar, known to astrologers
for his books The Beginning of Wisdom and Nativities that were translated into
Latin in the 12th century.
19

=== Page 22 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
But it does not seem that the inexperience of those common
astrologers ought to be omitted, who never seem to acknowledge
either formally or eminently the quality of heat, cold, moisture, or
dryness in any planet, while in thinking about the temperament of
natives, they settle the nature of a planet by the nature of the sign in
which it is posited; as, if Saturn and Venus were in air signs, they
make them both and equally hot and moist; if in earth signs, both
and equally cold and dry, without having taken into consideration
the proper nature of the planets, as if they would take their force of
acting from the signs alone, and that force would be varied imme-
diately by a change of sign, both of which [assertions] are rejected
by us in Book 20. But while we are contemplating removing the
above said errors, it seems that it ought to be stated and warning
given that the intellect of man is too weak to define the elemental
qualities precisely; and yet, although this determination, if not ex-
act, is at least reasonable and concordant with experience, it is of
the utmost necessity in astrological [considerations], and for that
reason we shall expound it here in what follows below, having
taken into account only the qualities predominating in the individ-
ual planets or the qualities that are contrary to that predomination.
Chapter 2.
In which the Elemental Strengths of the Individual Planets
are Determined from the Experiences of Astrologers
with Respect to the Terrestrial Globe.
It is absurd that astrologers generally want to be very exact in
calculating the places of the planets, and [yet] they have not
thought out any accurately defined reason for the strength of a
planet, since they nevertheless investigate houses with regard to
their strengths, and that from the kinds that they are, they produce
the same effects; but so that we may remedy this defect in their
strengths, it will be necessary for us to proceed thus.
It was prescribed by Ptolemy, and the more skilled of the as-
trologers taught by experience, that Venus is naturally hot and
20

=== Page 23 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 18
moist, but that moisture predominates in it; therefore, let it be '/z
degree hot and 4 degrees moist. Besides, even if Cardan in his
Commentary on the Quadripartite, Book 1, chapter 4, states that
Venus is hotter than Jupiter, because it is closer to the Sun, and
brighter by its own light (as he badly opines) than Jupiter itself;
nevertheless, Ptolemy and all the rest make Jupiter to be hotter
than Venus, but less moist, but in the truth of the matter it is a little
dry; therefore, let its heat be put at 1 Vi and its dryness at 1. But now
no one will deny that the Sun is hotter and dryer than Jupiter.
Therefore, let its heat be at S'/z and its dryness at 2, seeing that by
its own heat it overcomes the cold of both the Moon and Saturn.
And finally then, everyone agrees that Mars is hotter and dryer
than the Sun, not indeed in quantity but in quality; that is, of the
planets it pours forth the highest heat, but a smaller amount, for if it
were more abundant, it would be too much corruptive and lethal.
But the Sun on the other hand pours out a more copious amount,
but a milder form, which is generative and also vital. Let us, there-
fore, put the heat of Mars at 2I/z and its dryness at 3. But to Saturn,
which is cold and dry, let there be given S'/z [degrees] of cold and 3
of dryness. But to the Moon, which we experience to be the moist-
est of all, even though its moistness is of somewhat dulled strength
in acting, let there be given 6 degrees of moistness. And because it
is cold, but less cold than the Sun is hot, let us suppose that its cold
is at 5 degrees; moreover, that I have attributed so much cold to the
Moon, and more than [the amount] to Saturn, hardly any astrolo-
ger will contest, who will contemplate with an attentive mind, that
the Moon rules Cancer, the coldest of the signs, and that both in her
own [eclipses] and in total eclipses of the Sun she noticeably cools
these sublunar [regions].
Now the one [planet] remaining to us will be Mercury, which
astrologers want to be of no personal nature, but [rather] to be like
Proteus,1 convertible to whatever nature, either of the sign in
which it is placed, or of the planet to which it is joined, either by
body or by aspect. But it is a very great error in astrology to deny
1 In Greek mythology, a shape-shifting demi-god.
21

=== Page 24 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
that Mercury has a proper nature, without which it would not exist.
And the proper natures of the planets are not changed into others;
namely, Mercury receives something from the Moon or Sat-
urn—not the light, or the heat that they lack, nor their cold, on ac-
count of its closeness to the Sun, which defends Mercury from
their cold; and much less does it receive the influence by which it
acts on these inferior things; but the individual planets and the
signs act individually with their own natures; and there is a mix-
ture of their strengths in their concourse, as we have shown else-
where. And although it can receive light and heat from the Sun,
and like the Moon, reflect it upon these lower things according to
its own measure; this is extrinsic to its own nature, in accordance
with which it acts by itself, and which we are here inquiring into;
moreover, some say that it is dry, and, among others, Ptolemy, in
Book 1, Chapter 17, in which he discusses the exaltations of the
planets, and then Pontanus at the end of Book 2 of his De Rebus
Coelestibus,1 and also Jofrancus Offusius, in his book De Divina
Astrorum Facultate,2 in which he discusses these elemental quali-
ties of the stars most precisely. But I say in addition that Mercury
itself is somewhat inherently cold, namely because it emulates the
nature of Saturn before all the others, and they help each other mu-
tually in acting, as experience proves; and this is confirmed by that
text of Ptolemy in Book 3, chapter 12,3 where he states that "Mer-
1 Giovanni Gioviano Pontano (1426-1503), De Rebus Coelestibus (Naples:
Sigismund Mayr, 1512).
2 Offusius (16th century) was a German physician, astronomer, and astrologer
who lived in France for many years. Like Morin, he rejected much of traditional
astrology and devised his own system. His book De divina astrorum facultate in
larvatam astrologiam [The Divine Power of the Stars against a Decadent Astrol-
ogy] was published at Paris in 1570. Morin cites passages from Offusius's book
mainly to disagree with them. It should be noted that, like Cardan, he lived and
wrote before the revised view of the solar system and the cosmos was ushered in
by the discoveries made by Galileo and others with the newly invented telescope
in the early 1600s.
3 Morin has Book 3, Chapter 17, which corresponds to Book 3, Chapter 16, Text
LXI (p. 292 col. 2) in Cardan's Commetary, and to Book 3, Chapter 12 (p. 329),
of Robbins's edition of the Tetrabiblos.
22

=== Page 25 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
cury joined to Saturn inclines to cold, and joined to Mars to dry-
ness." for indeed that "inclination to cold" cannot be perceived ex-
cept in the greater cold [resulting] from Saturn and Mercury to-
gether, rather than from Saturn alone; whence it can be conjec-
tured that each of these planets is inherently cold, for a united
strength is stronger than a separated one. And the reasoning is the
same for the dryness of Mercury conjoined with Mars; conse-
quently 1 '/a degrees of cold are attributed by me to Mercury and 1
of dryness. And there are the above said qualities in the individual
planets [arising] from their action and formally, or extrinsically;
moreover, for the planets Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mer-
cury, opposite ones coincide with them intrinsically and eminently
by an equal degree for the reason set forth elsewhere; and they co-
incide with these in their medium distance from the Earth, and in
the horizon, also in the medium circle between both hemispheres,
where those powers of theirs on the temperament of natives is ap-
prehended to be most powerful; for, in accordance with their
greater and lesser distance from the Earth, and not with respect to
their altitude or depression from the horizon—those qualities in
which they are varied to us—as we shall cite below from Jofrancus
Offusius. For the moment, let this table be noted [see p. 24], in
which is put just as much in the planets' essence of heat as of cold,
and as much of moistness as of dryness, not otherwise than in those
elements. And from which it is plain that the Sun and the Moon, ar-
ranged around the Earth,1 are among the planets masculine and
feminine of sublunar effects; and indeed the Sun is male, hot and
dry, but the Moon is female, cold and moist.
Moreover, this table is more conformable to the natures and
effects of the planets, and also to things that are pleasing to astrolo-
gers, than those [numbers] of Offusius, in which the Sun is sup-
posed to be nearly twice as dry as it is hot, and four times dryer
1 Morin had adopted Tycho Brahe's concept of the solar system, in which the
Earth was at the center and both the Sun and the Moon revolved about it. This
avoided censure by the Catholic Church that insisted upon the Earth's being the
center of the universe.
23

=== Page 26 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Heat Cold Wetness Dryness
Sun SVi 2
Moon 5 6
Saturn 31/2 3
Jupiter Wi 1
Mars 2/2 3
Venus Vi 4
Mercury VA 1
Sum 10 10 10 10
than Mars, and that one is twelve times dryer than it is hot. Besides,
Saturn is made to be four times colder than the Sun is made to be
hot; Jupiter and Venus of about the same nature hot and moist, but
each of these one hundred and twenty-eight times more moist than
hot. Mercury, moreover, is equally as dry as Mars or Saturn. All of
which deviates very much from the common opinion of astrolo-
gers, especially since he attributes four times more cold than heat
to all the planets taken together, when, having added up the forces
of the individual [planets], there is reported for their sum 28 de-
grees of heat, 114 of cold, 133 of moistness, and 85 of dryness.
This table1 will be fundamental for these things and a basis for the
judgment of temperaments in nativities, not only for the planets,
but also for the signs, aspects, and positions with respect to the
Sun. For all of these things are referred to this table, as can be in-
ferred from Section 2, Chapter 5 of the Practice of Astrology}
1 Morin means "my table as shown above."
2 This sounds like the book that Morin mentions occasionally in other chapters of
the Astrologia Gallica that he intended to write if God granted him longer life.
But the fact that he here mentions Section and Chapter numbers would seem to
imply that he had already written part of the book or else that he had at least con-
structed an outline of it. If so, it seems to have perished after his death.
24

=== Page 27 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
Chapter 3.
In how many Ways a Superior Planet by its own Nature
with Respect to us is Increased or Decreased.
Offusius rightly judges it firstly to be increased or decreased
[in strength] according to the greater or lesser distance of the plan-
ets from the Earth; for because the strength of the agent is weaker
the more it distances itself, [and] the longer that it departs from its
own source, as is plain on Earth from the light of the fixed stars, it
follows that a subject is more weakly affected when it is being in-
fluenced by a more distant agent than by a nearer one. Therefore,
since the superior nature of each planet is attributed to it when it is
in its middle distance from the Earth, so at least the approximate
quantity of the strength of individual [planets] will be found when
they are in perigee or apogee or in intermediate places.
Let it be supposed [in the figure above] that Jupiter is in apo-
gee at G, at its middle [distance] at F, and in its perigee at E, of
which the semi diameters are GA, FB, or EC. And let the Earth be
at D, and let a straight line DG be drawn through the centers of Ju-
piter. Then DA, DB, and DC touching its body at A, B, and C; the
straight lines DE, DF, and DG are given by the tables, and the di-
ameter of Jupiter with the right angles at A, B, and C; and conse-
quently the greatest angle to the Earth will be given as EDC for Ju-
piter in perigee, the middle angle as FDB for the middle distance,
and the least angle GDA for [its distance] in apogee; and so the
sines of these angles are taken from the tables; and finally let it be
done that the sine of the angle FDB at 1 Vi degrees of Jupiter's heat,
25

=== Page 28 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
so the sine of the angle EDC to the other, and that is made to be the
degree of Jupiter's heat in perigee; and the same thing is done for
the apogee. Then [we will have] 1 degree of dryness in the perigee,
and in the apogee, and in the intermediate places.1
Offiisius offers another method with a table erected with the
distances of the planets from the Earth; but because those distances
are not recognized by modem astronomers, and because he will
have it that if the Sun is above its own mean distance from the
Earth, it would recede from us by two fourths of its medium dis-
tance, i.e. by 188 diameters of the Earth, its heat would not be felt
on these inferior [regions], even if the Sun were located far below
the mean distance of Mars; consequently, in this matter we do not
stick with him.
Secondly, its [strength] is increased with the greater elevation
of the planet above the horizon, but it is reduced with the greater
depression below it, although Offusius says nothing about that de-
pression and reduction. For it is conceded by all, and experience
with the Sun teaches, that the planets emit their own sensible quali-
ties more efficaciously when they are located above the Earth than
when they are sunk down below it, and the more intense still, the
higher they are raised above the horizon; for the more their rays
fall obliquely, the weaker they act, and the more upright, the more
powerfully. Therefore, since the Sun, for example, is given SVi de-
grees of heat and 2 of dryness on the horizon, it must be under-
stood that that quantity of strength coincides with it from its own
nature, and it affects us according to it when the Sun itself is lo-
cated at its mean distance from the Earth and from the horizon.
Whence, if the Sun is in its apogee, its perigee, or in an intermedi-
ate [place], that quantity is corrected previously by its distance, as
above. And the quantity of the solar strength on the horizon is
made in accordance with its distance at the apogee, the perigee, or
an intermediate [place], which quantity is again increased with re-
1 This is not clear. If the dryness is set at 1 Vi degrees in the middle, then it should
be more at one extreme of the diagram and less at the other. Perhaps some num-
bers have dropped out of the printed text.
86

=== Page 29 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
spect to us by the Sun's ascent from the horizon to the zenith, as
conversely it is diminished by its descent from the horizon to the
nadir, where it leaves off altogether with respect to us, on account
of the Earth's being diametrically interposed. Whence it is conjec-
tured that nights in the torrid zone are very frigid,1 but especially
under the equator when the Sun is located in it, namely because it
then descends down to the nadir. From this, moreover, it follows
that the Sun from the nadir to the ASC increases with respect to us
by 5 /i degrees of heat and 2 of dryness when it stands at its mean
distance from the Earth; whereby, from the ASC to the zenith, it
increases as many times more as the Sun itself acts more effica-
ciously above than below the horizon; and the same thing must be
concluded about the amount of strength of the Sun when it is in
apogee or perigee. But it seems to be very difficult to define the
[exact] amount of the increment, the necessary experience being
lacking in this matter; indeed, those [experiments] would have to
be done in very calm air, and entirely free from winds, especially
in the right sphere,2 in which the Sun on the equator is raised up in
equal times and equal arcs.
Offusius will have the heat of the Sun to be increased cubi-
cally both by its approach to the Earth and by its altitude above the
horizon, but the other qualities squared; by which rule he con-
structed the tables that he used. For example, having put the Sun
on the horizon, he multiplies the qualities due to it by reason of its
distance by 1, which is the same cubed and raised to the square,
and those qualities remain the same horizontally. But having put
the Sun at an altitude of VA degrees, he multiplies its horizontal
heat by the cube 1 and 217/512 and its dryness by the square 1 and
17/64, and these are the qualities corresponding to that altitude.
And with the Sun posited in an altitude of 30°, he multiplies the
horizontal heat by the cube 8 and the dryness by the square 4; at an
altitude of 60° he uses the cube 27 and the square 9; and at an alti-
1 But this conjecture is not true, except in desert regions. Elsewhere, it is gener-
ally cooler at night, but not excessively so.
2 The celestial sphere.
27

=== Page 30 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
tude of 90°, the cube 64 and the square 16, as is seen in his table,
for which he offers no [explanatory] reason.1
But finally, since the longer the Sun stays above the horizon
in the same altitude, the more it heats, having found the quantity of
heat from the altitude, he again multiplies it by the augment corre-
sponding to the diurnal stay2 of the Sun above the horizon, for
which thing he also has a table for the individual times from 1 hour
to 24. For example, (as we may use Offusius's own example), for
the Moon let it be given to be in perigee and elevated 65° above the
horizon; since in perigee it moistens by 121 degrees; and since ele-
vated by 65° (which from the table should be 10), it moistens by 10
times 121, that is by 1,210 degrees; and since it stays 16 hours
above the horizon (which from the table should be 9), it moistens
by 9 times 1,210, that is by 10,890 degrees.
Besides, the following considerations prove that no faith can
be had in these tables: first, because if the heat is augmented cubi-
cally, why is the cold only augmented by the square, since the
cold, especially in the winter and in northern places, is attended by
so much violence and is so intolerable that it kills plants, animals,
and sometimes men themselves, which the heat of the Sun even on
the equator does not do? Second, the increase of the quality by its
elevation above the horizon and by its stay cannot be observed
separately, because the elevation is never without a stay, and vice
versa. Third, it is absurd to multiply the qualities of the Moon
found in a given altitude by the whole diurnal stay of the Moon,
since that contains not only the elapsed time from the rising of the
Moon to its given altitude, but also the future time from its given
1 Offtjsius seems to have equated the number series 1, 2, 3, 4 with the angles 0°,
30°, 60°, and 90°. The cubes and squares of those numbers give the figures cited
by Morin from Offusius's table. If then we divide the angle 3.75° by 30° and add
1, we get 1.125; and if we cube and square that number, we get 1.4238 and
1.2656, which can be expressed fractionally as 1 and 217/512 and 1 and 17/64,
which are the numbers Morin cites for that elevation.
2 By "stay" Morin evidently means here the entire diurnal arc, i.e. twice the diur-
nal semi-arc; but below he more often seems to refer to its actual arc above the
horizon in a given instance.
28

=== Page 31 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
altitude to the Moon's setting, which time, because it has not yet
occurred, cannot increase its quality; and it will be an even more
serious an error if the altitude was in the east. On which account,
having [already] rejected these tables and methods of OfTusius, it
seems that we must also make the same judgment about these [the-
ories].
First, since with the Thermoscope (a most ingenious instru-
ment for measuring the heat and cold of the air)1 a most exact ob-
servation of the increase of the Sun's heat can be made through [a
period of] 4 or 5 hours, having noted the increases at each individ-
ual hour, and that on some sphere, especially on the right sphere,
on the day of the equinox; for that observation will stand as a foun-
dation and measurement for the oblique or parallel sphere,2 as will
be said below.
Then, since the altitude of the Sun above the horizon, and the
length of time of its rising up to that altitude and its diurnal time al-
ways concur, having made two observations, either in the same lo-
cation or in others, it should be noted that if the altitudes and the
times are the same in both observations, the diurnal will be the
same; [but] if the altitudes are the same and the times different, or
vice versa, the altitudes will be different. And indeed from these 3
[considerations], namely two of the times, two of the altitudes, and
two of the diurnal [times], if two of them agree in being equal, the
third should also agree, for otherwise the individual [numbers]
will be unequal.
Having established these principles, let the Sun be observed
on the equator on the day of the equinox and from two altitudes
taken of it, from the first and the third hour after its rising. The first
' That is, a device for measuring temperature differences. Originally, it was a
thermometer without a standard scale. It was devised by Italian scientists in the
late 1500s, and thermometers with graduated scales began to be made in the
1650s, but the Fahrenheit and Celsius scales with which we are familiar were not
invented until the early 18th century. Morin probably refers to an earlier device
with arbitrary scale markings.
2 The apparent sphere at a particular place.
29

=== Page 32 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
altitude will be 15°, and the second 45°. And because the diumal
[time] of the Sun is the same for both observations, the difference
of heat produced at both times can only arise from the difference of
stay and the difference of altitudes of the Sun above the horizon;
namely because the heat at each time is composed of the stay and
of the altitude of the Sun at that very time; consequently, it results
that the product from the altitude and the stay of the first time, i.e.
from 15° to 1, is namely 15 to the product of the altitude, and the
stay of the second time, i.e. 45° to 3, is namely 35.1 So, the increase
in heat from one hour from the rising (which is, for the sake of an
example, observed at 2/3 of a degree or 40') to another 3 will make
6 degrees of heat for the increase of heat at 3 hours from the rising
of the Sun; and such ought to be found by an observation with the
Thermoscope; therefore, if to this are added 3 degrees of heat con-
sistent with the Sun on the horizon and at about its mean distance,
9 degrees of heat are made, with which the Sun itself heats at the
second time. By the same reasoning, if the product of 15 to 1 is
made to 2/3, and the product from 90 to 6 to another; they will pro-
duce 24 degrees of heat for the increase when the Sun is in the ze-
nith itself of the right sphere.2 And thus with the others at the same
place on the same day, whatever the latitude of the place is, be-
cause the diumal [time] is also given to be the same, provided that
the observation of the increase of the heat is made for one or two
hours at the same place on the same day by the use of the
Thermoscope, as was done above for the right sphere, or taken at
the same altitude in the right and the oblique sphere; and the incre-
ment having been found in the right sphere, the increment should
be found proportionally in the oblique sphere, as we have already
shown above.
Therefore, [if] in different spheres the same altitudes of the
Sun are given at the same time, it is certain that the stay and the di-
umal times will be different, and moreover the proportion of the
heat will be found thus. So that the ratio of the stay of the Sun at its
1 We should presumably read 135 instead of 35.
21 do not understand these numbers.
30

=== Page 33 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
semidiurnal time in one sphere may be at the ratio of the stay of
the Sun at its semidiurnal time in another sphere, so the incre-
ment of the heat from the rising of the Sun in the first sphere may
be the increment of the heat in the second sphere. And with this in
mind, let the Sun be put in the right sphere and the parallel sphere
elevated 15 degrees above the horizon, its stay in the right sphere
will be 1 hour and the semidiurnal time 6 hours; consequently by
dividing the stay by the semidiurnal time, the ratio of the stay to
the semidiurnal time will be 1/6; but its stay in the parallel sphere
will be 41 days, and the semidiurnal time is 93 days. Therefore,
the ratio of the stay to the semidiurnal time is 41/93, therefore the
increment of heat from the rising of the Sun in the right sphere is
2/3 or 40?. And let there be made [the ratios] 1/6 to 41/93, so 2/3
to another; they will make 164/93 for the increment of the heat
from the rising of the Sun in the parallel sphere; that is, 1 degree
and 71/93.'
Again, let the Sun be put in those same spheres, elevated
23o30', which is the maximum altitude of the Sun in the parallel
sphere. The stay of the Sun in the right sphere will be 1 hour and 34
minutes or 94/60 hours, and the semidiurnal time is about 6 hours;
and therefore the ratio of the stay to the semidiurnal time will be
47/180; but the stay in the parallel sphere will be 93 days;2 and
consequently, the ratio of the stay to the semidiurnal time will be 1.
Since if the increment of the heat at the selected altitude in the right
sphere is 122/75 and it is made 74/780 to 1; so 122/75 to another
will make 6 162/805 for the maximum increment of heat in the par-
allel sphere or under the pole,3 which is certainly much more than
in the right sphere, not however beyond reason, having seen the di-
versity of the stays, nor from experience, since from Olaus
1 The ratios are like this: 2/3 is 4 times 1/6, so 4 times 41/93 is 164/93, which is 1
and 71/93.
2 That is the number of days required for the Sun to advance from the vernal equi-
nox to the summer solstice.
3 Some of these fractions are blurred in the Latin text, and I may not have read
them correctly. But if I have read them correctly, I do not understand them.
31

=== Page 34 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Magnus,1 [we read that] also among the Vestergoths2 in some
fields the barley gathered together at the end of June is collected
around the middle of August.
But if it would be as a product of the altitude and the stay in
the right sphere to a product of the altitude and the stay in the paral-
lel sphere, then the increment of the heat in the right sphere or
122/75 at the other, would produce more than 2,000 degrees of
heat for the increment in the parallel sphere, which cannot be, for
such an increment would be intolerable to every living thing, since
in the zenith itself of the right sphere the increment is only 24 de-
grees, as was made plain above.
In short, it must be concluded in the same manner, the Sun's
altitude having been given in the same place with different stays, if
in fact these can only happen on different days; consequently, hav-
ing previously found the semidiurnal times of the Sun for those
same days, the calculation by stays and semidiurnal times would
be as above; moreover, what we are saying here about the Sun and
its heat should also be understood to have been said about the cold
of the Moon and Saturn. For about moisture and dryness, in fact I
would not have dared to assert the same thing freely; and after all,
even if the things said above may seem to square sufficiently with
reason and experience, nevertheless, because in this matter we are
devoid of suitable observations, these matters must be entrusted to
the experiences of our successors, and it must suffice for us that we
have not wished to leave untouched this matter, which is not un-
pleasing, and not useless.
Next, two things must be noted here. First, the superior por-
tions of heat and cold are frequently perturbed by accidents of the
air, especially by winds, vapors, and exhalations. Second, this only
serves to determine how much of their own elemental strength the
planets pour forth into the air at any particular moment in time,
1 Olaus Magnus (1490-1558), Swedish ecclesiastic and author of Historia de
Gentibus Septentrionalibus 'History of the Northern Peoples' (Rome, 1555).
2 Probably the inhabitants of the old region of Vastergotland in Western Sweden,
not far below the Arctic Circle.
32

=== Page 35 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
which certainly should by no means be scorned; not, moreover, so
that the temperament of the child being bom and then of the man
may be known (which must be carefully noted), for this is not de-
termined solely by the qualities of the ambient, otherwise in the
harsh winter no one would be bom of a hot disposition, which goes
against experience, but with other causes unknown to Offusius, as
will be said in its own place. For the Sun does not act solely by its
own heat and dryness, which Offusius supposed, writing against a
decadent (as he calls it) astrology; otherwise, from a hot coal or a
glowing iron globe of the same magnitude as the Sun there could
be done whatever is accomplished by the Sun, but besides and es-
pecially it acts through the influences and its own substantial form,
the noblest of all material things, if you except the unique form of
the Primum Caelum;] the same thing must be said about the Moon,
which would only be taken for a globe of ice, then Saturn, which
would be taken for a globe of earth. And what we are saying here
about the particular celestial constitutions of men being bora, we
also want to be said about universal [charts] erected at the mo-
ments of eclipses, lunations, and the annual revolutions of the
world; for in all of these the planets operate influentially in accor-
dance with their own position in the zodiac, their position with re-
spect to the Sun and to the astrological houses, as will be shown in
its own place.
Therefore, having abandoned the [exact] manner of the incre-
ment, let us return to Ptolemy. In Book 1, chapter 6, he and the
other astrologers after him think that the elemental qualities of the
planets are increased and decreased by reason of their location
with respect to the Sun. And first about the Moon, Ptolemy wants
it to be moister from the conjunction to the first quarter; then to the
full Moon to heat more; thence to the second quarter to dry more;
and finally, to the new Moon to chill more. But the others make the
Moon in the first location to be hot but more moist; in the second,
1 The Primum Caelum, Latin for 'first sky', designates what the early astrono-
mers and astrologers considered to be the outermost sphere of the universe that
contained the signs of the zodiac. I have retained it as a technical term.
33

=== Page 36 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
dry but hotter; in the third, cold but dryer; and in the fourth, moist
but colder.
Next, it can be doubted whether the Moon from the first
square to the full Moon is truly hot and dry; for if it were, the prop-
erty of its elementary nature put down above will be altogether
changed, which it would be absurd to suppose; and this was not
Ptolemy's opinion, for he would have used the words increased
and decreased in vain. Therefore, it must be judged from his [ac-
count] that the proper qualities of the Moon, cold and moist, are in-
creased or decreased by similar things, or they are relaxed or im-
peded by contrary things, but not absolutely destroyed or weak-
ened. Whether and how that can be done, we shall look into below.
Therefore, let it be supposed that the Moon is full; then as
much of its cold can be released from that location if not formally,
at least effectively; it is not nevertheless entirely destroyed;
whereby, if we were to give to this location of the Moon 2 degrees
of heat, 2 degrees will seem to be a suitable measure of the princi-
pal or more intense quality of this location or quadrant of the
Moon; and half of that, namely 1 degree, will be the measure of the
other ones; consequently, such will be the qualities of the individ-
ual quadrants for the Moon, in accordance with which her proper
strengths are increased or decreased, at least effectively.
Hot Cold Moist Dry
From cf to 1st □ 1 2
From 1st □ to cP 2 1
From cP to 2nd □ 1 2
From 2nd □ to cf 2 1
But for the superior planets Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, he also
considers 4 locations or statuses with respect to the Sun; namely,
34

=== Page 37 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
from the conjunction to the first station;1 then from the opposition
to the Sun; then, at the second station;2 and finally at occultation;
to which he attributes the same qualities as those of the Moon.
Therefore, let it be supposed that Jupiter is [going] from its
2nd station to its occultation, where its heat and dryness are dis-
carded. And if at this location, which principally chills, it is given
1 degree of cold (lest the entire heat of Jupiter be destroyed), there
will be a 1 degree measure of intensified quality at this location,
and 30' will be the measure of the next one; consequently, such
will be the qualities of the individual locations.
Hot Cold Moist Dry
From cf to 1st Sta. 30' 60'
From 1st Sta. to <? 60' 30'
From cP to 2nd Sta. 30' 60'
From 2nd Sta. to cf 60' 30'
Others think that oriental planets increase their active
strengths and decrease their passive ones; but the occidental plan-
ets decrease their active strengths and increase their passive
strengths. But it would be better to say that in those locations those
qualities are increased and decreased, not indeed formally or in
themselves, but in their sublunar effects. But nevertheless, the way
that it is made difficult is to define it, as will be made plain below.
Moreover, what this location of the planets is will be made
plain here thus: if one of them is direct and preceding the Sun, that
one is [going] from conjunction to its first station; if it is retrograde
and preceding or dexter to the Sun, it is going from its first station
1 The first station is what we would call static retrograde or SRx.
2 The second station is what we would call static direct or SD.
35

=== Page 38 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
to opposition; if it is retrograde and following the Sun, it is going
from opposition to its second station; if it is direct and following
the Sun or is sinister to it, it is going from its second station to con-
junction [with the Sun].
Next, Ptolemy made no mention of Venus and Mercury, and
Proclus and Haly1 want to exclude them, because with respect to
us they can never come to an opposition of the Sun; and conse-
quently they cannot accurately receive the moderation—which
reason seems to be incongruous, since Mercury and Venus experi-
ence the same phases as the Moon with respect to us; and, like Sat-
urn, Jupiter, and Mars they are arranged about the Sun, [and are]
direct, stationary, and retrograde; whence, it seems agreeable [to
suppose] that they are subject to the laws of those [planets] rather
than to the laws of the Moon; having taken them in conjunction
with the Sun in the highest part of its own eccentric for the opposi-
tion, because with full light they are turned towards us, even
though being combust they are not then seen. But from the apogee
going on2 to the first station they arise in their vespertine rising;
and they are said to be oriental vespertine. From the first station or
being vespertine, where they are greatly elongated from the Sun,
they go on to perigee, and they fall into their vespertine setting. Af-
ter their perigee, they arise in their matutine rising, extending to
the second station, which is called matutine. After which, repeat-
ing their apogee, they are hidden again, or they set in a matutine
setting. Consequently, from opposition to the Sun to conjunction
with the Sun, or from apogee to perigee, they rise and set vesper-
tine', but from conjunction to opposition, they rise and set
matutine', and in the latter case they are said to be oriental to the
Sun, and in the former case occidental to the Sun. Moreover, the
oriental [planets] increase their own elemental qualities, but the
occidental [planets] decrease them; and the same with the influen-
1 Probably Haly Abenragel or 'AH ibn abi al-Rijal (11th century), Liber complete
de iudiciis astrorum 'The Complete Book on the Judgments of the Stars' (Venice:
J. B. Sessa, 1503 et al).
2 Reading pergentes 'going on' rather than per gen tes 'by the peoples'. A simple
typographical error.
36

=== Page 39 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
tial [qualities]. And it should be judged in the same way about
them by their stations, just as with Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars,
Moreover, Venus is retrograde oriental from the conjunction to the
first station; direct and oriental from the first station to the opposi-
tion; direct occidental from the opposition to the second station;
and retrograde occidental from the second station to the conjunc-
tion.
Besides, in addition to the four superior stations of the plan-
ets, Cardan adds a fifth; namely, when the Moon and the other
planets are hidden under the Sun; in which status Cardan takes all
their force away from them, so that, if I may use his words, "they
can do absolutely nothing." But from this a significant error is pre-
served in astrology—that combust planets (as they call them) are
of no strength at all; and they do nothing with respect to these
lower things while they are in that state; but they only begin to act,
when first emerging from under the Sun's beams, they begin to
shine on us in the morning or in the evening, which error, from an-
other one by Cardan and others, has led to a more serious one, be-
cause (as they will have it) all the force of the stars depends upon
their light; and consequently, they do not affect us if they don't
shine upon us. But besides that in Book 11, Chapter 13, it was
shown by us that there is no force in the light of the stars except for
illuminating, the planets under the Sun are at least hardly at all de-
prived of their own strengths of acting, and we shall prove for them
that they also act then, when the discussion will be about eclipses
and combust planets; and especially in the case of Mercury, which
is nearly always combust, and yet they always attribute effects to
it, plainly asserting with a ridiculous exception that it is "accus-
tomed to combustion or occultation." For the moment, it must be
stated here that Cardan is deceived on his fifth status that he tried
to deduce from Ptolemy, contrary to the latter's words and opin-
ion. For Ptolemy will plainly have the first status of the Moon to
begin from its conjunction with the Sun, and the first status of Sat-
urn, Jupiter, and Mars from the moment when they become
matutine, i.e. when the Sun departs from their conjunction; but
also the last status of the Moon and Saturn will end at their
37

=== Page 40 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
occultation—that must be understood as the mean occultation, or
the mean moment of time of the whole occultation, which occurs
in their conjunction with the Sun. And consequently there will be
only four status positions, [which is] also according to the opinion
of the rest of the astrologers. But if Ptolemy thought otherwise,
then certainly in this too, as in many other things he was wrong.
Ptolemy's doctrine thus expounded, must now it seems be
subjected to the examination of reason, and that more coura-
geously, because to confirm it by evident experiences, I know is
very much more difficult. First, therefore, if the elemental natures
of the planets are increased or decreased according to their diverse
location with respect to the Sun, either formally as Ptolemy and the
old astrologers seem to have thought; or only effectively as it
seems to us, it is necessary that that effect is either from the Sun it-
self or from the quantity of light apparent to us that is received by
those planets from the Sun or from the status itself; but already the
cold of Saturn is increased by the Sun, or the heat of Mars is de-
creased, as it is supposed in the third status, but especially in the
fourth status, in which both planets are nearer to the Sun; [but] this
is absolutely alien to the nature of the Sun itself, which is also said
by Cardan to be hot according to its substance and according to its
impressed (as he calls it) quality. But it cannot be from the quantity
of its light [that is] apparent to us, both because the light only illu-
minates and does not do anything else, as has been proved by us;
and then, because it is absurd that by that light, [that is] the same in
nature and quantity (as it is in the first and fourth status), heat and
cold [which are] contrary qualities are also produced. Therefore,
since this diversity of effect from the Sun or from its light cannot
be sought from the same amount of determination, it seems to re-
main that it must be sought from the location, which is indeed dif-
ferent in the statuses of the individual planets. But that it cannot be
from the location is proved thus: for the dexter site nearer to the
Sun would be cold for the Moon and hot for Saturn—consequently
hot and cold at the same time; indeed that site coincides with the
first site of Saturn, which heats, and the fourth of the Moon, which
chills. But the same site cannot be cold and hot at the same time.
38

=== Page 41 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
Someone might argue that this is indeed true with respect to heat,
but not of diverse [bodies] such as Saturn and the Moon; but first
the nature of the site must be inquired into, viewed [solely] in it-
self, and not with respect to different [bodies], for whatever that
nature is will be participated in by the planets. Then Saturn and
Mars, even though diverse in nature, are nevertheless affected in
the same manner by the same site above; consequently, the argu-
ment is not valid; and he will not come forward again to argue it.
Consequently, the cold of Saturn is decreased in the first status be-
cause not much after its rising above the horizon there follows the
rising of the Sun pouring out a huge amount of heat, by which the
cold of Saturn itself is reduced; whence, that status can be said to
be hot; for it would follow that at least in the second status, espe-
cially around the opposition, the cold of Saturn is reduced less be-
cause between its rising and that of the Sun there is a greater dis-
tance of time, but on the contrary it must be reduced more, because
the second status is assigned to be hotter than the first. Whence,
therefore, it is plain that neither the Sun, nor its light, nor the site it-
self is inherently the cause of those contrary qualities.
Only one thing [then] is left that can at least probably be of-
fered for the defense of those four statuses—namely, their analogy
with the four parts of the year and the day; for as the Sun revolves
around the Earth in its annual and diurnal motion, and each revolu-
tion is divided into four parts or quadrants that are diverse in tem-
perature, so all the planets with respect to the Sun exhibit to us the
appearance of a certain revolution, when they arise from [beneath]
its rays, they set in them, and they are allotted intermediate sta-
tuses. Consequently, so many effects are produced by the planets,
which can only be referred to an analogy, e.g. that the ruler of the
MC swift and direct signifies swiftness and continuation of ac-
tions; but on the contrary, slow and retrograde it indicates slow-
ness and interruption; so the first status of the Moon and the rest of
the planets in temperature or in nature, corresponds by analogy
with Spring or with the first part of the day from the rising of the
Sun towards noon, which corresponds to more intensity of mois-
ture and less intensity of heat; the second status corresponds with
39

=== Page 42 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Summer or the second part of the day from noon to the setting of
the Sun, corresponding to more intense heat and less dryness. The
third [corresponds] with Autumn or the third part of the
day—more intense dryness and less intense cold; and finally the
fourth status corresponds with Winter or the fourth part of the day
from midnight to the rising of the Sun, corresponding to more in-
tense cold and less intense dryness.
And so, therefore, the cold of the Moon from new Moon to the
opposition will be tempered by a twofold cause; namely, from the
first and second statuses of the Moon, which are hot; then from the
heat of the Sun, which is received both on its own surface and on
its very vast craters,1 with its light reflecting upon these lower [re-
gions], especially at [the time of] full Moon, when those craters are
filled by a fuller and denser light, appearing like glowing furnaces.
Moreover, from full Moon to new Moon, the Moon returns to her
cold, which is also in the fourth status increased in its effect. And
the same thing must be judged about the rest of the planets reflect-
ing in their own measure the light and heat of the Sun on these
lower [regions], although that heat even like the proper heat of
Mars is absolutely imperceptible to us by our senses alone.
Finally, the qualities assigned above to each status must be
understood to agree with it, not in the beginning but in the end or
the completion of its status, e.g. the Moon there after the conjunc-
tion is not hot as a [degree] 1 and moist as a [degree] 2, but only at
that instant when she reaches the square, gradually acquiring those
qualities in the intermediate time; and when two statuses adjacent
to each other are opposite in any quality, there is only a successive
change to the following quality before having gradually lost the
previous opposite one; therefore, as the qualities and the times of
the statuses are proportional to each other, so there must be a ratio
for that proportion, since the forces of the planets will be exactly
1 Morin is referring to the craters (he calls them in Latin cavitates 'hollows') on
the surface of the Moon, some of which have "rays" emanating from them. At full
Moon some of the craters appear brighter than their surroundings. They would
appear especially bright to an observer using a telescope.
40

=== Page 43 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
defined. Where, nevertheless, it must be noted that when we say
here that the Moon is made hot by 1 [degree] and moist by 2 [de-
grees], it must be understood that the cold is reduced by 1 degree
but the moisture increased by 2 degrees, not formally or intrinsi-
cally, but only accidentally and extrinsically by reason of the
sublunar effects. And so it is with the rest [of the planets]. And
nevertheless, we judge that much less certainty and efficacy ought
to be assigned to that cause than to the signs under which they are
seen and with which the planets themselves act with their elemen-
tal strength.
Besides, since it was said above that the four statuses preserve
an analogy with the four parts of the year and the day, here it must
be noted in addition that the elemental forces of the planets seem
not to be increased or decreased obscurely in those same parts of
the year and the day according to their nature. For Mars in the
Summer above the Earth at the hour around noon heats and dries
more intensely; and Saturn in the Winter above the Earth during
nocturnal hours chills more intensely; therefore, if Mars is in the
first status with regard to the Sun, above the Earth by day, at an
hour around noon in the summertime, still much more intensely
will it heat and dry; and the same reasoning applies to the rest [of
the planets]. But because the parts of the year and the day are
caused by the Sun and the Earth, the former of which is hot, but the
latter cold; both of them, moreover, pour out their own force into
the air, as was said about the Earth in Book 3, Section 1, Chapter
10. Consequently, it must rather be asserted that from the mutual
concourse of qualities, of the Sun, the Earth and any other planet,
there arises in the air a mixed constitution, in which each one acts
differently in accordance with its strengths; so it must be thought
to increase its strength by the nature of a similar companion and to
decrease it with a dissimilar one; and consequently the previous
notion of the constitution of the air can be allowed and must not be
rejected; and it is plain that the above said increase and decrease of
the proper elemental nature of the planets is not formally or intrin-
sically theirs, but only accidentally from the cause mentioned
above, and extrinsic by reason of the increased or decreased effect
41

=== Page 44 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
on these lower things, which must indeed be noted. Therefore, Ju-
piter will be better in its rising; Mars at the MC lower for heat and
dryness; Saturn in its setting lower for cold and dryness; and the
Moon in the IMC lower for cold and moistness.
Chapter 4.
The Ethereal Nature of the Planets in General.
This has hitherto become known to very few, or rather I
should say to no one, and less to astrologers than to the rest of the
philosophers; for the former, addicted to the elemental and influ-
ential nature as being the better known, omitted the less known
ethereal nature, especially because the planets are mixed bodies,
and they did not think that the ethereal nature predominates in
them. But now, since we have proved this to be so in Book 9,
Chapters 4 & 5, it may rightly be inferred that just as they
strengthen the elemental nature by an elemental mixture, so do
they strengthen the ethereal nature by an ethereal mixture; and
since Plato, Aristotle, and the Princes of Medicine also discovered
this in sublunar mixtures, indeed in the seed of an animal, and con-
sequently in the humors from which the seed is made, how much
more will it be necessary to give precedence to the ethereal mix-
tures? Moreover, its strength in man is detected most powerfully in
those same spirits and humors, then in those parts that the faculties
of the humors and spirits productive of them occupy; for in these,
besides the elemental qualities, the force that is in the forces of the
elements is superior according to Aristotle and corresponds to the
element of the stars, and by reason of its similitude for the various
status and motion of the planets, those humors, spirits, and facul-
ties experience various motions and dispositions, as especially
from seed and lust; then from the diverse status of Venus and the
motion over the vital places of Venus in the nativity of a man, it is
permitted to observe [them], and so also about the bile and the iras-
cible appetite; then about Mars in [the nativity of] a bilious man;
and so on with the rest [of the planets].
42

=== Page 45 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
Next, this ethereal nature is simple and unique and the same in
all the planets because the ether is unique in all of them; and yet it
is not of the same strength in all of them, because the ether is inher-
ently duplex, as was said in Book 2, Section 2, Chapter 2. And
compared with the rest of the principal materials by which a planet
is made of its associated form; it also receives its formal strength
very readily before the rest; and consequently there is in Saturn
[strength] of the Saturnine nature, only acting in accordance with
the Saturnine nature; in Jupiter [strength] in accordance with the
Jupiterean [nature], and so on with the rest of them; which cannot
be said of the elemental qualities of the planets, which act accord-
ing to their own strengths, not, moreover, in accordance with the
formal [strengths] that are in the planets, as is shown by our sensa-
tion from the heat of the Sun, which bums like a sublunar fire.
Chapter 5.
The Celestial Nature of the Planets in General.
By whatever ratio the elemental and ethereal nature is in the
planets, the same celestial nature is in them—namely, by reason of
a mixture; moreover, the latter nature, since it is more divine than
the others, also produces more divine effects. For since the planets
have a participation in the prime physical cause (that is, in the Pri-
mum Caelum), which eminently contains all the forms of things,
and is all powerful in nature, so the individual planets have from it,
that which can do something in any generation and can evoke the
corporeal forms of things on the worldly stage; and in any mutable
physical body they can do whatever is naturally possible, as will
be proved in its own place. Moreover, there is also in these planets,
arising from that same celestial nature, that marvelous faculty that
they say is universally influential, from which so many stupendous
things happen, especially of their own kind—good fortune, mis-
fortune, and other various accidents that unskilled philosophers
think occur beyond reason and [merely] by chance, not because
this faculty of the planets themselves is not greatly appropriate to
43

=== Page 46 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
the forms, for their formal strength is different in the individual
things for which they are specifically distinguished among them-
selves, but because this combines with these same forms by reason
of the mixture of the celestial material; for the forms of the individ-
ual mixtures and their formal strengths are only given to mixtures,
and to those in keeping with their proportions.
Chapter 6.
What the Planets Do with their Individual Natures.
Therefore, from what was said above, it is plain that the plan-
ets by their own elemental strength alter the alterable bodies ele-
mentarily, of course by heating, cooling, humidifying, desiccat-
ing, and other things that follow from those, such as by causing
open texture, lightness, etc.
But the ethereal nature causes the spirits and faculties to
change, to arouse, and to direct themselves to the performance of
their proper duties. For the spirits and the faculties are not inher-
ently subject to the action of the elements, since they are such as
are not suited to be heated or chilled, to be moistened or dried;
which are the proper effects of the elements; therefore, the spirits
and the faculties ought to be subject to another higher cause, to
which they are more comparable, and by which they can experi-
ence their own alterations, since it is necessary that they be sub-
jected to an alteration and to motions proper to themselves, be-
cause GOD alone is immutable. Whence it is deduced that if in-
deed the force of acting directly upon the mental faculties is inher-
ent in the elements, [then] much less do they act upon the
substantial forms—those, namely of generating and corrupt-
ing—so that those [writers] are [merely] chattering, who contend
that everything is done by contrary qualities, since of the forms it
is far more noble, sublime, and remote from the elementary nature
than from the faculties, and the latter depend upon the former.
Finally, by the celestial nature the forms of things are led out
of the darkness into the light; consequently, they generate and cor-
44

=== Page 47 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
rupt individual things; and they perform marvelous effects of in-
fluences. So that consequently in mixed sublunar things, the mate-
rial is from the elements; moreover, its sensible alteration results
from them and from the elemental nature of the planets, but the
spirits and the faculties of the body and their motions result from
the ether and from the ethereal nature of the planets; but their
forms are from the Caelum and the celestial nature of the stars,
since they release those lying latent or bound up in seeds, and they
compel them to come forth onto the worldly scene. So, neverthe-
less, anything a planet does will be related to the specific nature of
the planet, as much as it can be. Consequently, it may be said that
Saturn acts in a Satumian manner, Jupiter in a Jovian manner, and
so on with the rest [of the planets]. Consequently, moreover, it was
necessary for the planets to be able to act in an elementary manner,
so that they could supply the forces of the elements in the mean-
time—one of which is when a storm, which per se is destructive of
all living things, as is plain from the coldest winter, by which crops
on Earth and under snowstorms, then the fish under glacial waters,
especially around the poles, for this reason live, because the ele-
mental ethereal nature of the planets supplies the deficit of the ele-
ments, and thus fosters and preserves living things.
But besides the superior natures, the elementary, ethereal, and
celestial ones, which are only the qualities of the planets coming to
them from the mixture, there is also a proper substantial form for
each one of them, by which the individuals differ specifically
among themselves, to which the above said natures are subordi-
nated in acting—indeed, to be the principal cause of all the ef-
fects—at least of those that exceed the proper effectiveness of the
elementary qualities—and from which substantial form there
flows forth the primary or formal strength of each planet, concern-
ing which, what it is was stated in Book 12, Section 3, Chapters 1
& 2.
45

=== Page 48 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
SECTION II
The Various Divisions of the Planets.
Chapter 1.
Masculine and Feminine Planets.
The planets are formally said to be masculine or feminine
from their more effective or weaker proper force of acting, or from
their masculine or feminine effects, which in accordance with the
diversity of their own nature and status they produce on these
sublunar things, although by reason of the celestial material, of
which they are composed, they are eminently masculine and at the
same time feminine.
Firstly, therefore, a planet is formally said to be masculine or
feminine from its own self or from its proper nature; and so the
masculine ones are those in which the active qualities predominate
over the passive qualities, according to our Table in Section I,
Chapter 2. For action particularly pertains to males. And the Sun,
Satum, Jupiter, and Mars are of that sort, for in the Sun, Jupiter,
and Mars heat is dominant, and in Satum cold is dominant; and
consequently, it is especially from these planets that the major
changes are made in the world, as is known to astrologers. But the
feminine planets are those in which the passive qualities prevail
over the active ones; and the Moon and Venus, in which wetness
exceeds, are of that sort. But Mercury is commonly believed to be
twofold both in its nature and also in its sex, nevertheless easily
convertible into either sex by [the action of] some other source.
Truly, since dryness prevails in it—a passive quality—it seems
that it must rather be referred to the feminine sex than to the mas-
culine sex; and its color does not hinder this, since it is sometimes
red, and therefore appears to be masculine, since that redness is
from the denser vapors and exhalations near the horizon, where
Mercury is commonly only seen, and in which when all the other
planets are located there, they are seen to be more reddish, espe-
cially if an exhalation of vapor prevails. Next, it is plain here that
46

=== Page 49 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
we are departing from the opinion of Ptolemy; both because he
makes Mercury to be of a duplex nature, which it is plain here is
feminine; and then because he has not distinguished the mascu-
line sex from the feminine one in general by active and passive
qualities, but only by the heat that he attributes to the masculine
sex and the humor that he attributes to the feminine sex, although
Saturn is nevertheless masculine to him, even though it is the
coldest of all.
Second. The planets are said to be or to be made masculine
or feminine by an accidental formality, due to extrinsic causes,
for instance from their own location with respect to the Sun and
the Moon. Since those that are oriental to the Sun and occidental
to the Moon are said to be masculine, but those that are occidental
to the Sun and oriental to the moon are feminine—namely, be-
cause of the greater strength of the planets in the former status
and the lesser strength in the latter. Moreover, those are oriental
to the Sun who are not distant from the Sun itself by 6 signs or
180, and it is their strongest status, since first they emerge from
[under] the Sun's rays, and they are seen to rise before it in the
morning in about a semi-sextile aspect. But those are occidental
from which the Sun is distant in the order of the signs by less than
180o. And it is their worse and weaker status, since they go under
the rays of the Sun, by which, but especially in [orb of] conjunc-
tion of the Sun, their force is greatly weakened by the super emi-
nent strength and heat of the Sun, by which the forces of the other
planets seem to be absorbed as it were and devoured, but not by
the light, as has been believed hitherto, since no effect besides il-
lumination coincides with the light; consequently, Cardan [says]
badly in his Commentary, Book 1, Chapter 6, Text 33, and after
him Origanus' and many others, that the planets are oriental by
day, therefore they think that they are weaker, and all the stars
lose their forces because they are obscured by the presence of the
1 David Origanus (1558-1628), German mathematics professor and astrologer.
His book Astrologia naturalis ... 'Natural Astrology ...' was published at Mar-
seilles in 1645 and was thus one of the most recent books cited by Morin in the
Astrologia Gallica.
47

=== Page 50 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Sun's light. For granted this, a diurnal planet above the Earth by
day would be weaker than at night—indeed, all the planets would
be stronger by day under the Earth than above it, which is by ex-
perience and reason absolutely alien to the opinion of all astrolo-
gers. And so, the planets are weakened by their approach, at least
their near approach, to the Sun, but they are said to increase their
strengths by their departure [from the Sun], because they are re-
stored to their former [strengths]. But the rest of the planets are
[also] made oriental and occidental to the Moon, just as to the
Sun; but they are affected otherwise by those positions. For they
are said to be strengthened by their approach to the Moon and
weakened by their departure [from it]—namely, from the two
lights arranged around the Earth,1 that is the Sun and the Moon,
the latter, by the forces of the Earth and the Sun and of nature, is
more affected than the Sun, since both the Moon and the Earth
are opaque bodies illuminated solely by the Sun; consequently,
when they come together to act upon the Earth, those planets are
helped by the Moon, but not hindered; whence, they are rightly
said to be strengthened by its approach and weakened by its sepa-
ration.
Third. Planets are [made] masculine or feminine by their own
location with respect to the horizon and the meridian, which cir-
cles, since they divide the circumference of the whole Caelum into
4 quadrants, and the one of these that from the rising on the hori-
zon comes to the summit of the Caelum, predominates in heat; the
one following, from the summit of the Caelum down to the setting,
in dryness; then from the setting to the IMC, in cold; and thence to
the rising, in moistness; just as they manifest these things to our
sense by the time of day and night. From this it is [plain] that the
planets, in the quadrants which the active qualities heat and cold
preside over, may be said to be masculine; and those [in the quad-
rants] which the passive qualities preside over may be said to be
1 Remember that Morin had adopted Tycho's hypothesis of the solar system, in
which the Earth was fixed in the center of the universe, and both the Sun and the
Moon revolved around it.
48

=== Page 51 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
feminine. If indeed from the predominating quality the sex of each
quarter is in accordance with the reason mentioned above, which
Cardan, Origanus, and others are not perceiving, [for] they have
thought up absurd reasons from right, and from oblique ascen-
sions, which it is known do not have any place in the right sphere;
and Cardan much more absurdly makes the stars to ascend from
the 7th house to the 4th, and to descend from the 4th to the ASC,
which is repugnant to sense.
Fourth. Finally, the planets are [made] masculine or feminine
by their position in the signs of the zodiac, which neither Ptolemy
nor the rest of the astrologers after him remarked; and in this they
erred no little; for if these planets, by reason of their position in the
houses of the celestial figure become masculine or feminine, how
much more and more effectively [is this done] by reason of their
location in the signs of the zodiac, which along with the planets act
upon these lower things, and they are formally determined to the
natures of the planets - indeed, some of those are masculine and
some are feminine, as Ptolemy himself declared in Book 1, Chap-
ter 12, along with all the rest of the astrologers. Therefore, any
planet in a masculine sign, Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra, Sagittarius,
or Aquarius may be said to be made masculine, but in the rest of
the signs [that are] feminine, [they are made] feminine.
Next, it must be known about the planets, that [if they are] by
nature masculine in a wholly masculine status, they will give forth
illustrious effects of a masculine nature, and similarly [those] with
a feminine nature in a wholly feminine status, will produce illustri-
ous effects of a feminine nature; but masculine planets in a femi-
nine status, or feminine planets in a masculine status, produce
mixed effects, that more or less share a masculine or feminine na-
ture by reason of the predominance of one or the other sex in that
case; and so from Saturn or Mars made feminine, or Venus made
masculine, badly afflicted anywhere, monsters are often gener-
ated.
49

=== Page 52 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Chapter 2.
Diurnal and Nocturnal Planets.
After Ptolemy, in Book I, Chapter 6, divided the planets into
masculine and feminine [categories] from an intrinsic cause,
namely from their proper nature; then from an extrinsic cause,
namely from their position with respect to the Sun and the quad-
rants of the celestial figure; in the following Chapter 7,1 he divided
them again into diumal and nocturnal [planets] but by a very con-
fused logic. For not intrinsically and by their own nature, since
they agree more on the qualities of day and night; and not extrinsi-
cally as they happen to be by day or night; but when they are pos-
ited above the horizon [by] day or night, do they make their effects
more temperate with respect to man. And thus Saturn affects the
day and Mars the night, so that the immoderate dryness of the latter
is tempered by the moistness of the night, but the excessive cold of
the former is tempered by the heat of the day.
But that Ptolemy, Cardan, and their followers erred in this, is
made plain by this: that just as in the division of the planets by sex,
Ptolemy considered the intrinsic and extrinsic causes of that sex.
So it must also be done here; consequently, for dividing the planets
into the categories of a diurnal and nocturnal sect; they must [for
example] be termed diumal from an intrinsic cause, or from their
own nature in which the active qualities predominate—of this sort
are the Sun, Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, and so they are rendered
masculine and diumal. For [if this was] not being determined by
the proper natures of the planets, it must be considered how that
departure in them would be regulated—that since it is [something]
extrinsic to them, and he supposes that it is intrinsic, but such
[sexes] are inherent in them; otherwise, it would have to have been
11 have added the Book number, and I have corrected the Chapter numbers from
4 and 5 to 6 and 7 to agree with F.E. Robbins's edition and translation of the
Tetrabiblos (Cardan uses a Latin version that numbers them differently). Hereaf-
ter I will correct Morin's chapter references to agree with the numbering in Rob-
bins's edition. The other reference is to Cardan's Commentary, Book I, Chapter
4, Text XXXI (p. 126, col, 2).
50

=== Page 53 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
said for the sex of Mars that it is masculine when it is occidental to
the Sun and in the fourth [quadrant] of the figure from the IMC to
the A SC. Indeed Cardan himself, who frequently wavers in his
own opinions, in Book 1, Text 42, says that Mars is truly diurnal
inherently. And the same logic applies to the Moon, Venus, and
Mercury [as being] nocturnal planets.
Furthermore, this doctrine is truer and more in accord with the
dogmas of astrology, because in Genesis, Chapter 1, (in which the
principal fundamentals of astrology are contained in very few
words) it is said, "GOD made the two great lights, the greater light
that it might rule over the day, and the lesser light that it might rule
over the night, and the stars that they might rule over the day and
the night."1 By the stars, in Hebrew chochavvim,2 are understood
to be the five lesser planets, for chocha among the Hebrews signi-
fies a wandering and dominating star; and that name is attributed
by many rabbis in particular to Mercury, although in many places
in the sacred scriptures chochavvim also signifies fixed stars or all
the stars, except the Sun and the Moon, indiscriminately.
But although it is common to all the planets to shine upon the
Earth, and so to divide the light from the darkness according to the
property of each of them, or with their borrowed light, as it is held
in that same chapter; nevertheless, it is not therefore principally
said that the Sun is to rule the day because it does that; for why
would the Moon be said to rule the night, and the rest of the planets
1 Genesis 1:16, but Morin has added some words at the end! Jerome's version ac-
tually reads "...and the lesser light that it might rule over the night, and [he also
made] the stars." In the Latin, the words are nocti 'night' and Stellas 'stars', but
nocti is in the dative case as the object ofpraeesset 'might rule', while Stellas is in
the accusative case and is not the object of praeesset, but rather the object of
Fecitque Deus 'And God made' at the beginning of the sentence. The modem
translations from the Hebrew agree with that construction, and the Septuagint,
the Greek translation from the early Hebrew made in the second century B.C.
reads .. . kai tons asteras 'and [also] the stars', again in the accusative case. So
the Biblical text does not say that the stars rule over the day and night. However,
having adopted the extended reading, Morin discusses the stellar rulership at
length in the succeeding paragraphs.
2 In the modem transcription, ko-khav and ko-khawim, 'star' and 'stars'.
51

=== Page 54 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
the day and the night, since neither the Moon nor the rest of the
planets make the day or the night, but the day and the night are
only due to [the presence or] the absence of the Sun, the day indeed
from its presence above the horizon? And similarly, it is not be-
cause the Sun illuminates the Earth by day, and the Moon illumi-
nates it by night; for the rest of the planets are said to rule over the
day and they do not illuminate the Earth by day. It only remains
therefore to be understood that the Sun must consequently be said
to rule the day principally because it rules its diurnal effects, and
the Moon the night because it rules the nocturnal ones; but the rest
of the planets [rule] the day and the night because they rule both.
Moreover, to rule the diurnal effects is nothing else than to rule
those that principally depend upon that planet that is said to rule
them, as far as that is done or it is, or the planet itself concurs with
them primarily. Whence, according to astrological doctrine, the
Septuagint has rightly interpreted [the Hebrew text to read] "GOD
made the Sun to rule the day, the Moon to rule the night, and the
stars to rule the day and night;"1 that is, the diurnal and nocturnal
effects, namely those that happen by day or night.
Nevertheless, it must not be thought that the Sun itself rules
alone over the diurnal effects, and that they are therefore all ruled
by the Sun, and the nocturnal effects only by the Moon; for [other-
wise] it would be said in vain that the day and night are ruled by the
rest of the planets, by each of which many things are done both by
day and by night, as experience proves; but between these and the
lights there is this difference; that by the lights and the rest of the
planets that are above the Earth, the former generally rule primar-
1 Morin refers to the Septuagint as Version 70. But as mentioned in a previous
note, the Septuagint does not agree with the text that Morin gives. It reads Kai
epoiesen 'o Theos tous duo phosteras tous megalous, ton phostera ton ntegan eis
archas tes hemeras, kai ton phostera ton elasso eis archas tes nyktos, kai tous
asteras 'And God made the two great lights, the great light for rulership of the
day, and the lesser light for the rulership of the night, and [he also made] the
stars', which is virtually the same as Jerome's Latin version. And neither one of
them says anything about the stars ruling the day and night. We may wonder
whether Morin either accidentally or deliberately misread the biblical text.
58

=== Page 55 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
ily, and the rest only secondarily. Which is the reason why in ce-
lestial figures astrologers always want to consider the way in
which a lesser planet that is the significator of any particular thing
is related to the Light of the Time, i.e. to the Sun by day and to the
Moon by night, if that was above the horizon (for below, the Light
of the Time will be looked for in vain1). Namely, whether it is ori-
ental or occidental to that Light. Indeed, Ptolemy, in Book 2,
Chapter 8, will have it "that the Sun and the Moon are the gover-
nors of the other stars and the principal causes of events, and they
manage the rulerships of the stars, and the powers of the ruling
[planets] either strengthen or weaken them," where "by the stars"
he means also the lesser planets that rule the effects.
Again, it must not be thought that the Sun only rules diumal
effects, but in no way the nocturnal ones, and the Moon only the
nocturnal ones, but not at all the diumal ones, because that is in-
consistent with the tmest aphorisms of the Sun's [influence when]
it is under the Earth, from which, nevertheless, experience proves
that it does have an influence upon the native, as well as does the
Moon posited by day above the Earth. But since a planet can rule
three ways—namely, by presence, by aspect, and by particular rul-
ership; and moreover, the Sun can rule by the latter two both by
day and by night, but by its own presence only by day; therefore,
from the rule [given] for the Sun and all the planets, it is manifest
that in the sacred writings, and among the old astrologers, it rules
the day, the Moon rules the night, but in fact the rest of the planets
are said to rule day and night only by reason of their presence, as it
is felt that the Sun by day and the Moon by night primarily rule by
their own presence, or that they rule generally, but the rest rule by
day and by night only secondarily, unless both lights should be un-
der the Earth; for then anyone of the rest of the planets can rule pri-
marily by its own presence above the horizon at night. And each
planet can by its own presence rule by its light, either its own as in
the case of the Sun, or only its shared light, as in the case of the
1 This is an additional restriction that Morin has placed upon the Light of Time,
since other authors merely state that it is the Sun by day and the Moon by night.
53

=== Page 56 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Moon and the rest of the planets; then, by their elemental qualities
and by their influence; and the same planet can also rule by means
of some particular effect, at the same time as it rules by its pres-
ence, its aspect, and some particular rulership.
But, having explained these things, it must now be sought
why by its presence the Sun only rules the day, and the Moon only
rules the night, [but] Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury
rule the day and the night? For if it was according to Ptolemy's
opinion that the Sun is of a masculine nature, and the Moon is of a
feminine one; and the day, moreover, agrees more with the mascu-
line nature, or with active qualities, and the night with feminine or
passive qualities; therefore, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and
Mercury will consequently rule the day and the night, because
some of them are of a masculine nature, and likewise of a feminine
nature; although in Chapter 1 we have said that only Saturn, Jupi-
ter, and Mars are masculine, but Venus and Mercury are feminine.
But for what reason will he have it that the Sun is only masculine,
and the Moon only feminine, but the rest of them are masculine
and feminine at the same time? And how will this apparent contra-
diction be reconciled?
It should be remembered from Book 9, Section 2, Chapter 5,
that all the planets are bodies mixed together from the elements,
the ether, and celestial material; and from Chapter 6 that the forces
or natures of these miscible characteristics remain in the mixed ac-
tion; and finally from Book 3, Section 3, Chapter 3, that the celes-
tial material is eminently hot, cold, moist, or dry. Which having
supposed, it seems that it must now be stated from the substantial
forms of the Sun and the Moon what are most powerful in the rest
of the forms of the planets, whose celestial material, by reason of
being eminently hot, cold, moist, or dry, is totally impelled and de-
termined to an actual or formal elementary nature that is conform-
able to their bodies. And so the Sun in all of its own intrinsic nature
is only of the nature of fire, the masculine sex, and the diumal sect,
but the Moon is only of the nature of water, the feminine sex, and
the nocturnal sect; but in the case of the other planets, Saturn, Jupi-
54

=== Page 57 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
ter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, whose substantial forms are infe-
rior in strength and dignity, or in which by approaching more to
the Caelum than do the Sun and the Moon, there is proportionately
more of the celestial material; this was, indeed, determined by
their forms to an actual elemental nature conformable to their
forms, but not totally impelled to it; and consequently, each one of
them in its own total intrinsic is not of only a single elemental na-
ture, but of a twofold and contrary one; of which one is formally
within them, or by the action of a predominating elemental min-
gling, but the other only eminently from the celestial material not
impelled within. Or it can also be said that in the case of the Sun its
nature is formally fiery, and in the case of the Moon it is formally
watery (especially when they are conjoined with similars), in fact
strong and predominating, so that the contraries in them are emi-
nently of no strength or efficacy. But in the lesser planets the for-
mally dominant elemental natures, are not so strong that the con-
trary ones are not eminently effective.
So, therefore, Mars from its celestial material is eminently
hot, cold, moist, and dry, but since from the predomination of the
elemental mixture it is formally hot, dry, or fiery (to which nature
its celestial material was determined by its substantial form, but
not thoroughly impelled), this will, therefore, be its principal or
predominating nature—namely, the one that it contains eminently
and formally; and consequently the rest, namely cold and moist or
watery, will be less important for it, namely for that which it con-
tains only eminently; for Mars does not have more than these two
natures on account of its eminent heat and dryness, which were de-
termined to a fiery nature by Mars's form; whence, the airy and
earthy [natures] are suppressed in it. And by a similar reasoning,
Saturn will be formally cold, dry, and eminently hot and moist; Ju-
piter hot and dry formally, but cold and moist eminently; Venus
formally hot and moist, but eminently cold and dry; and finally
Mercury, formally cold and dry, but eminently hot and moist.
Therefore, since having agreed that a duplex elemental na-
ture, one of which is masculine, and the other feminine, is found in
55

=== Page 58 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
the individual lesser planets, it follows that each one of them is
also intrinsically masculine and feminine, and also diumal and
nocturnal. Moreover, this duplex sex and duplex sect was from an
intrinsic cause, hitherto unknown to any astrologer, but only the
sex and the sect from the elemental nature formally existing in the
planets themselves, and consequently more effective and more ev-
ident. Besides, Ptolemy only looked at the sect of the planets from
an intrinsic cause, but not from an extrinsic one; by which he erred,
as was already stated above, seeing that the cause must especially
be looked at in that place after the investigation of the sex from a
similarly extrinsic cause.
Therefore, the sect is from an extrinsic or accidental cause,
which happens to the planets themselves from the day or the night.
Whence, those are only said to be diumal or nocturnal extrinsically
that occur in the day or the night. And since the day and night are
only made above [and below] the horizon; those, therefore, are
said to be diumal extrinsically that are [above the horizon] by day;
and those are nocturnal that are located above the horizon by night.
And that is confirmed to be sure by those things that were said
about sex. For as a planet is said to be extrinsically or accidentally
masculine, when it is in fact oriental to the Sun, or in an oriental
quadrant, or in a masculine sign, that same planet must [also] be
said to be diumal, which actually happens by day, that is [when] it
is above the horizon by day. Otherwise, Ptolemy's doctrine on sect
will be contrary to his doctrine on sex; whence, it is not surprising
if he only refers to that doctrine accepted by the ancients with these
words,1 "Therefore, they relate that nocturnal stars, etc."
Moreover, because this is said about the planets, the same
1 Tetrabiblos i. 7,... nykterinous men akolouthdsparadedokasi ten te Selenen kai
to tes Aphrodites '... accordingly they have handed down that the Moon and the
[star] of Venus are nocturnal'. Curiously, Morin's phrase Tradunt igitur
nocturnas Stellas 'Therefore, they relate that the nocturnal stars ...' does not oc-
cur in the translation of this chapter (Quadripartite i. 6, Commentary, p. 128, col.
1) published by Cardan, which has only Stellarum quoque consimili ratione
nocturnam esse docuere Venerem & Lunam 'They have taught of the stars that by
a similar reasoning, Venus and Mercury are nocturnal ...'
56

=== Page 59 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
thing must also be judged about the signs—namely, that they have
a sect from the intrinsic reason of their own nature or their own
sex; and then, from the extrinsic reason of day and night; and so it
is plain that the planets are not allotted an extrinsic sect either from
their own position under the earth or from the signs of the zodiac,
but only from their own position above the horizon.
And so, it will be sufficient to say about Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
Venus, or Mercury that without any regard to the sign, the planet is
extrinsically diurnal, as that is understood to be above the Earth by
day, and extrinsically nocturnal, as that is known to be above the
Earth by night. And consequently, when it is commonly said that a
planet is diurnal by day above the Earth; it is the same thing as if it
is said that a planet is diurnal intrinsically and extrinsically, be-
cause that is partly the maximum strength of a planet; but when it
is commonly said that a diurnal planet is by night above the Earth,
it is the same as if it is said that a planet that is intrinsically diurnal
is extrinsically nocturnal, which is a debility of a planet; and the
same logic applies to planets that are intrinsically nocturnal.
But these ancient forms of saying diurnal by day, and noctur-
nal by night below the Earth, will be rejected; because every planet
below the Earth is lacking in an extrinsic sect with respect to us,
which is one of the principal causes of the debility that is com-
monly attributed to planets posited below the Earth.
But this can be objected to; because if Mars was intrinsically
diurnal and nocturnal, then if it was above the Earth by day, that
will not be a more powerful reason why it is said to be [diurnal]
above the Earth by day, than nocturnal above the Earth by day; and
so, its intrinsic sect will be either null or else ordinary, which is
seen to be absurd.
But I reply. It is more in keeping with reason that the nomen-
clature of a planet, as far as its intrinsic sect, should be made from
the sect predominating in it. And consequently, since Mars is for-
mally, and at the same time eminently, fiery, masculine, and diur-
nal, and only eminently watery, feminine, and nocturnal, it will,
therefore, be called diurnal rather than nocturnal. And so with the
57

=== Page 60 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
rest [of the planets]; and having agreed on this, the above said error
of Ptolemy is again quashed.
But the consequence is denied. For if Mars is at night above
the Earth in a feminine sign, and especially a water sign—espe-
cially indeed, in Scorpio its own domicile—and with all these ac-
cidental causes entirely favoring the extrinsic nocturnal sect, its
nocturnal intrinsic is very much strengthened; and as a result it will
preponderate as much as it can be made to do so toward the femi-
nine sex and the nocturnal sect; and yet this would not happen if it
were lacking a nocturnal intrinsic. Nevertheless, with Mars pos-
ited thus, it will always have less strength for the feminine sex and
the nocturnal sect, than for the masculine sex and the diurnal sect,
if it is posited by day above the horizon in a masculine domi-
cile—especially a fiery one, and especially in its own domicile
Aries.
Furthermore, it must be known about the planets that by
their intrinsic sect, especially formally, along with their con-
formable extrinsics, the planets produce greater and more evi-
dent effects in accordance with the nature of the sect, or the sex
that is conformable to it; but if they are not conformable, they
produce lesser or more obscure effects and those that are mixed
and not pure, or different in some way. Planets formally mascu-
line and diurnal act more effectively above the Earth by day than
by night. And consequently, since Saturn is already harmfully
cold inherently, it will be better for it to be above the Earth by day
than by night; just as Mars will be more temperate by night above
the Earth, especially in Pisces, than by day, especially in Aries or
Leo, as this is also proved by experience. And let those things
that have been said about the sex and the sect of the planets be
sufficient; how truthful and important they are will be more evi-
dent in what follows.
58

=== Page 61 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
Chapter 3.
Benefic and Malefic Planets.
About this division of the planets of great importance among
the others, [if it is] not at least the ultimate fundamental of astrol-
ogy, the principals of this science agree very little among them-
selves. Indeed, in this matter they all agree that Jupiter and Venus
are benefic planets, and Saturn and Mars are malefic; and then
Mercury is of a wavering nature—since with the benefics it is
benefic, and with the malefics it is malefic; but they disagree with
each other about the lights.
For Ptolemy, in Book 1, Chapter 5 of the Quadripartite,]
along with the older [authorities] will have it that the Moon is
benefic, but the Sun is of a common nature, which Cardan, never-
theless, in his Commentary says "is of the greatest good fortune,
and that no planet is more benefic." But Origanus on the other
hand judges the Sun to be malefic, since joined to the planets it
bums them and impedites them with its light, extinguishing their
own light as it were; and thus it frustrates the powers of the
benefics, but it encourages and increases the powers of the
malefics. In which there is a contradiction or an absurdity, since
the Sun extinguishes the light of the malefics no less than it extin-
guishes the light of the benefics. But Schoner2 and Dorotheus3
make the Sun, Moon, and Mercury to be of a common nature.
Moreover, Hermes4 says in general that a planet is neither fortu-
nate nor unfortunate inherently, but that it has whatever strength
1 Morin does not give the Book number and says the Chapter number is 3. In the
translation I have corrected the reference.
2 Johann Schoner (1477-1547), De Judiciis Nativitatum libri tres 'Three Books
on the Judgments of Nativities' (Numberg: J. Montani et Ulrici, 1545).
3 Dorotheus lived in the first century and was the author of five books on astrol-
ogy called Pentateuch, but Morin has cited his opinion from the book of some
later astrologer.
4 A number of treatises are attributed to Hermes Trismegistus. Morin was possi-
bly referring to the De revolutionibus nativitatum 'The Revolutions of Nativities'
(Basel, 1559), now known to be by Albumasar.
59

=== Page 62 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
and individual power over those things that it rules, such as Saturn
over agriculture, Jupiter over judgments, etc.
Besides, Ptolemy, Cardan, and all the other astrologers judge
only by elemental qualities whether a planet is benefic or malefic,
and they do not offer reasons about this in which they agree among
themselves. For Ptolemy says that Jupiter, Venus, and the Moon
are benefic planets, because heat and moisture abound in them;
and yet moisture does not abound in Jupiter since it is moderately
dry, nor does heat abound in the Moon, since it is inherently cold.
Why then will the Sun not be inherently benefic for Ptolemy, since
in fact a pleasant and vital heat exceeds in it, and it does not have a
noxious dryness like Mars or Saturn?
Finally, Ptolemy, and the others, who make the Sun and Mer-
cury to be of a dual nature, say that they are made benefic with the
benefics Jupiter or Venus, but malefics with the malefics Saturn or
Mars. Others, like Alchabitius,1 say that the Sun will be benefic in
trine or sextile aspect, but malefic in conjunction or opposition.
And yet must it not be asked and determined, not what sort [of na-
ture] they have from extrinsic causes or from the aspects of other
[planets], but what sort [of nature] they have from their own selves
and from their own nature?
Therefore, from these things it is plain how many are the diffi-
culties that present themselves to us on the very threshold of as-
trology; and which we shall elucidate individually:
First it must be said that all the planets are innately or unquali-
fiedly good; both because being and good are interchangeable; and
because in Genesis, Chapter 1, it is said about the creation of the
Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, And God saw that it was good, and
again at the end of the Chapter, And God saw all the things that he
had made, and they were very good}
1 Abu al-Saqr al-Qabisi (d.c. 967). His book was very popular and often reprinted.
Morin perhaps had this edition; Alcabitii ad magisterium iudiciorum astrorum
'Alchabitius's Book on the Art of the Judgments of the Stars' (Paris; Simon de
Colines, 1521).
2 Genesis 1:18 & 31.
60

=== Page 63 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
Second. Not everything that is innately or unqualifiedly good
is good with respect to something else; [that is], not everything that
is good in itself is good to some other thing. This is plain from the
wolf, which is very bad for a sheep; and from poisons, which are
lethal for men and animals, even though they are innately good.
Third. Just as among the minerals, vegetables, and animals,
some are beneficial to man if they are applied, and some are harm-
ful; and so among the planets this same thing is not found to be
alien to reason. For even though in Deuteronomy, Chapter 4, it is
said that "God created these things for the service of all the people
that are under the sky;"1 consequently, no star should be said to be
harmful to man; and likewise, it is certain that the same thing can
also be said about the sublunar mixtures harmful to man—namely
about those that were created for the use and service of man. But as
in any sublunar mixture that is said to be harmful to man, there is
also something in it beneficial to him if it is carefully prepared and
applied; and so it must be judged about the stars that are harmful to
man; namely, that they are not in themselves absolutely harmful to
man, but in some way they are also beneficial; indeed, because just
as poison itself and caustic applied to some particular use are use-
ful to man, so that malignant nature of the stars duly applied can be
beneficial to man.
Fourth. With respect to man, the planets must properly be said
to be neither good nor evil, but benefic or malefic.2 For goodness
and evil are properly only referred to an entity or to morals; but a
planet is not inherently or morally evil, since all of them are inher-
ently good; but evil morals are only possessed by free creatures,
which the planets are not; but beneficence or maleficence are prop-
erly referred to an efficient and affecting cause; therefore, since all
the planets are efficient causes with respect to man, and causes af-
1 Deuteronomy 4:19 (Jerome's Latin version) "... solem el lunam, el omnia astra
caeli. . . quae creavit Dominus Deus tuus in ministerium cunctis gentibus quae
sub caelo sunt. 'the Sun and the Moon, and all the stars of the sky ... that your
Lord God has created for the service of all the people that are under the sky'.
2 That is "doing good" or "doing evil," as distinguished from "being good" or
"being evil."
61

=== Page 64 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
fecting him; therefore, just as they are affecting well or evilly, they
will properly be said to be benefic or malefic, or at least effective
of good or evil.
Fifth. The planets must be defined benefic or malefic not only
because of their elemental qualities, but especially because of their
own influential ones. For they affect men much more effectively
by their own influences rather than by their elemental qualities, of
which the only property is to heat, to chill, etc.; also, to rarefy, to
make more dense, etc.; but not to produce those stupendous effects
that happen to men in connection with their life, mental abilities,
character, riches, honors, actions, marriages, lawsuits, violent
death, etc., all of which are produced by influences; and it is cer-
tain that they exceed the effectiveness of the elemental qualities.
But nothing keeps the same planet from being malefic by its ele-
mental qualities and benefic by its influential ones, or vice versa,
just as that same planet is not in both ways benefic or malefic.
Sixth. As for the benefic or malefic nature, this must not be
determined about any planet, [only by] what kind it is from extrin-
sic causes, e.g. from a conjunction or an aspect with other planets,
but from what kind it is inherently. For if the planet itself, for ex-
ample the Sun, is not connected by body or by aspect with another
planet (which often happens), and it is in the first space or the first
house of the figure, it cannot be said that it has no power or effi-
cacy in the native's figure, but it will be the significator of life and
behavior, and more purely according to its own nature than if it
were configured with another planet. But also it cannot be said that
its effect will be indifferent, both because its effect differs from the
effect of some other planet that might be put similarly in the same
space—even in the same degree of the zodiac; and also, because
from such an indifference of effect, it would follow that the native
is either going to be successful or not be successful, which implies
that either if he does not live as a result of that, it will therefore be
malefic; if he does live, but is badly afflicted in his health or his be-
havior, again therefore it is malefic; but if he lives well affected in
both categories, it is therefore benefic. And it will not be useful to
62

=== Page 65 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
say that determination about the life and behavior of the native
must be made in accordance with the state of the Sun's ruler; for if
the Sun is put in Leo,1 it will submit to the rulership of no other
planet; and yet it will act more purely according to its own nature.
Therefore, the nature of a planet must be defined solely from its
own nature, whether it is benefic or malefic.
Seventh. No planet is indifferent to man from its own nature,
that is, it is neither benefic nor malefic. For if from its own nature
it was indifferent, and it is put in the first space, as was said above
of the Sun, it will, therefore, produce an indifferent effect on life,
character, mental abilities, etc.; this is neither good for man, nor
evil, contrary to the reasoning above. But if it does not produce
an indifferent effect, but either a good or an evil one (as is cer-
tainly necessary), that planet will, therefore, not be indifferent
due to its own nature, but [rather] determined both toward the
kind and toward the quality of the effect. I say "toward the kind,"
for the Sun by its own nature produces only solar effects in what-
ever space of the figure it falls, Saturn produces Saturnine ef-
fects, etc. "Toward the quality of the effect," for either no effect
is produced by the Sun, or to the question "what kind" is it with
respect to the man who is affected, one will have to reply, "good
or evil," but not "indifferent," because indifference is neither a
quality, nor does it affect any subject. Add to these, that about
any planet whatsoever, whatever its status in the natal figure was,
any astrologer at all would have always said that it was indiffer-
ent to doing good or doing evil, even if it should rarely happen
that the planet is in its own domicile, configured with no other
planet.
Eighth. That planet with elemental qualities must be said to be
malefic to man, in which the contrary qualities exceed by too much
the two foundations of life, namely the native heat and the radical
moisture. And consequently, since Satum is a planet that is very
cold and dry, it is plain, that from its nature also it will be greatly
1 Reading the symbol for Leo rather than the symbol for the North Node, a simple
typographical error.
63

=== Page 66 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
and totally contrary to the foundations of life. Similarly, Mars,
even though it is hot and must therefore be thought to be a friend of
life; nevertheless, because its heat is too greatly fierce and fiery,
and not1 mild and ethereal; therefore the heat of Mars is very inim-
ical to life, especially since having the added maximum dryness, it
very strongly destroys and dissolves the radical moisture. And so,
concerning these two, Saturn and Mars, it is established that from
their elemental nature they are malefic, and also as such they have
hitherto been perceived and so called by all astrologers. But as for
what pertains to the rest of the planets, it is certain that Jupiter and
Venus are not malefic, for mild and vital heat prevails in both of
them—in Jupiter with a very reduced dryness, but in Venus with
an abundant and benign moisture; and consequently, since they are
friends of life, by the ancients—taught by experience—they are
rightly held to be benefics.
There remain the Sun, the Moon, and Mercury, which many
make to be of a dual nature; but it is proved by No. 7 [above] that
no planet is by it own nature indifferent; by their own nature they
will therefore be malefic or benefic.
And it is proved about the Sun that it is benefic; both because
it abounds in mild and vital heat more than all the other planets, by
which it also excites a native feminine heat for life and the duties
of life, and it nourishes living things; then, because by its annual
entrance2 as the author of life it enlivens the universal nature of
vegetation, animals, and men; but they are saddened by its retreat,
because the rulership of earthly cold that follows in the air is inimi-
cal to life.
But the Moon, even though by reason of its cold, it may seem
to be opposed to life; nevertheless, because its elemental nature is
watery, and water is the principle of generation and fecundity,
since that time when the spirit of the Lord was brooding over the
waters. Indeed, water is necessary for the nutrition of all living
1 Reading neque vero 'and not' rather than nativus vero 'native in fact'.
2 Morin refers to the entrance of the Sun into Aries.
64

=== Page 67 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
things, and it is especially necessary for animals to drink; for that
reason, there is no one who can say that the Moon is malefic be-
cause it is of a watery nature. But if the Sun and the Moon were
malefic because of their own elemental natures, without doubt
from their own magnitude and conspicuous activity as compared
with the rest of the planets, all these lower things would be de-
stroyed, and those men capable of reason would fear and shrink
from their sight—the contrary of which we experience.
Finally, Mercury, since its elemental nature emulates that of
Saturn, but is somewhat relaxed in intensity, and also inherently,
deserves to be said to be somewhat malefic rather than benefic due
to its elemental qualities.
Furthermore, it seems to be very probable, indeed it is certain,
that the ethereal nature which is very friendly to life is innate in all
the planets; it checks the noxious elemental nature of the malefics
and sharpens and strengthens the auspicious nature of the
benefics,.
Ninth. That planet must be said to be benefic in its influences,
which in its own domicile where it acts more purely in accordance
with its own nature, and posited in good spaces of the figure, from
itself produces good in conformity with those spaces without any
evil or difficulty. But posited in evil spaces of the figure, it either
removes an evil conformable to those spaces, or it at least dimin-
ishes it, or it frees [the native] from it. Moreover [a planet] must be
called malefic if even in its own domicile and posited in good
spaces of the figure, a good thing conformable to those spaces nei-
ther occurs nor at least it does not occur without malice and diffi-
culty. But in evil spaces of the figure, evil that is worse and more
certain occurs, and it increases it. This is said of its own self, be-
cause benefic or malefic must here be considered to be in accor-
dance with itself and insofar as it is abstracted from the mixture
with others.
Tenth. Jupiter, Venus, the Sun, Mercury, and the Moon are
planets benefic from their own influences. About Jupiter and Ve-
nus there is no controversy, but about the Sun, the Moon, and Mer-
65

=== Page 68 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
cury1 it is [also] proved, because for these, no less than for Jupiter
and Venus, the description above suits a benefic planet, as will be
plain for anyone of them both from our own experience, and from
the experience of all the old astrologers, [that is] if the Sun, Moon,
or Mercury are in good spaces of the figure and in their own domi-
ciles, free from a bad connection with Saturn or Mars. And in fact,
wherever they are said by the old [astrologers] to be malefics, there
is always detected either that connection or some other conspicu-
ous accident to have arisen as the cause; and since no planet can be
said to be inherently indifferent between a benefic and malefic [na-
ture], then from No. 7 [above], if the Sun and the Moon were not
benefics from their own proper influences, then they would be
malefics. But it was not proper for the planets that are primary by
their strength and dignity to be malefics because of their own na-
ture, on account of the reason already explained in No. 8; there-
fore, by nature they are both benefics.
Eleventh. Saturn and Mars are planets that are malefics be-
cause of their own influences. And this is proved, both by the com-
mon consensus of astrologers, and because of these [planets]
alone2 the previous description of malefics is appropriate, as is
witnessed by daily experience. Because, if it should happen other-
wise, there will be discovered to be either a mingling [of influ-
ences] with the benefics, or some other conspicuous occurrence to
have been involved in the cause. Besides it is certainly established
by experience that if Saturn and Mars from any house of the figure,
in any sign of the zodiac and configuration with others are in
square or opposition to the ASC or the MC, they make the signifi-
cations unfortunate. Therefore, they do not have that malefic force
from the house, the sign, or the configuration, but from their own
selves; consequently, they are rightly said by Ptolemy to be inher-
ently anaeretas or cutters-off of life, honors, etc.
Twelfth. Planets that are by their own nature benefics some-
1 The text says Venus, but that must be a typographical error.
2 Reading his solis 'to these alone' rather than his Solis 'to these of the Sun'—a
typographical error.
66

=== Page 69 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
times degenerate into malefics in their effect, and malefics into
benefics. As, if Jupiter or the Sun, ruler of the eighth space, which
is [the house] of death is by body in the first space, which is [the
house] of life, and also by many other ways that will be explained
in its own place.
Moreover, someone will speak in favor of the old opinion;
consequently, to state that the Sun and the Moon in their own in-
fluences are of both natures and not absolutely of a benefic nature,
because in fact in good spaces they produce good things, but in
evil spaces they at least neither take away the evils nor reduce
them, as Jupiter and Venus do, but they make them greater and
more notable. For the Sun or the Moon in the 12th arouses great
enemies and great illnesses. And in the 8th,1 a public death or the
likelihood of a public disaster, or something notable in another
way, such as in a shipwreck, or a common brawl.
But I reply that it is common to all the planets to have an influ-
ence derived from their own nature on the signification of the
house in which they are posited, or which they rule, or which they
aspect. But the benefics influence well; and therefore they further
the good things conformable to those spaces, but they take away or
diminish the evil things, or at least they influence them to be few
and light with [the possibility of] remedy and evasion. And that
works more powerfully, the better the status in which they are lo-
cated.
But already the Sun and the Moon, on account of their very
great strength and outstanding dignity that is greater than that of
the rest of the planets, also act or influence more powerfully than
they do—both for good things and for evil ones, and they produce
more notable effects. But they seem to differ altogether from the
malefics, both because they do not make evil influences, and be-
cause in evil spaces they do not increase the malign quality of the
evils; of which things the contraries are effected by the malefics.
They therefore agree more with the benefics, because like them
1 Reading the figure 8 rather than £3 the sign of Taurus, a typographical error.
67

=== Page 70 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
they always make good influences in the good spaces, and they
do not increase the quality of the evils in evil spaces, but only as
they influence more notable good things in the good spaces; so in
the evil spaces they influence more notable or more public
evils—namely, because they only act in accordance with their
own nature, which rules only those things of both the macrocosm
and the microcosm that are more notable, more universal, and
primary.
You will object against what was just said that it is abomina-
ble to assert that Mars influences a disposition to perpetrate mur-
der, or that Saturn subjects a man to an ignominious death. And
that that is injurious to the Author of Nature, who "saw those
things that he had made and that they were very good," Genesis 1.
Therefore, Saturn and Mars are not malefics in their influences,
nor any other planet; and consequently it is also false that Venus
calls out [people] to sexual indulgence, etc.
But I respond in similar fashion that it will [then] be necessary
to deny the force of arsenic, of the viper, the scorpion, or hemlock
to kill men, of cantharides1 to excite [them] to an almost insane
sexual state, of hyoscyamine to disturb the imagination, and then
pestilential constitutions of the air that wherever and whenever
they come are cutting off a third part of the men in any region or
city in a plainly horrendous spectacle; moreover, since these
things cannot be denied, and [likewise] the goodness of GOD to-
wards men should not be denied, but His wisdom should be greatly
praised.
It must be said first that we have not asserted above that Sat-
urn and Mars in their own influxes are altogether ma-
lefic—namely, because there is in them something of an intrinsi-
cally beneficent nature, by which they are sometimes observed to
do good, especially when they are fortunately posited in the
Caelum; but their nature is such that if they are mingled in a sign
by conjunction or by aspect in a manner incongruous to the natures
1 Spanish Fly, used as an aphrodisiac.
68

=== Page 71 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
of the other planets, and thus by a bad site with respect to the hori-
zon they act upon sublunar things, far more frequently they do evil
rather than doing good; consequently, these two planets are rightly
said to be malefics as compared with the others that are commin-
gled harmlessly and more frequently do good.
I say second. Those words of Genesis must be understood in
this way—namely, that whatever GOD has made, those things
were very much perfected in their own kind, or if you prefer (and
which seems to me to be the truer sense) they were very good for
the purpose for which they were created by GOD. So, arsenic, the
viper, monkshood,' and such like things on Earth; then, Saturn,
Mars, the Head of Medusa, Cor Scorpii,2 and such like things in
the Caelum, are very good.
I say third. GOD created such malefic stars, so that man, ex-
posed to their bad influences, might be afraid and beware of them
no less than from thunder and lightning threatening destruction
on his own head, and so that in these as well as in those he would
be mindful of his own subjection and weakness and moreover of
the justice and omnipotence of GOD, and he would return with
prayers to His pity, strength, and grace. For GOD [made] those
stars—both the malefic ones as well as the benefic ones—and the
whole Caelum, and also displayed their motion to the eyes of
men, so that they may foresee the evils to which they are exposed,
and prudently beware of things acting exterior to them, namely
those things illuminated by the celestial lights, but that they may
be internally converted to GOD, so that his mlership over all
Heaven and Earth, and as the most powerful governor, who, ac-
cording as he wishes, tightens and loosens the reins of the sec-
ondary causes; for everything that, what in itself is, he has made,
and man will call upon GOD with a humble and contrite heart,
equally certain that he will be freed from the threatening tempest
of malign influxes, just as the Ninevites were converted by the
1 Monkshood is the poisonous herb Aconitum napellus.
2 The Head of Medusa is the star Algol; and Cor Scorpii is the star Antares; both
of which stars are generally accounted to be malefic.
69

=== Page 72 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
prognostication of Jonah.1 Of course it is greatly characteristic of
GOD to pity even those not invoking [his name]; how much more
then is it characteristic to pity those who are invoking [his name]?
And this is plain in the case of criminals who perish at last by the
hand of the executioner. Such persons, if indeed they are indulging
in bad inclinations, which they have derived from bad influxes,
GOD pityingly ends their understanding [of them], so that at least
in the last hour of this life, inspired by Him, they come to their
senses; and the grace of future life is bestowed on them by their
own ministers.
SECTION III
The Proper Celestial Nature of the Individual
Planets. And also about the Fixed Stars.
Chapter 1.
How Difficult it is to Define the Proper Influences
of the Individual Planets.
In Section 1 of this Book, the proper elemental nature of the
individual planets was stated; now it remain for us to discuss their
proper celestial nature. But by the celestial nature we understand
the baptismal influence of each planet defined by us in Book 12,
Section 3, Chapter 20, which in Chapter 4 we distinguished from
the substantial form of the planet, moreover, to flow from this; and
therefore we have said that it is essential to a planet, namely it is
the thing by which any planet gives out the proper effects of its
own nature—the Sun giving solar effects, the Moon lunar effects,
etc.
Next, this influence of any planet, although in itself it is a
1 The reference is to the story in the Book of Jonah in which Jonah predicts to the
citizens of Nineveh that the city will be destroyed by a tempest in 40 days, but
then God chose to spare the contrite Ninevites.
70

=== Page 73 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
unique and simple strength, nevertheless diffuses throughout the
whole world; indeed it is universal in all things capable of genera-
tion, so that there is no natural effect, for which some planet cannot
do something. From this it is certain, because from Book 12, Sec-
tion 3, Chapter 6, that the influx of the planets penetrates the whole
globe of the Earth, also from the highest and subterranean dis-
tances they affect the child being bom on the Earth; given which,
there is no natural effect that can conceal itself from the influx of a
planet, as is said about the Sun in Psalm 18, 'And there is no one
who hides himself from its heat',1 and nature begets nothing, to the
origin of which the planets do not concur; and because from such a
concourse, it is not subject to a natural fate close to the experiences
conformable to its own species. For the individual species of
sublunar things are not subdued to fate by the influences in the
same way, because a planet cannot do the same thing to a metal or
a plant that it can to a man, even though it acts at the same time
with the same strength on a single species or even on an individual;
for the different arrangement of the steps stands in the way of those
receiving the strength, which is received in the mode of the recipi-
ent. Whence, various effects are produced in the several species
and in individuals, because this is also evident in the same heat of
the Sun, which hardens clay and melts wax at the same instant.2
Having said these things in advance, since all the planets are
different among themselves in nature and species, as in Book 9,
Section 3, Chapter 1, and similarly the nature of things or of
sublunar effects is different; it cannot be denied that the Sun, for
example, has a greater natural affinity with some things or effects,
and a lesser one with others; and no affinity at all with the rest.
Whence the lion and the rooster among the animals, and gold
among the metals, are thought to be solar things—namely, from
the greater affinity of their nature with the Sun than with the rest of
the planets—and yet all the planets join together for the generation
' Psalm 18:7 in Catholic Bibles, but Psalm 19:6 in Protestant Bibles.
2 One of Morin's favorite observations. See Origen, On the First Principles. I,
1,13.
71

=== Page 74 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
of a lion or of gold; but the stronger one wins and assimilates the
subject to itself. And that assimilation is easier in subjects or ef-
fects that are allotted the greater natural affinity with the active
cause. That which we are saying here about the Sun may also be
understood to be said of any other planet.
Besides, to define with a proper name the influence or formal
strength of any particular planet, which will explain clearly in its
own way the essence of its strength seems to go beyond the capac-
ity of man. For although the Sun's influence is said to be "Solar,"
and Jupiter's influence "Jovial," and neither one of them can be
better expressed by us; nevertheless, it is not known from that [ad-
jective] what the Solar influence is formally, or what its nature is,
or what it consists of; indeed, the intellect is overpowered by the
magnitude and preeminence of the cause that is indeed universal,
or it causes mistiness in his understanding; and it judges that force,
at least for men going about in this world, to be unutterable in its
simplicity.
For to define this clearly by a name suitable to it, it would be
necessary to contemplate the effects of its strength in individual
kinds of things—certainly, in elements, minerals, vegetables,
dumb animals,1 and men; and it must be observed in the individual
thing in which the effects coincide to what extent they are affected
by the influence of the Sun. For if it should become known by a
name appropriate to itself, it would reveal the nature of the solar
influence. But since we can scarcely know what the influences of
the planets perform in the human species; in fact, about [their per-
formance in] the minerals, vegetables, and brute animals we have
little or no experience—indeed, those influences have hitherto re-
mained unknown or wrapped in the deepest obscurities on account
of Aristotle and the other philosophers, who wrongly ascribed all
sublunar effects to the light and the motion of the stars. We have
certainly done much more, if, from the effects of the planets seen
upon the human species, we have defined the influences of the in-
1 Reading Brutorum 'dumb animals' instead of Erutorum 'rescuers', a simple ty-
pographical error.
72

=== Page 75 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
dividual [planets] that disclose to us their natures and differences,
according as the human species is affected by them; and vice
versa, from these the individual human effects may be thus de-
rived. But for the rest of the sublunar bodies or effects we shall at
least cling to tradition for determining the planetary rulerships
over them, just as those correspond to reason and the experiences
of astrologers with regard to analogy, which will be explained be-
low.
Chapter 2.
By what Theory, the Influences of the Planets, at least with
Respect to Men, can be Investigated and Defined.
Let us begin with the Sun. It, therefore, seen in the sky, is con-
sidered to be the ornament and glory of the whole world, and its
brightness of such great majesty that it is held to be the king of all
the stars, not undeservedly, because all the rest of the Planets, with
the exception of the Moon, are only its satellites that perpetually
surround and pay respect to it in their own revolutions, being mov-
able with respect to it; but it, although their ruler and prince, al-
ways brings them along with it.1
Moreover, viewed according to the way it affects men in their
[bodily] composition, it appropriates for itself the heart among the
other viscera by sympathetic analogy, of which more below. That
is, it is the fount of vital heat, the primary seat of life, and the uni-
versal cause; and in sum, it is the noblest organ of the entire human
body, and the foremost; and it is greatly analogous to the Sun it-
self; that is, it excels analogically in man, as the Sun does in the
macrocosm.
But in the nativity of a man, if the Sun is found in a primary
] Another reference to Tycho Brahe's model of the solar system, in which the Sun
revolves in an orbit about the Earth, but all the other planets revolve about the
Sun; hence, they are carried along with it. As mentioned in a previous note, Morin
had adopted that model because it avoided controversy with the Catholic Church,
which did not favor a heliocentric model.
73

=== Page 76 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
space, or is its ruler, at least [when it is] little debilitated by the ma-
lefic Planets, not only does it deliver up the heart itself more
closely to itself through its particular influx, but it renders the [na-
tive's] temperament fiery after its own manner, a face notable for
its splendor or majesty, his manner sincere and open; it bestows
fame on his name, and always [gives] the native some eminence in
his father's house or over his brothers. If it is in the 2nd house, it
signifies splendid wealth or expenditures. But of persons, it al-
ways signifies royals, primates, notables, or those standing out
over the rest, with regard paid to the family or condition of the Na-
tive. Of illnesses, strokes, heart-attacks, fevers; among the kinds of
death, famous, public, or occurring in the common disaster of bat-
tle, shipwreck, the plague, etc., or something otherwise notable.
And therefore, since in the proper individual effects of the Sun
there are present fire, vitality, beneficence, fame, splendor, emi-
nence, it is necessary that the Sun have these [qualities] itself, as
will be clear from this example: if the Sun is found in the 11th
house of a nativity, it presages the friends to be kings, princes, or
magnates by the observation of Astrologers; and it does not have
this [signification] from its site in the 11th considered by itself; for
Saturn in that same house would not signify such things; nor does
it have this [signification] from the sign in which it is placed, for in
whatever sign the Sun is placed in the 11th house, it will signify
the aforesaid friends. Nor yet does it have this [signification] from
a corporeal conjunction, nor from an aspect with the other Planets,
because, when it is not connected with these in any way, it will
[still] signify those same [kinds of] friends very plainly. Therefore,
it has this [signification] from itself - namely, because of persons
it signifies kings and magnates rather than common people or
those of low degree. Wherefore, ignition, vivification, benefac-
tion, elevation, glorification, or if you prefer, igniting, vivifying,
benefiting, elevating, making famous (if they please, grammarians
may give names to a philosopher equivalent to these), will be
words or attributes, by means of which the influence of the Sun is
seen to be comprehended.
True as GOD, even very true, it may be said to be true, just,
74

=== Page 77 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
wise, etc., because we have known it to be of that particular sort by
its effects, and by its infinite goodness, justice, wisdom, and the
other things attributed to it without limit, we may try to define its
nature, although, nevertheless, what it is in its simple essence, may
remain unknown to us; so the celestial bodies, which in the like-
ness of GOD are universal causes, and images of Him (at least by
the way of acting) compared with the rest, the noblest in universal
corporeal nature, as will be made more clearly plain in what fol-
lows; although they were defined by us with some words [express-
ing] the properties or attributes apprehended in them from their ef-
fect and by experience; nevertheless, [exactly] what is the simple
nature or the formal strength seen in them will remain unknown to
us in this life, as we humbly direct our attention to the fog and
weakness in this corruptible body. For seeing the Sun doing differ-
ent things on different subjects—namely, in the first house on cer-
tain kinds of dispositions, in the eighth on a certain kind of death,
in the twelfth on certain kinds of illnesses, etc.—and all of these
coincide with it because they are not Satumian effects but Solar
ones; that is, they do not refer to the nature of Saturn, but to the na-
ture of the Sun. Of course, reason dictates that all of these are [the
result ol] some simple nature of the Sun, but when one tries to in-
vestigate what that is, he is sunk into fog, if indeed the essences of
things (as also that of GOD, which they represent by an essence)
always remain as an inaccessible light for us, at least in this state of
nature. For the Sun's influence is not properly incendiary and vivi-
fying, exalting,1 etc.; for these individual [characteristics] have in-
dividual and different formal concepts, none of which is a formal
concept of influence, which is unique and very simple—equiva-
lent to all the aforesaid things, or to those enfolded in itself—but as
from the effects [caused by] GOD, His attributes become known to
us, and from having recognized them, we may rightly consider
then the works or effects of GOD; so from the effects of the planets
we may [recognize] their attributes, and from their attributes, we
may aptly deduce other similar effects, to the extent that is allowed
1 Reading exaltativitas rather than ex altativitas.
75

=== Page 78 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
in this life; where we may observe things not in themselves or intu-
itively, but only by their noticeable effects or the appearances of
accidents. But in what follows it will be more evidently plain how
that influence, very simple in its being, is so manifold in acting,
and at the same time determinable in ways so varied, that from
them the human intellect can not fail to be seized with the greatest
admiration. And these things about the influences of all the other
planets are going to be explained.
But the Moon, since it is also a primary Planet and free like
the Sun—that is, its orbit is not bound to the orbit of another
Planet—if it is seen in the Caelum, especially by night, among the
Planets and stars that are then conspicuous, it appears to be like the
ruler or the queen of the stars, even though it does not shine by its
own light, but [by that] of the Sun, as do the rest of the Planets that
are called minor Planets,1 which if they were not illuminated by
the Sun, neither they nor the Moon would be visible to us.
But in the makeup of a man, it principally mles the brain by
analogy. And if it is found in a primary house in any nativity, it ren-
ders the temperament phlegmatic, his mentality somewhat dull, his
morals inconstant, nevertheless a man illustrious in some way, but
unsettled. Of riches, it signifies aquatic possessions or profits from
waters. Of persons or dignities, magnates or illustrious persons, and
especially feminine ones; then, couriers, go-betweens, hunters,2 and
common folk. Of illnesses, catarrhs, excessive menstrual flows, epi-
lepsy, and such like. Which individual things, if they are carefully
considered, we will perceive to be watery, benefic, notable, elevat-
ing, moveable—words or attributes by which the influence of the
Moon is seen to be not separately but jointly comprehended; how-
ever, the simple essence of the influence does not become obvious
to us from them, as was said above about the Sun.
1 That is. Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn— not today's minor planets,
a now obsolete astronomical term for the asteroids. See the note on primary and
secondary planets below.
2 The Roman goddess Diana, identified with the Greek Moon goddess Artemis,
was a huntress.
76

=== Page 79 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
But the rest of the Planets are only said to be secondary Planets,
because they do not primarily and independently revolve about the
Earth,1 like the Sun and the Moon, but only secondarily and depend-
ently, and they emulate the nature of servants rather than that of lords;
because in fact they are not free in their own motions like the Sun and
the Moon, but they are bound to the motion of the Sun in its orbit.
And yet two of these are more noteworthy, namely Saturn and Jupi-
ter, both of which were also allotted satellites by the Author of Na-
ture, since Saturn [has] two minor planets and Jupiter four, as is dis-
cerned by the optical tube.2 Wherefore, it seems that it should be de-
clared that Saturn and Jupiter are of great authority in mundane mat-
ters, and that they are principal [planets] after the Sun and the Moon.
Furthermore, if it is permissible to conjecture about the bod-
ies of the Planets from the clarity and purity of their light; Saturn
and his followers, exhibiting a dull and impure light, is perceived
to be the darkest and most impure of the Planets.3 From this it is
obvious, because even if the Moon, [seen] backwards through the
optical tube,4 were not removed up to the distance of Saturn, so
1 Remember that Morin had adopted Tycho Brahe's scheme of the solar system,
in which the Earth is the center, the Moon and the Sun both revolve about the
Earth, and the five planets revolve about the Sun. Hence, in this scheme both the
Sun and the Moon are "primary planets," while the other five are "secondary
planets."
2 These are the first four moons of Jupiter, viz. lo, Europa, Ganymede, and
Callisto, discovered by Galileo in 1610, and the rings of Saturn, which, being
only indistinctly sighted in the primitive telescopes, were first supposed to be two
small bodies close to Satum on either side of it. The true nature of the rings and
the first actual Satumian satellite. Titan, were discovered by Christiaan
Huyghens (1629-1695) (who was a better lens-maker than his predecessors) and
announced in 1656, but the Astrologia Gallica had already been written before
that. The "optical tube" is of course the telescope.
3 Saturn's appearance to the naked eye is dull and yellowish in comparison with
Venus, Jupiter, and Mercury, which appear to be white. By impurus 'impure',
Morin evidently refers to the fact that Saturn's color is not a pure white. Mars, of
course is noticeably reddish when it is at its brightest, but Morin does not mention
that.
4 Morin apparently refers to looking at the Moon backwards through the tele-
scope.
77

=== Page 80 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
that it is seen still more remote; nevertheless, it is established by
experience that the more the tube throws it higher,1 the brighter
and livelier its light appears, so that it excels the brightness of Ve-
nus in that way. Therefore, since Saturn, the highest of the Planets,
shines for us with a very dull and impure light, this certainly ar-
gues that its body is very much more impure and darker than the
body of the Moon,2 in which black spaces [that are] neither few nor
small are seen.3 That same logic very probably proves that the
Moon is purer than the rest of the bodies of Jupiter, Mars, Venus,
and Mercury, whose light and mixture we have described in Book
9, Section 3, Chapter 8, asserting there that the earthy nature pre-
dominates to an intense degree in Saturn, the fiery in Mars, the airy
in Venus; but the fiery nature predominates in Jupiter to a mild de-
gree, and the earthy similarly in Mercury.
If, therefore, the effects of those Planets on men are noticed
and gathered together in turn, as was already done for the Sun and
the Moon above, it is perceived [that]:
Saturn in its influence is frightening, revolting, malefic, dis-
tressing, secretive, delaying, strengthening.4
Jupiter, igniting, beneficent, healing, dutiful, lawful, prudent,
enriching, honoring, delighting.
Mars, igniting, arrogant, audacious, impatient, malefic, cruel,
squandering, terrifying.
1 Morin seems to be referring to the projection upon a card of the Moon's image
through a reversed telescope, which would yield a very bright image, and, if the
telescope were hand-held, a dancing image.
2 This may have seemed logical in the early 17th century, but it is wrong. Most of
the Moon's surface is a dull grey, brilliantly illuminated by the Sun, while Sat-
urn's visible Surface is a sort of dirty yellow.
3 These are the so-called maria, which appear dark to the naked eye.
4 All of the epithets attributed to Saturn and the other planets are in the grammati-
cal form of causative agents, e.g. terrificum, ignificum, beneflcum, salvificum,
etc., thus representing the active force of the planets. Some of these are awkward
to translate, so I have rendered them by the corresponding adjectives, and simi-
larly for the other planets.
78

=== Page 81 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
Venus, airy, beautifying, beneficent, healing, dutiful,
amative, delighting, voluptuous, prolific.
Mercury, terrifying, acute, ingenious, knowledgeable, loqua-
cious, crafty, adaptable, fickle. All of which terms produce an ac-
complishment of the causative agent.
But if by more or by fewer terms, it may seem to some that the
influence of each planet can be explained better, or equally well, I
would not deny that; for in [the case of] Mars, "arrogant" ("making
proud") seems to embrace "acting bold," "being impatient,"
"evil-doing," "acting cruelly," and "tyrannizing"; indeed, because
the latter are easily deduced from the former - even as the name Je-
sus embraces all the attributes or duties pertaining to "Savior." But
I only suggest that to fashion a unique word that would explain the
influence of a particular planet and satisfy its attributes as assigned
above would, it seems to me, exceed the capability of man. It is
true that until now the influences of the individual planets are
known much more clearly - what in the individual kinds of things
is principally or particularly subjected to the rule of each planet;
but then, what the individual [planets] do especially with regard to
the accidents of men will be more fully set forth in the table placed
below, if we have first spoken about the analogical strength of the
planets, on which that table itself also depends.
Finally, if it should be asked why Mars in the following table
signifies soldiers, generals, or robbers, it is customary to reply that
that is known by experience alone and not from the thing itself; if
indeed posited in the ASC of the native, or if it is its ruler, it makes
men of that sort conformably disposed; therefore, the answer will
be for the cause a posteriori; moreover, the cause a priori is the
proper nature of Mars, and its conformable celestial status, insofar
as they are determined to the morals or the social position of the
native. The same must be said about the Sun for kings, about Jupi-
ter for bishops, about Saturn for monks, etc.
79

=== Page 82 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Chapter 3.
The Strength of the Planets by Analogy.
This [feature] of the planets is seen to be most worthy of ad-
miration; namely because by its own nature, then by its location in
the Caelum, and with respect to the earth, as well as by the mutual
relationship by conjunctions, aspects and applications, and by
other accidents or events, as if they premise future sublunar effects
through some analogy or similitude already explained with
sublunar things. Moreover, that such an analogy may be made be-
tween the celestial bodies and sublunar things will be shown here
by a unique example, which will be like all [other cases].
It is known by experience that the Sun in the 11th house espe-
cially signifies friends at court, kings or princes, or magnates; in
the 10th, splendid honors and royal dignities. And indeed it does
not have [this influence] from the 11th house because friends of
that sort are signified, no more than rustics, plebeians, or monks;
therefore, will the Sun have [this influence] from the sign in which
it is, or from the connection with other planets, or from its own
self? Not the first, because posited in any sign in the 11th it will
signify famous and illustrious friends; and not the second, because
not connected with any others by rulership or aspect, it will [still
signify] such friends. Therefore, it has it from itself that of persons
it signifies kings and magnates, rather than plebeians and common
people; moreover, Saturn is the reverse. And similarly it is shown
in the individual houses that the Sun by itself signifies persons and
things that are famous, illustrious, and royal; whence it is demon-
strated that the Sun has conformity of analogy and agreement with
those things; and the logic is the same with the other [planets].
Moreover, two kinds of analogy are universally found among
the planets—namely, essential and accidental. And indeed essen-
tial analogy is [both] simple and composite. But it is simple espe-
cially by nature, dignity, or sex.
The analogy by nature consists of some similitude of natures,
of the sort that is found between the Sun and something innately
80

=== Page 83 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
hot. For, just as in the macrocosm the Sun heats all these lower
things, vivifies them, and governs them, so the native heat1 in the
microcosm, the heat and life and the functions of life are com-
manded in its own way and move forward to the whole body; and it
is just like the Sun in its own microcosm, and the same analogy of
nature is found between the Sun itself and the heart and the vital
spirit; between the Moon and the brain and the phlegm; between
Saturn and the spleen and melancholy; between Jupiter and the
liver and the blood; between Mars and the bladder, the gall-blad-
der, and the bile; between Venus and the genitalia and the sperm;
and between Mercury and the nerves and the animate spirit. Con-
sequently, when they are determined to such things and located in
the first house or when they are its ruler, they particularly signify
such things; then in the twelfth they signify illnesses [affecting
those things].
To these things, an analogy by nature is given between the
Sun and gold, worthy of admiration. For just as the Sun is the first,
purest, and noblest of the planets, so indeed is gold among the met-
als. And so also are the analogues, Moon and silver, Saturn and
lead, Jupiter and tin, Mars and iron, Venus and copper, and Mer-
cury and quicksilver. So that consequently not without reason the
old alchemists wanted to distinguish these 7 metals by the names
of the 7 planets analogous or sympathetic to them—namely, be-
cause they agree mutually in the purely natural effects; the magical
understanding of which must not be disparaged.
Again, the analogy by nature comes between the Sun and dig-
nities, honor, and fame; between the Moon and the common peo-
ple; between Saturn and enclosures, prisons, and solitude; between
Jupiter and riches; between Venus and pleasures; and between
Mercury and mental ability, arts, and sciences. For the Sun is the
glory of the macrocosm; Saturn the horror; Jupiter the riches; Mars
the terror; Venus the delights; and Mercury the versatility; for as
the Sun is conspicuous by its own splendor, it obscures the rest of
the stars, so that honors, dignities, and fame make a man to stand
1 Reading color nativus 'native heat' rather than color nativus 'native color'.
81

=== Page 84 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
out before the other commoners, whom he seems to overshadow.
And, as the Moon is the lowest of the planets, very quickly chang-
ing her phases, so the commoner is the lowest kind of man, very
rapidly changeable in his opinion and friendship. And so with the
rest [of the planets].
The analogy by dignity consists of some similitude of ruler-
ship, of the sort that is found between the Sun and a king, a father,
or a husband. For as the Sun shines in the middle of the planets,
which are like satellites to it, perpetually surrounding, following,
and observing it, so does a king shine in the midst of his own court
and satellites; and the father and husband in the midst of his own
family. And so the Moon, by analogy of dignity, refers to queens
and great ladies, because these shine among other women, just as
the Moon does among the stars when appearing by night. In a simi-
lar manner, since Jupiter and Saturn were allotted satellites, they
refer by analogy to those among men who are lesser magnates,
who because of dignity are surrounded by some assembly. And in-
deed Jupiter, the more splendid one with 4 followers, [indicates]
more conspicuous persons, such as bishops, chancellors, gover-
nors, chieftains; but Saturn with only two more obscure satellites,
and closer to the vast uninhabited area of the ether, [is indicative]
of monks, those in charge of desolate regions or mines, and royal
paymasters.
The analogy by sex consists of a certain similitude of mascu-
linity or femininity. For, as having seen the Sun as the father of a
family in the macrocosm, and the Moon as the mother, the rest of
the planets must be held to be subordinate to the Sun, as if in slav-
ery or as offspring, or as just the family of the Sun and the
Moon—each one by reason of its own sex in accordance with Sec-
tion 2, Chapter 1. There will, therefore, be an analogy by sex
among Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and Mercury as husbands, brothers,
male servants, and the rest of the males; then, between Venus and
wives, sisters, house maids, and the rest of the females of an infe-
rior sort. For the Sun also signifies males and the Moon females by
analogy, but strong and very superior, at least essentially; namely,
82

=== Page 85 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
the Sun, a king, father, or husband; the Moon, a queen, mother, or
wife. And let these few [examples] of simple analogies suffice.
Moreover, composite analogies are bom from these simple
analogies. For the Sun, by reason of its dignity and sex, is analo-
gous to kings, fathers, and husbands; the Moon to queens, moth-
ers, and wives. By reason of its nature and sex, Mars is analogous
to soldiers and robbers; Venus to lovers and whores; Mercury to
astronomers and merchants. And in all of the above said [exam-
ples], there is this worthy of note and admiration—that an analogy
agreeing with one planet does not agree with another; for Mars is
not analogous to lovers, nor Venus to robbers; nor the Sun to
monks; nor Saturn to Kings; but the above said individual analo-
gies are appropriate to the [proper] individual planets, as experi-
ence teaches.
Besides, the essential analogical strength of a planet is not
something really different from its influence, but they are the same
thing; because what is said of the analogical strength by acting re-
veals subjects or effects with which that planet has a greater affin-
ity. Indeed, in whatever space of the figure any planet acts analogi-
cally, it is from the things signified by that space that it chiefly af-
fects whatever is more analogous to that planet; and that is nothing
else than the planet acting in any space in accordance with its na-
ture or proper influence on the things signified by that space; and
this must be well noted.
Furthermore, Cardan in his Commentary on the Quadripar-
tite, here and there, and then in his Book of Revolutions, Chapter 5,
calls the planets significators according to their substance, of
those things which it was said above that the planets themselves
are analogous to; e.g. the Sun is a significator according to sub-
stance of a king, a father, or a husband; Jupiter of riches; etc.;
moreover, the rulers of the Sun and Jupiter are significators of
these same things by accident; and these significators according to
substance and accident are those that are the principal foundation
of judgment according to almost all the rest of the astrologers; and
yet that it is false as it is commonly employed by Cardan and the
83

=== Page 86 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
rest of the astrologers, we shall prove most manifestly in its proper
place. Here, let it suffice to note that we call all those things "So-
lar," for which the Sun has an essential analogy; "Lunar," for
which the Moon has analogy; "Saturnine," for which Saturn has
analogy, and so on with the rest [of the planets]; and it should be
especially noted that the "Solar" effects are generally made in vari-
ous ways according to the varied status of the Sun in the Caelum;
the "Lunar" effects according to the varied status of the Moon; and
thus with the rest [of the planets].
Moreover, the accidental analogical strength of the planets is
that which comes as an extrinsic to them, and that happens in vari-
ous ways.
First. From the quality of their own motion; for a planet that is
swift in its own motion, or slow, direct, or retrograde is analogous
to persons or things that in their own actions or motions are swift,
slow, direct, or retrograde; and also by the force of analogy they
make these that way; which you should understand about the
things and persons to which these planets are determined in the ce-
lestial chart.
Second. From the method of approach of the planets; for if the
ruler of the ASC, representing the native, applies to the ruler of the
seventh space, which signifies the wife, the native will be con-
cerned about taking a wife, and he will take a wife, unless some-
where else [in the chart] a celestial obstacle strongly interferes; but
if both of the rulers have separated from each other, the native will
avoid marriage, and he will not marry; or at least they will not
agree between themselves, but divorces will occur, especially
from [the action of] the malefics.
Third. By the freedom of light. For a combust planet—or one
under the Sun beams—is analogous to hidden things; but, free
from the Sun beams, it is analogous to visible things; and conse-
quently it brings about such things.
Fourth. From the heliacal rising or setting. For a planet
emerging from under the Sun beams is analogous to things that are
84

=== Page 87 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
new and free; but immersing itself under the Sun beams, it is anal-
ogous to the opposite of that.
But from these kinds of analogies, both accidental and essen-
tial, as set forth above, it will not be difficult to apprehend and un-
derstand the rest that will occur; and it is already sufficient to make
[them] known.
Finally, analogy is also found in the Caelum itself or in the
Primum Mobile. Since the part of the Caelum that is rising signi-
fies the origin of life of the thing that is then being bom; the culmi-
nating part its energy or action; the setting, its decline; and finally,
the part that occupies the IMC, its destmction; if in fact this is the
force and signification of the Caelum, it can more readily be re-
ferred to analogy than to any other cause, as is established in Book
18, Chapter 5.
TABLE OF THE UNIVERSAL RULERSHIPS
OF THE PLANETS1
The Seven Planets are the Primary and Universal Causes of
Physical Generation in the Family of Nature as a Whole. They are
allotted an affinity with those things of a particular nature placed
below, either from their own essence or because of analogy, and
on this account they are said to rule them.
Parts of Heaven
Saturn: Capricorn, Aquarius.
Jupiter: Sagittarius, Pisces.
Mars: Aries, Scorpio.
The Sun: Leo.
Venus: Taurus, Libra.
1 The material that follows is displayed in a large full-page tabular format on pp.
302-311 of the Latin original. Some of the print is large and some is very tiny and
sometimes even printed sideways. Rather than attempting to reproduce the actual
format of the tables on these much smaller pages, I have chosen to list the con-
tents of the Table in sequential text format.
85

=== Page 88 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Mercury: Gemini, Virgo.
The Moon: Cancer.
Elements
Saturn: earth.
Jupiter: air, fire.
Mars: fire.
The Sun: ether, fire.
Venus: air.
Mercury: earth.
The Moon: water.
Elemental Qualities
Saturn: Intense cold, dryness, density, opacity, heaviness.
Jupiter: Moderation, with an excess of lightness, heat, and
dryness.
Mars: Heat and dryness in intensity.
The Sun: Vital heat, rarity, lightness.
Venus: Moderation, with a little moistness.
Mercury: Cold and dryness in some degree.
The Moon: Cold, wetness, liquidity, density, and heavi-
ness.
Colors1
Saturn: Black, dark, earth-colored, swarthy.
Jupiter: Blue.
Mars: Red.
The Sun: Yellow.
Venus: Green.
Mercury: Variegated.
The Moon: White, pale.
Odors
Saturn: Foul, narcotic.
Jupiter: Sweet.
Mars: Sharp.
1 The printed text mistakenly has Odores 'Odors'.
86

=== Page 89 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
The Sun: Fragrant, aromatic.
Venus: Delightfully sweet
Mercury: Mixed.
The Moon: Dull, imperceptible.
Flavors
Saturn: Sour, astringent.
Jupiter: Sweet.
Mars: Bitter.
The Sun: Salted just right.
Venus: Rich.
Mercury: Acid.
The Moon: Flat, watery.
Parts of the Year
Saturn: Fall.
Jupiter: Spring.
Mars: Summer.
The Sun: Summer.
Venus: Spring.
Mercury: Fall.
The Moon: Winter.
Weather Conditions and Effects in the Air
Saturn: Intense and frightful cold, and sometimes pesti-
lence. Heavy, black clouds, dark rainstorms, snows,
frosts, destructive winds, violent winds.
Jupiter: Mildness, healthy condition, moderate winds, fair
weather, clouds turning from white to red.
Mars: Intemperate, hot, dry, very hot, pestiferous, wast-
ing, fair weather, or red clouds, tawny, green, thunder,
flashing, cloud-to-cloud lightning, thunderbolts, hail.
Comets with tails, glowing impressions,1 tornadoes, tem-
pestuous, harmful, destructive winds.
The Sun: Heat, dryness, fair weather and sometimes very
1 Probably the glowing trains of meteors.
87

=== Page 90 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
hot, tawny clouds or turning tawny from red, moderate
winds, dry and healthy.
Venus: Mildness, health, fair weather, dew, fog, mist,
clouds completely white, light and healthy rain, moderate
and somewhat humid winds.
Mercury: Dryness, sudden winds, strong, gusty, shifting;
violent, damaging winds; variegated clouds, thunder,
flashing, thunderbolts.
The Moon: Humidity and cold from itself.
In Waters and in the Sea
Saturn: Overflowing, floods, corruption, destruction or
scarcity of fish, violent winds and raging storms, difficult
voyages, shipwreck.
Jupiter: Moderate and useftil increases in waters, abun-
dance of fish, tranquility, or moderate winds, favorable
and profitable passages of ships.
Mars: Drying up of waters, corruption, destruction of fish,
violent winds, sudden shipwrecks, invasions of pirates.
The Sun: Droughts and decreases.
Venus: Useftil increases and overflows, good health, great
abundance of fish, easy, secure, and fortunate voyages.
Mercury: Violent winds and sudden storms that increase
when it is matutine, and decrease when it is vespertine,
plots of pirates.
The Moon: Increases, ebbing and flowing.
On the Earth
Saturn: Sterility of fruits and corruption of useftil plants by
malign air, cold, frost, rain storms, hail, floods, caterpillars,
locusts; destruction of useful animals, appearance of harm-
ful ones; earthquake, collapse of buildings and cities.
Jupiter: Abundance and health of plants, fruits, and useftil
animals, and the suppression of injurious ones, or those
spawned from rotten material.1
1 Maggots, etc.
88

=== Page 91 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
Mars: Scarcity and unhealthiness of plants, fruits, and ani-
mals usefiil to man from intemperate heat and dryness or
from the poisonous quality of the air; generation of ven-
omous creatures, fires, earthquakes.
The Sun: Four parts of the year, but especially the summer
per se; droughts, forest fires; the rest according to the
characteristics of the ruler and the aspects.
Venus: The same as Jupiter, but with more fertility.
Mercury: Great earthquakes, but a diversity of other
events, instability, and often, with Saturn or Mars, de-
struction of plants and animals.
The Moon: Putrefaction, but in accordance with its rela-
tion to the Sun and the other planets, whose configurations
with the Moon ought to be careftilly noticed, since the
Moon is closest to the Earth.
Minerals
Saturn: Lead, black stones, dark-colored, field-stones.
Jupiter: Tin, sapphire, amethyst.
Mars: Iron, lodestone, jasper, bloodstone,reddish [stones].1
The Sun: Gold, carbuncle, hyacinth,2 chrysolite.
Venus: Copper, emerald, turquoise, coral, pearl.
Mercury: Quicksilver, chalcedony, camelian, alecterius?
The Moon: Silver, crystal, beryl, diamond, pearl.
Plants
Saturn: The oak, medlar, quince,4 rue, hellebore, narcotic
[plants], and the rest of the thick substances, and those
growing slowly.
Jupiter: The laurel, sandalwood, cinnamon, sugar, balsam,
1 The Latin has rubinus 'reddish'.
2 A hyacinth-colored precious or semiprecious stone, either a variety of amethyst
or sapphire. Cf. Pliny, Natural History. XXXVII. 40 (Sect. 122).
3 I cannot identify this mineral or stone, unless the reference is to the alectoria or
"cock's stone" mentioned by Pliny, Natural History, XXXVII. 54 (Sect. 144).
4 Reading cydonius 'quince' instead of citonius [unidentified].
89

=== Page 92 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
frankincense.
Man: Pepper, ginger, mustard, radish, scammony, colo-
cynth,1 garlic, everything bitter, and hot poisonous [plants].
The Sun: The palm, rosemary, heliotrope, crocus, grain,
and spices.
Venus: The date palm, olive, pine, lily, rose, pea.
Mercury: The hazel, yarrow.
The Moon: Gourds, cucumbers, pumpkins, lettuce.
Animals
Saturn; The camel, bear, goat, ass, cat, owl, bat, tortoise,
mouse, beetle, and others that walk slowly, and those that
roam about at night, the toad.
Jupiter: The elephant, deer, bull, stag, peacock, falcon.
Mars: The horse, wolf, boar, dog, ostrich, kite, hawk, ven-
omous serpents, scorpion, spider.
The Sun: The lion, eagle, falcon, cock.
Venus: The nanny goat, sheep, pheasant, partridge, dove,
turtledove, sparrow.
Mercury: The fox, ape, serpent, parrot, spider, bee, ant.
The Moon: The hare, swan, nightingale, frogs, fish, juicy
snails, shellfish, crabs, slugs.
The Humors
Saturn: Melancholy, black bile.
Jupiter: Moisture, blood, semen.
Mars: Yellow, vitelline, aeruginous, [or] porraceous bile.2
The Sun: Vital spirit, bilious blood.
Venus: Phlegmatic blood, semen.
Mercury; Animal spirit.
The Moon: Phlegm, serum.
1 The Cucumis colocynthis of Linnaeus, a wild cucumber used as a purgative. See
Pliny, Natural History. XX. 8 (Sect. 14).
2 Vitelline means yellowish; aeruginous, bluish-green; and porraceous, greenish.
90

=== Page 93 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
Parts of the Body
Saturn: The bones, teeth, cartilage, right ear, spleen, bladder.
Jupiter: The liver, veins, lungs, diaphragm, sides, muscles.
Mars: The gall bladder, left ear, pudenda, kidneys.
The Sun: The heart, arteries, right eye, and the right side in
men, but the left one in women.
Venus: The throat, breasts, belly, buttocks, womb, kid-
neys, genitalia.
Mercury: The legs and feet, arms, hands, fingers, tongue,
nerves, ligaments.
The Moon: The brain, left eye, the left side in men, but the
right one in women. Intestines, stomach, vulva, membranes.
The Faculties
Saturn: The retentive.
Jupiter: The digestive1 and vegetal.2
Mars: The expulsive.
The Sun: The vital, attractive.
Venus: The generative.
Mercury: The animate, rational.
The Moon: The expulsive, vegetal, animate.
The Senses
Saturn: Hearing on the right.
Jupiter: Touch, smell.
Mars: Hearing on the left.
The Sun: Sight on the right in a man, especially by day; on
the left in a woman.
Venus: Taste, smell, touch, the pleasures [arising] from
these senses.
Mercury: Taste, hearing.
The Moon: Sight on the right in women; on the left in men.
1 Literally, coctrix 'cooking'.
2 The word vegetal is used in the sense of 'growing'
91

=== Page 94 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Parts of the Mind
Saturn: Memory.
Jupiter: Judgment, the concupiscible appetite.
Mars: The irascible appetite.
The Sun: The universal appetite for good.
Venus: The concupiscible appetite.
Mercury: Common sense, imagination, ingenuity, reason,
or the rational appetite.
The Moon: Apprehension, the universal appetite.
The Natural Laws of Men and their Relations amongst
Themselves by Analogy
Saturn: Great-grandfather, grandfather and father, then
also a servant, a hidden enemy.
Jupiter: The master, children.
Man: The husband in women's charts, elder brothers,
open enemies.
The Sun: The father and the husband in women's charts.
Venus: The wife and the mother by day, sisters, daughters,
lovers, concubines.
Mercury: Younger brothers, servants.
The Moon: The mother and the wife especially by night,
widows, pregnant women.1
Corporature
About which there can be no universal determination. For
even though in general and everywhere on earth Martial types are
drier and more slender; Jovial and Venusian types, moister, juic-
ier, fairer-skinned, and more beautiful; Satumians uglier and
darker; etc.; still, the particular conformations of parts and colors
do not always correspond equally to the natures of the planets, but
there is a [particular] character of body native to each place on
earth, as is obvious from the Ethiopians, the Tartars, and the Peru-
vians, who differ greatly among themselves in body, hair, and
shape of face, but the Ethiopian in France begets an Ethiopian.
1 Or, less likely, 'prcg11301 widows'.
92

=== Page 95 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
Therefore, consider the region and the parents; and understand that
the things given here [are mainly applicable] to the white men of
Asia, Europe, etc.
Saturn Oriental: Cold, moist, moderate flesh, moderate in
stature, a long face, large dark eyes, occasionally spotted, uneven
teeth, an ugly and grim appearance, face and body rather dark in
color, tawny,1 honey-colored,2 pallid, dark hair, thickset, rugged,
crooked feet.
Occidental: Cold, dry, thin, short in stature, dark eyes, dark
plain hair, scanty on the head and in the beard, the rest of the body
hairless.
Jupiter Oriental: Moderately hot and moist, fleshy, round
cheeks, moderate and elegant and majestic in stature, white in
color, inclining to yellow or rose, eyes rather large [and] dark,
handsome, with a mark in the right foot.
Occidental: Somewhat moister in temperament, moderate in
stature, bald, with a mark in the left foot, which rarely fails.
Mars Oriental: Hot, dry, less fleshy, decently tall and well
proportioned, in color from white to red, with bluish eyes, much
hair between curly and straight, with hairiness of body.
Occidental: Drier, moderate in stature, with a big head, a
round and freckled face, or with a mark on his forehead, small
eyes, large nostrils, long teeth; red in color, red-haired, rigid, with
a hairless body, and a long and military stride.
The Sun: Hot and not so dry, moderate in stature, a large
head; a round, white, and shining face, eyes large and splendid and
yellow in color, long hair but growing bald, a somewhat harsh
voice.
Venus: Hot and moist, moderate in stature, plump, and the
face especially full and delicate, white with a blush of red, beauti-
ful, lovable, hair somewhat curly, tawny, or rather dark,
1 Reading fulvus 'tawny' rather than fulcus [no such word].
2 Latin mellinus.
93

=== Page 96 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
tawny-colored eyes, handsome, happy, glancing charmingly, thin
eyebrows and lips, narrow chest, full legs. And these features are
more apparent when Venus is oriental.
Mercury Oriental: Somewhat hotter, moderate in stature
and well proportioned, with good color, or honey-colored, small
eyes, moderate, yellowish hair.
Occidental: Somewhat dry, thin, slim, with small teeth and
fingers, scanty beard, a thin voice, small, quick steps, a very sharp
mentality.
The Moon: Moist, tall stature, a beautiful face, white in
color, gray eyes, fine hair, a becoming beard.
Note
Judge cautiously and carefully on the form of the body, for
this part of judgment often fails, since it is not yet well understood.
But through experience it can be perfected, namely by having
looked at the planets in the first house and their lords and the lord
of the Ascendant, along with the forms of the natives.
Character and Talents
Saturn well-placed.1 Very talented, investigators of secret
things, prudent, outstanding in counsel, secretive, rather solitary,
suspicious and jealous, dissembling, hardworking, long-suffering,
persevering, overcoming, violent, thrifty, eager for wealth, great
accumulators, striving for dominion, fit for governorships, useful
and dear to princes.
But badly disposed. Sad, melancholy, abject, repulsive, aus-
tere, shameless, sluggish, timid, nervous, envious, outstanding in-
eptitude in crime, wretched, complaining, or taciturn, those who
hate association and light, very solitary, paupers, or trading in evil
arts, very suspicious and jealous, liars, spiteful, fraudulent, plot-
1 The Latin reads bene affecto 'well affected', which means "well placed by sign
and house and well aspected." "Badly placed" is of course the reverse. More fa-
miliar terms (especially to Horary astrologers) would be fortified and impedited.
94

=== Page 97 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
ters, traitors, and those who frequently suffer judicial punishment
for their crimes.
Jupiter well-placed. Straightforward, upright, religious, just,
faithful, courteous, merciful, clean, modest, cheerful, obliging,
easy to talk to, moderately serious, frank, dutiful, prudent, sensi-
ble, strong in counsel, obliging, generous, illustrious, great in giv-
ing justice, in making laws, fit for magistracy, for first place, and
for kingdom, fond of and partial to his own and his own things,
truthful.
Badly disposed. Character in one way or another like the pre-
vious, but artificial and inclining to faults, as superstition in place
of piety1 and religion, silliness instead of courtesy, timidity instead
of modesty, pretense instead of fidelity, prodigality instead of gen-
erosity, pride and arrogance instead of greatness—of course in ac-
cordance with the way of the planet by which it is afflicted by con-
nection2 or by rulership.
Mars well-placed. Brave, strong, spirited, noble, bold, arro-
gant, boastful, despising the praise of another, and full of contempt
for other men, irascible, prone to strike and wound, eager for re-
venge, obeying no one, unable to endure servitude and injuries, ea-
ger for dominance, craving battles and conflicts, arrogant tyrants,
reckless and scornful of danger, active, ready, in a hurry, self-con-
fident, spurning wealth, generous, lucky, well-suited for com-
manding soldiers, ill-suited for ruling citizens, scornful of God or
not concerned.
Badly placed. Unscrupulous, unjust, pitiless, arrogant, quar-
relsome, seditious, loud-mouthed, reckless, mad, truculent, ag-
gressive in challenging, cruel, assassins, murderers, tyrants,
drunkards, destroying their own property and that of others, incen-
diaries, robbers, thieves, pirates, neglecting their own people.
The Sun well-placed. Upright, just, honest, faithful, clean,
sensible, in one way or another irascible, great, very eager for hon-
1 Reading pro pietate instead of proprietate.
2 That is, by aspect.
95

=== Page 98 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
ors and much honored, illustrious, grand, distinguished, famous,
cultivators of friendships, but not overly fond of wife and children.
Badly placed. Silly, spiteful, less observant of honor, artifi-
cial, and degenerate from the things said above in accordance with
the nature of the planet making it unfortunate by rulership or unfa-
vorable connection.
Venus well-placed. Endowed with good character, charm-
ing, upright, and worshiping God religiously, merciful,
peace-making, cheerful, sociable, fond of cleanliness and deco-
ration, devoted to dancing, singing, music, and dining, elegant
and charming in their actions, playful, and inclined towards all
delights and pleasures, fortunate and cautious in love affairs and
friendships, kind especially towards his own [people], unable to
endure hard work, quarrels, anger, and misfortune, and easily
reconciled.
Badly placed. Timid, idle, suitors, and bothersome in love
affairs or friendships, imprudently and unfortunately jealous,
womanizers, addicted to indecent desires, disreputable, and
with many expenditures on account of women, mischances,
bothersome to the wretched and bad; unless Venus herself rules
most of the principal places of the geniture and is in an impor-
tant angle.
Mercury well-placed. Endowed with outstanding character,
excelling in shrewdness of intellect, easily capable [of learning]
the sciences and arts of all kinds, but especially mathematics,
readily conjecturing and reasoning; learning many things without
a teacher, and finding unknown things first, finely differing and
discussing, quick, wary, prudent, composed in behavior, readily
adapting himself to any person, situation, or time, and therefore
sociable and fit for getting things done.
Badly placed. Unstable, foolish, forgetful, addicted to mental
wanderings, talkative, boastful, dull-witted, insolent, liars, stub-
bom, flatterers,1 dissemblers, crafty, deceivers, treacherous, spite-
1 And "yes-men."
96

=== Page 99 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
ful, perjurers, plotters, slanderers, given to falsifications of writ-
ing, testimony, or money, disreputable, pimps, rudely embroiling
themselves in matters of every sort, giving dangerous advice, and
boldly undertaking crimes.
The Moon well-placed. Fine mental ability, famous, honored,
well composed in behavior, honest, frank, honorable.
Badly placed. Dull in mental ability, timid, common, untruth-
ful, vagabonds, artificial, and of no name, or servants, or fools.
Professions, or Characters Speaking to Them
Satum well-placed. Great theologians, philosophers, treasur-
ers, mine superintendents.
Moderately placed. Farmers, excavators, miners, potters,
builders, leather-workers,1 monks, hermits.
Badly placed. Practitioners of magic, fortunetellers, sorcer-
ers, those who clean out cesspools and sewers, beggars, [and] exe-
cutioners.
Jupiter well-placed. Advisers, senators, judges, presidents,
executive secretaries,2 high priests, generals of sacred orders, or
provincials,3 abbots, bishops, cardinals, popes, governors of prov-
inces or cities.
Badly placed. Schoolmasters and athletic directors.
Mars well-placed. Knights, commanders-in-chief of armies,
generals, and colonels,4 hunters, lawyers, physicians, blacksmiths,
founders,5 [and] cooks.
1 The Latin word coriarii 'tanners' or 'curriers' designates those who work with
raw hides rather than artisans who turn finished leather into consumer products.
2 Not copyists and routine office workers, who are under Mercury (see below).
3 Generals and provincials are the superiors and division superintendents of Cath-
olic religious orders such as the Benedictines. The leader of the Salvation Army
also holds the title General.
4 The Latin has Capitanei exercituum, Duces atque Praefecti. The ranks men-
tioned in the translation are arbitrary. Certainly, military officials of higher rank
than captain are meant. (Cf. the Spanish capitan general.)
5 That is, those who make castings in a foundry.
97

=== Page 100 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Badly placed. Butchers, leather-workers, pirates, bandits, cat-
tle-rustlers1 [and] executioners.
The Sun well-placed. The Pope, emperors, kings, princes,
governors, magnates, and all administrators with royal honors or
dignities.
Venus well-placed. Spice-merchants, perfumers, druggists,
painters, jewelers, musicians, tavern keepers, soothsayers, mem-
bers of sacred orders.
Badly placed. Whores, seductresses, enchantresses, painted
ladies,2 beggar-women.
Mercury well-placed. Mathematicians, geometers, astrono-
mers, astrologers, philosophers, orators, copyists, secretaries, po-
ets, painters, merchants. All ingenious craftsmen, and inventors of
new arts.
Badly placed. Pimps, thieves, counterfeiters, forgers, and
sellers of fake goods.
The Moon well-placed. Queens, widows, couriers, sailors,
fishermen, hunters, commoners.
Accidents of Fate
Saturn well-placed. High positions, governorships, authority,
discovery of treasures, great wealth.
1 The Latin text has Lictores, where 1 have translated 'cattle-rustlers'. Lictors
were official attendants who walked before the high magistrates of Rome carry-
ing an axe. This word is certainly wrong here. The Latin version of Ptolemy's
Tetrabiblos, iv. 4, printed by Cardan has the following (Textus XVI, p. 324, col.
2)... carnifices ... raptores, latrones abactores... 'executioners...robbers, ban-
dits, cattle-rustlers ...' I think what Morin wrote was abactores 'cattle-rustlers'.
My second choice would be luctatores 'wrestlers', which appears a few lines up
in the same text.
2 The Latin word fucatrices is not in my lexicon. If it is not simply a misprint, it
would seem to be derived from fucatus 'counterfeit' or 'artificial'. I suppose it re-
fers to women who wear heavy makeup, but if the derived sense of fucatus is
taken, it could be translated as 'deceivers'. And if fucatrices is a misprint, per-
haps Morin wrote fututrices, a coarse word that could be translated as 'sluts'.
98

=== Page 101 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
Badly placed. Fall from honor and high position, low status,
poverty, servitude, bad luck with projects and actions, secret ene-
mies, disgrace, imprisonment, exile, punishment, a sorrowful end.
Jupiter well-placed. Independence, riches, honors, high po-
sition, friends, servants, fortunate marriages, or high positions in
the Church, fame, glory, an abundance of children, and from
them happiness, profits. And, to sum it up, Jupiter well-placed
bestows good luck in undertakings and in all things, and happy
outcomes.
Badly placed. It denies these things, or lessens them, or gives
merely the appearance of them, or makes them unfortunate.
Mars well-placed. Friendships with and cultivation of mili-
tary men, fortunate in duels, positions of command in war, victo-
ries in battles when storming cities or attacking fleets of ships,
spoils, [and] triumphs.
Badly placed. Enmities, lawsuits, fights, duels, battles and
military assaults unluckily undertaken, losses of personal property
and high position, robberies, squandering, destruction, plots, at-
tacks, thefts, homicides, illicit intercourse, imprisonment, and fre-
quently a violent death.
The Sun well-placed. Glory, fame, splendid status, honored
appointments, public offices, high royal or ecclesiastical posi-
tions, in both cases, i.e., secular and ecclesiastical, with honor
and outstanding respect, powerful friends, a name famous from
death.1
Badly placed. It gives powerful enemies, and it renders unfor-
tunate the things mentioned above, or else it denies them [alto-
gether], and it portends misfortune in all things undertaken for
himself.
Venus well-placed. Good will from everyone, profits, happy
successes in love affairs, happy marriages, fortunate and numer-
1 This could mean 'from the manner of death' or 'from [the time of death', i.e.,
'after death'.
99

=== Page 102 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
ous offspring; high positions and exceptional good fortune in un-
dertakings and actions.
Badly placed. It lessens, renders unfortunate, or even denies
the things mentioned above.
Mercury well-placed. Successful business activities, profit-
able missions, fortunate contracts, outstanding and successful in-
ventions, high positions, professions, and honor and profit from
these, many and useful friends.
Badly placed. It corresponds to the opposite [of the preced-
ing], then [it indicates] useless occupation in curious, arcane [ac-
tivities], expenses and misfortunes, deceptions, falsifications, in-
constant position in life' due to various unexpected events, and lia-
ble [to experience] an uncertain demise.
The Moon well-placed. A renowned name, wealth, happi-
ness, honorable and lucrative missions, possessions of watery
lands, many offspring, happy marriages, high positions and also
royal positions, highly placed friends in both spheres.
Badly placed. It lessens, renders unfortunate, or even denies
[altogether] the things mentioned above, and it gives a life of
change, hardship, and liable [to experience] various unexpected
events.
Ages
Saturn: Decrepitude extending to the end of life.
Jupiter: Old age to the 68th year
Mars: Virility to the 56th year.
The Sun: Youth to the 42nd year.
Venus: Adolescence to the 21st year.
Mercury: Boyhood to the 14th year.
The Moon: Infancy to the 4th year.
100

=== Page 103 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
Illnesses1
Saturn: Of the parts of the body which Saturn itself rules.
Then quartan ague2 scabies,3 leprosy,4 wasting diseases, melan-
choly,5 paralysis, the black jaundice,6 dropsy, arthritis, cancer,
cough, asthma, tuberculosis, and other serious catarrhs, deafness,
toothache, lethargy,7 apoplexy, hernia.
Jupiter: Of the parts over which it presides. Then chronic fe-
ver, variola, exanthema, angina, back pains,8 inflammation of the
liver, pleurisy, inflammation of the lungs,9 spasms; then sick-
1 The text seems to be falsely punctuated here. I have read falsijlcationes. vitae
status inconstans as above, instead of falsificationes vitae, status inconstans
'falsifications of life, inconstant position.
2 Morin was a medical doctor, so his list of the diseases peculiar to each planet
should be reasonably reliable. However, medical terminology has changed con-
siderably in the three centuries since he wrote. Consequently, it is not always pos-
sible to equate the names of the diseases and conditions he mentions with their
present day names. And of course the reader must bear in mind that the real cause
of most diseases or conditions was unknown to Morin and his contemporaries.
The medicine of his time classified diseases according to their symptoms, thereby
confounding different ailments that displayed similar symptoms but arose from
different causes.
2 Probably the malariae form of malaria. (Most of the medical notes that follow
are from the introduction to W. H. S. Jones's translation of Books XX-XXIII of
Pliny's Natural History [Loeb Classical Library, Pliny, N.H., vol. 6]).
3 In Latin, scabies, but this term is now narrowed to mean an itchy skin eruption
caused by the itch insect. The older usage was broader and referred to any ruddy
hardening of the skin accompanied by itch.
4 Not necessarily true leprosy, but any scaly condition of the skin resembling lep-
rosy and accompanied by itch.
5 Melancholy refers to a state of mental lassitude or depression, which can have
either a physical or psychological cause. It is one of the manifestations of chronic
malaria in certain patients.
6 Probably the name used for a long-standing case of ^e/Zow jaundice, in which
the skin has finally taken on a dark green or dark brown hue.
7 Probably coma is meant, rather than sluggishness, although, from an astrologi-
cal point of view, Satum would rule both.
8 Disregarding the comma in passiones, spinae dorsi.
9 Latinperipneumonia, probably the disease we call pneumonia.
101

=== Page 104 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
nesses [arising] from winds, stench and inflammation, phlegm.1
Mars: Of the parts over which it presides. Then acute, burning
fevers, plague,2 yellow jaundice, convulsions, hemorrhage, dysen-
tery, carbuncles, anthrax, erysipelas, gangrene,3 wounds, espe-
cially in the face, tertian fever.4
The Sun: Of the parts over which it presides. Then ephemeral
fevers, spasm, fainting, catarrhs, illnesses of the eyes.
Venus: Of the parts over which it presides. Then venereal dis-
ease, gonorrhea, illnesses of the womb and the genitals, priapism,
weaknesses of the belly arising from cold or moisture, and from
that, diarrhea, inflammation.
Mercury: Of the parts over which it presides. Then intermit-
tent and recurrent fevers, madness, frenzy, delirium, insanity, epi-
lepsy, convulsion, stammering, catarrhs, cough, abundance of
spittle.
The Moon: Of the parts over which it presides. Then quotid-
ian fevers,5 epilepsy, apoplexy, silliness, catarrhs, colic, vomiting,
fluxes from the belly, excessive menstruation, dropsy, stroke,
phlegm.
Death
Saturn well-placed. A natural death from the illnesses over
which Saturn itself presides.
Badly placed. Sudden or violent death from the collapse [of
1 In Morin's time, two hundred years before the adoption of the germ theory of
disease, it was believed that various diseases were caused by winds or bad smells
(from swamps, sewers and cesspools, or rotting garbage). Malaria (from the Ital-
ian mala aria 'bad air'), a disease now known to be caused by a protozoa! parasite
is a case in point.
2 Probably the bubonic plague or "black death." But the term would have also
have been applied to outbreaks of typhus or malignant malaria.
3 In the Latin, ulcera phagedenica & serpentia. These are eruptions on the skin
that are round and putrefying or streaked.
4 An attack of chills and fever that recurs every other day, as in vivax malaria.
5 Daily attacks of chills and fever.
102

=== Page 105 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
buildings), from a fall, a precipitous fall, drowning, shipwreck,
suffocation, incarceration, hanging, lead shot; or with infamy, as
by an executioner.
Jupiter well-placed. A natural death from the illnesses over
which it presides.
Badly placed. A violent death from drowning, from war, a
duel, or by order of a prince.
Mars well-placed. A natural death from the illnesses over
which it presides.
Badly placed. A violent death from wounds [made] by iron,
from fire, or catapults; from decapitation, mutilation of [bodily]
members, being torn to pieces, strangulation, hanging, bites of ani-
mals, especially venomous ones, mangling or letting of blood by
unskilled surgeons and physicians, [or] by being burnt up.
The Sun well-placed. A natural death from the milder ill-
nesses over which it presides, such as fevers.
Badly placed. Sudden death from plague, [or] stroke; or a vio-
lent [death] from a public order of a prince, or in battle, or by being
burnt up.
Venus well-placed. A natural death from the illnesses over
which it presides.
Badly placed. A violent or premature death from poison,
medicine, intoxication, an excess of intercourse or of women, or
because of lust.
Mercury well-placed. Death from those illnesses over which
it presides, and a natural one.
Badly placed. An unexpected and very violent death, by mur-
der, poison, magic, or on account of counterfeiting, perjury, forg-
ery, or misapplication of the law.
The Moon well-placed. A natural death from those illnesses
over which it presides.
Badly placed. A violent death from the excessive [administra-
103

=== Page 106 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
tion of] laxatives, from drowning, or murder, generally public or
judicial.
Particular Places on the Earth
Saturn: Subterranean [places], pits, sewers, latrines, prisons,
cemeteries, lonely [places], hermitages, deserted [places].
Jupiter: High [places], and lofty churches, palaces, [places]
especially intended for judicial purposes.1
Mars: Foundries and machine shops, fortified places.
The Sun: Courts of kings and princes, auditoriums, churches,
places of cities.2
Venus: Parks, greens, groves, gardens, banquet-houses, thea-
tres, whorehouses.
Mercury: Markets, academies, colleges.
The Moon: Forests, seas, rivers, pools, and places dedicated
to public gatherings.
Days of the Week
Saturn: The Sabbath.
Jupiter: Thursday.
Mars: Tuesday.
The Sun: The Lord's Day.
Venus: Friday.
Mercury: Wednesday.
The Moon: Monday.
And the things said here are sufficient for the general ruler-
ship of the planets over these lower things. But it must be carefully
noted that:
1. In the tables above, I did not set forth all the rulerships per-
taining to Saturn, but only the more common and notable ones, so
1 Or, less likely, 'High and lofty palaces of the Church, especially intended for ju-
dicial purposes.'
2 That is, a large open area in a city—place in French, piazza in Italian, p/aza in
Spanish, sometimes square in English.
104

=== Page 107 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
that from them it may be clearly exposed what sort of influence
Saturn has on rulerships. And the consideration is the same with
regard to illnesses, accidents of fortune, death, etc. resulting from
Saturn or coming forth from any other planets.
2. The rulerships of the planets over sublunar things that are
set forth above are only the simple rulerships from the proper na-
ture of each planet. And consequently, when many planets concur
together in the rulership, e.g. of rulership itself, there must be a sa-
gacious mixture of the strength and nature of the individual plan-
ets, having taken into account the one that predominates [over the
others]. And so with the rest.
3. And judgment must not be made about [the native's] mor-
als from all the planets together, nor from one separately according
to the above said table, but only from the one or from those that
will be determined in the natal figure to signifying behavior by
body, rulership, or with connection by body or by aspect, as will be
said in its own place. And the logic is the same in the case of
corporature, profession, illness, etc.; and thus the faith of the table
will be able to be applied. And when it is said that these kinds of
accidents appear with regard to behavior from a planet well dis-
posed, but those other kinds from a planet badly disposed, a good
or bad disposition is understood to be both by reason of the sign
and of the connection with other planets, or the celestial state of
that planet, and by reason of its location in the figure. For even
when a planet is said to do this or that with regard to behavior, it is
already supposed to be determined to those things. Nevertheless,
that planet will signify one thing about behavior if it is in the tenth,
and another thing if it is in the fifth, or one thing if it is the ruler of
the tenth and another if it is the ruler of the fifth. A planet by reason
of its own location or rulership in a figure, is well or badly dis-
posed to those things that it signifies.
105

=== Page 108 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Chapter 4.
The Influences of the Jovial Planets.1
There is no one of sane mind who would dare to assert that
these planets are of no importance in the nature of things and of no
use; therefore, either they serve us, or they serve those living in the
Jovial world; and if this is asserted, it should similarly be said that
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury serve those living in
the solar world or on the Sun. But we experience that these [plan-
ets] are made to be causes for us and that they direct their own
powers of acting toward us. Therefore, why not the Jovial ones?
To these things, since they are made hypothetically on account of
Jupiter, and Jupiter on account of us, as we experience it; it follows
that these things are always made because of us, or if you prefer the
system of Jupiter to have been established, as we experience that
the system of the Sun was made for us, as Holy Scripture teaches.
Therefore, they do serve us, not indeed by their own light, which is
not noticeable to us; [and are] therefore, an influence very difficult
to recognize, for the detection of which, we have nevertheless de-
scribed a certain method elsewhere. The same thing must be
judged about the two satellites of Saturn.2
Chapter 5.
The Proper Influences of the Fixed Stars.
Here it must frankly be said that the proper influences of all
the fixed stars, as well as their elemental strengths, are not known
1 Morin is speaking of the satellites of Jupiter, four of which were known in his
time.
2 Not satellites of Saturn, as Morin supposed them to be, but in fact the rings of
Saturn, which to early observers such as Galileo appeared to be two appendages,
one on each side of the planet, that some took to be satellites. It was not until 1656
that Saturn's big satellite Titan was discovered by Christiaan Huyghens
(1629-1695), who in 1659 published the first drawing showing the Satumian "ap-
pendages" to be in fact a ring about the planet. But Morin had died before these
discoveries. Nevertheless, his statement that the same logic would apply to Satur-
nian satellites is valid.
106

=== Page 109 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
to men; consequently, astrology—at least practical astrology—ex-
periences no mean loss. For even if the seven planets are the pri-
mary governors of this inferior world, and their influx is not in
governance, or if the secret laws of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus,
and Mercury escape the light of philosophy (as Alexander de
Angelis asserted in the Preface to Book 5 of his [treatise] Against
the Astrologers), but rather the awkwardly and stupidly [made]
obscurities of those who are philosophizing. Nevertheless, it is
certain from the conjunctions of the planets with the fixed stars
that their sublunar effects are varied. For which reason, Astrolo-
gers have not only made tables of [the stars] for recognizing future
conditions of the air, from the true or heliacal rising and setting of
the fixed stars, or tables of the applications of the Moon to the
fixed stars. But Hippocrates himself in his Book on Airs, Waters,
and Places,^ text 30, prescribes that the observation of those
risings and settings of the stars must be made in medicine, espe-
cially those of Sirius, Arcturus, and the Pleiades, whose powers he
had experienced more than the others, teaching that the same thing
should be done in the future in the case of the others, especially the
more notable ones that to himself were then unknown. Therefore,
to deny to the fixed stars powers and efficacies, both elemental as
well as influential, on these lower things, does not seem to be of
less inexperience than to take them away from Saturn, Jupiter,
Mars, Venus, and Mercury, [which would] also be apart from ex-
perience, which alone produces those who are skilled in this art,
just as inexperience produces unjust judges, who, attributing
power over these lower things solely to the Sun and the Moon,
consider the other stars to be made without effect, or only as deco-
rations, or for the sake of illuminating.
And yet it is certain that those things that Ptolemy has in Book
1, Chapter 9, of the Quadripartite about the powers of the stars are
no less uncertain than they are devoid of reason, and scarcely in
agreement with the things that he put in Book 2, chapter 11, on the
1A treatise ascribed to Hippocrates (c.460-c.360) in the collection of his writings.
Morin probably referred to the Latin translation by Fabius Calvus (Rome, 1525).
107

=== Page 110 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
strength and nature of the signs. In those, therefore, he is counseled
by experience. Moreover, how the force of only a few of the fixed
stars, namely the influxes of the brighter ones, are however known
to astrologers; and not to be trusted are the tables of the fixed stars
handed down by the old astronomers for the nature of the fixed
stars, which Cardan himself relied upon in his judgments of nativi-
ties, even for fixed stars of the fifth magnitude. From which no lit-
tle advantage comes to astrology, especially with regard to the ac-
cidents of humans, which are certainly often produced by the
brighter fixed stars, or evidently observed to be initiated, but not
by the lesser ones, except rarely, or to the degree that they are ac-
cumulated in some constellation, such as the Pleiades, Delphinus,1
etc. Nevertheless, since we already know more about the powers
of the stars than Hippocrates did, or others who lived at the birth or
in the youth of astrology, what forbids that it may not be of use
now more fully to those following those things in recognition, if
generous talents, either on their own or with the generosity of
princes (which here, no less than in astronomy, should be carried
out) have wished to undertake this sublime field.
Besides, we are now speaking in general about the influences
of the fixed stars, those influences that act in a divided and con-
joined manner on all these sublunar things, as was made plain
above about illnesses and constitutions in air; but on man particu-
larly, than which there is no subject in the elementary region that is
more suitable for receiving influences. Consequently, some of the
fixed stars are benefic to man by nature, but others are malefic, as
was said about the planets in Section 2, Chapter 3. And besides, the
individual [stars], just like the planets, differ in kind; nevertheless,
they preserve along with these some affinity of nature, as has been
shown diffusely by us in Book 9, Section 4, Chapters 1 & 3. And it
is set forth in the table of the fixed stars set below, in which it hap-
pens that at least the brighter stars, which they call royal, con-
1 The Pleiades are a little asterism of six stars within about one degree of each
other, and Delphinus is a small constellation, whose principal stars are within
about six degrees of each other in the northern part of the constellation.
108

=== Page 111 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
joined to planets to which they are related by their own nature, es-
pecially in the principal spaces of the figure, very often produce
great and stupendous effects in accordance with the property of the
space. Both, if they rise or set with the planets, but especially with
the lights, or if they are in the same circle of position with them, or
if they are in angles of the figure, or in aspect with the Sun or the
Moon.
But as for their kind, the Girdle of Orion, Canis Major,
Canicula, Castor & Pollux, the Left Foot of Gemini, the Heart of
Leo, Spica of Virgo, Arcturus, the bright star of Corona Gnosiae,
the bright star of Lyra, Aquila, the Tail of Cygnus, Fomalhaut,1
and others, are allotted benefic influxes, which they make manifest
in conformable locations. But the Head of Medusa, the Eye of
Taurus, the Pleiades, the Heart of Hydra, the Heart of Scorpio,
Hercules, Delphinus,2 and many others have been discovered to
have malefic influxes in accordance with the property of the space
in which they are found, or in accordance with the nature and the
determination of the planet with which they are found, just as both
of these can be confirmed by innumerable observations of astrolo-
gers and can be tested by anyone. See Junctinus's Compendium7'
on his observations of the fixed stars.
Besides, two things should not seem to be omitted here. First,
that if the royal fixed stars in the principal houses of the nativity
are strengthened by fortunate aspects from the planets, especially
the lights, or of those that rule the angles themselves, or if planets
are conjoined to the fixed stars themselves, it is certain that they
produce stupendous and lasting effects; but if they are not
1 The more customary names of these stars today are the Belt of Orion (consisting
of Mintaka, AInilam, and AInitak), Canis Major (the constellation), Sirius, Cas-
tor, Pollux, Alhena, Regulus, Spica, Arcturus, Alphecca, Vega, Altair, Deneb,
and Fomalhaut.
2 The more customary names of these stars today are Algol, Aldebaran, the
Pleiades, Alphard, Antares, Hercules (the constellation), and Delphinus (the con-
stellation).
3 Probably a reference to Francesco Giuntini's Speculum astronomiae... (Lyons;
Philip Tinghi, 1573. repr. 1581).
109

=== Page 112 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
strengthened by the conjunction or the aspects of the planets that
exalt men, then they wretchedly depress them.1
Secondly, that when a planet is joined to any fixed star, it
must be seen in which house or space of the figure that is done, or
which house that planet rules, for it is to those houses that the nota-
ble accident signified pertains, especially when the planet rules the
house that it occupies. As if the Sun was with the Heart of Leo, Ju-
piter with the Heart of Scorpio, Mercury with the Eye of Taurus,
Venus with Spica of Virgo, etc.
Moreover, on account of the previously unknown principles
of astrology, both of the planets and of the fixed stars, with what
perfection could it be known or could it be distinguished between
them, even though the influxes of the planets are more accurately
known to us; therefore, for determining the strengths of the fixed
stars from now on, the following rules should be noted, at least for
the brighter ones. For the lesser ones do not affect men noticeably;
besides, effects also happen to be observed on individual days
from the directions of significators to them, although however
such effects only happen rarely from the brighter ones, but very
frequently from the planets that are the primary rulers of this infe-
rior world, and from their aspects. Here, moreover, it must be
frankly stated that men do not discern anything in astrology but the
more conspicuous things, but Demons also notice the little things.1
First, if there is no planet in a particular space of the nativity
(which must always necessarily happen, since there are only 7
planets, but 12 spaces), look at the star that is brighter, and or what
region is vertical to or which is closer to the ecliptic, and more
1 These last phrases seem at first glance to be inconsistent with what is said ear-
lier. One would expect the royal fixed stars to exalt the native to some de-
gree—greatly if supported by the benefic planets, and somewhat less if they act
alone but one would not expect their influences to turn from good to bad if they
lack that support.
2 The Latin text has 5 cum oculo 8\9 cum spica 8 &c. The phrase cum oculo 8' is
meaningless; I have assumed that we should read the symbol 0 rather than 8'; and
of course the symbol Tib is a simple typographical error for the symbol HP.
110

=== Page 113 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
powerful, that occupies that space. For if there is anything happen-
ing to the native that is pertinent to that space, and it may be seen
that it cannot be referred to its own influence or determination or to
the planet that rules that space (about which determination we
shall discuss [at length] in Book 21), it is probable that that particu-
lar accident is from the influx of that star. And if the same thing or
something similar is observed many times, there must be no doubt
about it; and so from the effect, the nature of the star can be discov-
ered, especially if by its nature and influx it was not similar to that
planet.
Second. If any planet is in a space and ruler of that space, look
similarly at the brighter fixed star, and, as above, distinguish the
influence of that planet, both by reason of its nature and its deter-
mination, so that you may be able to discern the force of the star if
the two of them differ in nature.
Third. If any planet is in a space that is under the rulership of
another planet (which is the middle mode between the two ex-
tremes mentioned above), the judgment will be more difficult, and
more entangled. For what each planet can do by reason of its na-
ture and determination will have to be distinguished individually,
so that the influx of the principal fixed star can be distinguished.
But this mode, and then others more complex, as when many plan-
ets are conjoined in the same space under the rulership of another,
ought to be disregarded, since the first two should be abundantly
sufficient. Moreover, the previous rules are especially valid for
fixed stars that are found on the cusps of the spaces, but especially
1 In this statement Morin refers to the Catholic doctrine, first enunciated by St.
Augustine (354-430), in his City of God that Demons had some ability to see into
the future and would sometimes whisper their observations into the ears of astrol-
ogers to enable them to make true predictions and thereby confound the faithful.
(This was Augustine's sophistry to try to cope with the obvious fact that astrolo-
gers sometimes make true predictions, but also to preserve the Catholic dogma
that only divine beings can see into the future, while men cannot.) So Morin
seems to say that men overlook some effects of the fixed stars, perhaps unadvis-
edly, but Demons take note of them (thus offering an explanation of their ability
to predict some future events that escape the notice of men).
Ill

=== Page 114 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
on the angles, where the fixed stars act more powerfully.
And let what has already been said about the planets and the
fixed stars suffice. But to the glory of GOD, the Creator of the
fixed stars, it does not seem that the following ought to be over-
looked: that since He himself is of infinite wisdom who estab-
lished everything in weight, number, measure, and order, and
since the individual stars differ among themselves, if not in spe-
cies,1 at least in individual properties; it then follows that each
fixed star, in such-and-such a location and arrangement, both with
respect to the other [stars] and to the earth, was located in the fir-
mament by GOD himself, so that it could not be better done, and
that particular location or arrangement cannot be changed, why
then does the sublunar nature not also experience an extraordinary
alteration, as it experiences from the location of the planets that are
continuously varying their own daily alterations [of location].
Who, therefore, will not indeed admire the marvelous and perpet-
ual agreement [in arrangement] of so many fixed stars determined
for the government of these sublunar things?
Finally, it must be added that if the fixed stars were referred to
the inhabitants, as on our Earth, just as some have supposed along
with the Cardinal of Cusa,2 it is certain that the whole solar system
would affect those same inhabitants much more weakly and insen-
sibly than we are affected by the system or satellites of Jupiter,
since, as we have proven elsewhere, the Sun itself is invisible from
the region of the fixed stars. It was, therefore, an outstanding arti-
fice of GOD the Wisest, that in the creation of the World it con-
sisted of the Moon and the Sun arranged around the earth,1 and of
the solar system that embraces the systems of Saturn and Jupiter.
1 Here Morin probably refers to the fact that most of the stars look alike, differing
only in their brilliance.
2 Nicolaus Cusanus or Nicholas of Cusa (1401 -1464), German cardinal, theolo-
gian, and scholar. Morin perhaps refers to his book De docta ignorantia 'On Ig-
norance that is Taught' (1440). He also wrote Coniectura de novissimis diebus 'A
Conjecture on the Last Days', in which he predicted the end of the world to occur
in 1734. These and other tracts were published in an omnibus edition of his works
at Basel in 1565.
112

=== Page 115 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
And the twelve signs of the Primum Caelum, the domiciles of
the planets in the zodiac, their syzygies, and their approaches to
the fixed stars (the strength of all of which is very conspicuous on
Earth) testify that all the rest of the universe was made for the sake
of that Earth, or rather for the sake of man living on it. And so the
divine wisdom played about in the circle of lands, in which He also
wanted to be bom and to live among the sons of men and to die for
them. Let there be glory to Him forever, amen.
End of Book Thirteen.
1 Remember that Morin had accepted Tycho Brahe's plan of the solar system, in
which both the Moon and the Sun were in orbit about the Earth, but the other
planets were in orbit about the Sun.
113

=== Page 116 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
114

=== Page 117 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
APPENDIX 1
Table of the Bright Fixed Stars for 1 January 1600
Star Name Catalogue Magnitude Longitude Latitude
Mintaka 5 Ori 2.2 16 H 47 23 S36
Alnilam e Ori 1.7 17X53 24S 34
Alnitak (^Ori 2.0 19X06 25 S 21
Alhena Y Gem 1.9 3 S 31 6 S 47
Sirius a Cma -1.5 8 S 34 39 S 31
Castor a Gem 1.1 14 S 40 10N 04
Pollux P Gem 1.1 17 S 42 6 N 39
Regulus a Leo 1.3 24 ^ 16 ON 27
Spica a Vir 1.0 18=2: 16 2 S 02
Arcturus a Boo -0.1 18=2:39 31 N 01
Alphecca a CrB 2.2 611139 44 N 22
Vega a Lyr 0.0 9 YU3 61 N 45
Altair a Aql 0.8 26 08 29 N 19
Fomalhaut a PsA 1.2 28 zc 14 21 S 05
Deneb aCyg 1.3 29 ^ 50 59N 56
Algol P Per 2.1 20 36 22N 23
Alcyone* i] Tau 2.9 24 25 4 N 01
Alphard a Hya 2.0 21 ^ 43 22 S 25
Antares a Sco 0.9 4/11 4 S 31
The names of the stars shown in the table are those that are in
common use today. Morin refers to some of them by other names,
but the names in the table are mentioned in the footnotes.
The longitudes of these stars increase at about 50" per year;
the latitudes remain nearly the same.
* Note. Alcyone is the brightest star of the Pleiades and is near
the middle of the asterism.
115

=== Page 118 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
APPENDIX 2
Table of the Bright Fixed Stars for 1 January 2000
Star Name Catalogue Magnitude Longitude Latitude
Mintaka 5 Ori 2.2 22X22 23 S33
Alnilam e Ori 1.7 23 X 28 24 S 30
Alnitak C, Ori 2.0 24 41 25 S 18
Alhena 7 Gem 1.9 9 S 06 6 S 44
Sirius a Cma -1.5 14 S 05 39 S 36
Castor a Gem 1.1 20 S 14 10N 06
Pollux P Gem 1.1 23 S 13 6 N 41
Regulus a Leo 1.3 29 50 ON 28
Spica a Vir 1.0 23 ^ 50 2 S 03
Arcturus a Boo -0.1 24 =2= 14 30 N 44
Alphecca a CrB 2.2 12 til 18 44N 19
Vega a Lyr 0.0 15 W 19 61 N44
Altair a Aql 0.8 1 ^47 29N 18
Fomalhaut a PsA 1.2 3 ^ 52 21 SOS
Deneb aCyg 1.3 5 1Z20 59N 54
Algol P Per 2.1 26 a 10 22 N 26
Alcyone* rj Tau 2.9 29 a 59 4 N 03
Alphard a Hya 2.0 27 17 22 S 23
Antares a Sco 0.9 9/46 4 S 34
The names of the stars shown in the table are those that are in
common use today. Morin refers to some of them by other names,
but the names in the table are mentioned in the footnotes.
The longitudes of these stars increase at about 50" per year;
the latitudes remain nearly the same.
* Note. Alcyone is the brightest star of the Pleiades and is near
the middle of the asterism.
116

=== Page 119 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
Index of Persons
Abraham Ibn Ezra, scholar, 19
Albumasar, astrologer, 59n.4
Alchabitius, astrologer, 60
k\\dX\MS,LQO, translator, 12n.l
Aristotle, philosopher, 19n.3,42,72
Artemis, divinity, 76n.2
Augustine, Saint, bishop, 11 ln.1
Averroes, 5c/zo/ar, 19
Benedictines, religious order, 97n.3
Brahe, Tycho, astronomer, 23n. 1,48n. 1,73n. 1,77n. 1,113n. 1
Calvus, Fabius, translator, 107n.l
Cardan, Jerome, astrologer, 6-7,1 ln.l,12n,2,13-21,37-38,47,49-
51,56n. 1,60,83,98n. 1,108
Corre, Robert, astrologer, 8
Cusa, Nicholas of, Cardinal, writer, 112
De Angelis, Alexander, writer, 107
Demons, minor divinities, 110,11 In. 1
Diana, divinity, 76n.2
Dorotheus, astrologer, 59
Eicholz, D.E., translator, 122
Ficino, Marsilio, scholar, 19
Galilei, Galileo, scientist, 77n.2,106n.2
God, 24n.2,44,51-52,60-61,68-70,74-75,95-96,112-113
Giuntini, Francesco, astrologer, 64,109
Haly, astrologer, 36
Hermes, astrologer, 59
Hippocrates, physician, 107-108
Huyghens, Christiaan, astronomer, 77n.2,106n.2
Jerome, St., translator, 51n.l,52n.l,61n.l
Jesus, 79
Jonah, prophet, 70
Jones, W.H.S., translator, 101n.2,121
117

=== Page 120 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Junctinus, Franciscus, See Giuntini
Magnus, Olaus, historian, 31-32
Morin, Jean Baptiste, astrologer, 5-8,1 In. 1,12n.l&2,16n.2,
18n. 1,22n.2,23n. 1,24n. 1,28n.3,29n. 1,40n. 1,47n. 1,48n. 1,50n. 1,51
n. 1,52n. 1,56n. 1,59n. 1 &3-4,64n.2,71 n.2,73n. 1,77n. 1 &3-4,78n. 1,
98n.l&2,101n.2,102n.l,106n.l&2,107n.l,l 1 In.1,112n.l,l 13n.l
Ninevites, 69,70n.l
Offusius, Jofrancus, astrologer, 7,22-23,25-27,28n. 1,29,33
Origanus, David, astrologer, 47,49,59
Origen, theologian, 37n.2,71n.2
Pema, Petrus, eofoor, 19n.2
V\dXo, philosopher, 19n.l,42
Pliny the Elder, writer, 89n.2&3,90n.l,101n.2
VXoiimxs, philospher, 19
Ponoda, Sriram, astrologer, 8
Pontano, Giovanni Goviano, scholar, 22
Princes of Medicine, 42
Proclus, philosopher, 12,36
Proteus, divinity, 21
Ptolemy, Claudius, astrologer,
6-7,11-12,16-22,33-38,47-49,50,53-54,56-60,66,98n. 1,107
Riske, Kris Brandt, editor, 8
Robbins, F. E., translator, 6,50n.l
Salvation Army, religious order, 97n.3
Schoner, Johann, astrologer, 59
Vestergoths, Swedish people, 32
Note: the characterization given for each person is not neces-
sarily complete, but it represents the type of work that he did to
which reference is made in the Preface or in the Translation or the
footnotes. Book publishers' names are not listed. They may be
found in the Bibliography.
118

=== Page 121 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
Bibliography
Alchabitius (Abu al-Saqr al-Qablsl)
Alcabitii ad magisterium iudiciorum astrorum.
[Alchabitius's Book on the Art of Judgments of the Stars]
Paris: Simon de Colines, 1521.
Augustine, Saint
De civitate Dei.
[The City of God.]
[Latin text and English translation]
The Loeb Classical Library
London: Wm. Heinemann and
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, 1960. 7 vols. repr.
Cardan, Jerome
Claudii Ptolemaei Pelusiensis libri quatuor/
De astrorum iudiciis cum expositione Hieronymi Cardani.
[Cardan's Commentary on the Quadripartite.]
in vol. 5 of Cardan's
Opera Omnia.
Lyons: Huguetan & Ravaud, 1662. 10 vols.
London: Johnson Reprint, 1967. 10 vols. reprint
Cusa, Nicholas of, Cardinal
De docta ignorantia.
[On Ignorance that is Taught]
Coniectura de novissimis diebus.
[A Conjecture on the Last Days]
Basel, 1565. omnibus ed.
Haly All ibn abi al-Rijal)
Liber completus de iudiciis astrorum.
[The Complete Book on the Judgments of the Stars]
Venice: J. B. Sessa, 1503. often reprinted
119

=== Page 122 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Hermes the Philosopher (actually Albumasar)
De revolutionibus nativitatum.
[The Revolutions of Nativities]
Basel: Petriana, 1559. folio
Magnus, Olaus
Historia de Gentibus Septentrionalibus.
[History of the Northern Peoples]
Rome, 1555.
Morin, Jean Baptiste
Astrologia Gallica.
The Hague: A. Vlacq, 1661. folio xxxvi,784 pp. portr. diagrs.
tables
Book 18—The Strengths of the Planets.
trans, by Pepita Sanchis Llacer and Anthony Louis LaBruzza
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2004. paper 101 pp. port, diagrs
Book 21—Determinations.
The Morinus System of Horoscopic Interpretation.
trans, by Richard S. Baldwin
Washington: A.F.A., Inc., 1974. paper [v],109 pp.
Book 22—Primary Directions,
trans, by James Herschel Holden
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 1992. paper xv,292 pp.
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2005. repr. paper xv,292 pp.
Book 23—Revolutions.
trans, by James Herschel Holden
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2003. 1st ed. paper x, 142 pp. portr.
diagrs. tables 28 cm.
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2004. 2nd ed. rev. paper xi,147 pp.
portr. diagrs. tables
180

=== Page 123 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 13
Book 24—Progressions and Transits,
trans, by James Herschel Holden
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2005. paper xii,l 12 pp. diagrs. tables
Offlisius, JoFrancus
De divina astrorum facultate in
larvatam astrologiam.
[The Divine Power of the Stars Against
a Decadent Astrology]
Paris, 1570.
Origanus, David
Astrologia naturalis...
[Natural Astrology...]
Marseilles, 1645. 8vo. xxxvi,454 pp. diagrs.
Origen
Peri Archon 'On first Principles'
trans, by Trannius Rufinus into Latin as
De Principiis 'On the Principles'
trans, into English as 'On the First Principles'
by G. W. Butterworth
New York Harper & Row, 1966.
Pliny the Elder
Natural History.
trans, by H. Rackham, W.H.S. Jones, and D.E. Eicholz
Loeb Classical Library
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, and
London: William Heinemann, 1962. 10 vols. repr.
Pontano, Giovanni Gioviano
De Rebus Coelestibus.
[Celestial Things]
Naples: Sigismund Mayr, 1512.
121

=== Page 124 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Proclus
Procli Diadochi paraphrasis in Ptolemaei
libros IV de siderum effectionibus.
[Proclus Diadochus's Paraphrase of Ptolemy's
Four Books on the Effects of the Stars]
Latin translation by Leo Allatius
Leiden: Elsevir, 1635.
Ptolemy, Claudius
Tetrabiblos.
ed. & trans, by F. E. Robbins
The Loeb Classical Library
London: Wm. Heinemann and
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, 1940. xxiv,466 pp.
Schoner, Johann
De Judiciis Nativitarum libri tres.
[Three Books on the Judgments of Nativities]
Niimberg: J. Montani et Ulrici, 1545. viii,152 pp.
122

=== Page 125 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Astrologia Gallica
Book Fourteen
The Primum Caelum and its Division
into Twelve Parts
Translated from the Latin
By
James Herschel Holden, M.A.
Fellow of the American Federation of Astrologers

=== Page 126 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Translator's Preface 5
Book Fourteen
Preface 11
Section I. The Prime Physical Cause and the Twelve Divisions.
Chapter 1. Among the Effective Physical Causes, there 12
is One that is First and Most Universal of All, and that is
the Primum Caelum
Chapter 2. The Primum Caelum Consists of Parts of 15
Diverse Virtue
Chapter 3. The Primary and Actual Division by Nature 16
Chapter 4. The Secondary and Virtual Division by Nature 18
Chapter 5. The Proper Elemental Natures of the Individual 23
Signs are Investigated and Proved
Chapter 6. The Twelve Divisions or the Signs of the 30
Zodiac Cannot be Established in any other Caelum than the
Primum Caelum; and what is a Twelfth Part
Chapter 7. What Kind of Error Concerning the Elemental 36
Natures of the Signs was Introduced by Ptolemy and Cardan
Chapter 8. What Objections were Made by Pico Mirandola 38
and Alexander de Angelis to the Division of the Zodiac into
Twelve Signs
Chapter 9. How Outstanding are Those Things that Follow 44
from the Causes of the Division of the Caelum Assigned
Above
Section II. The General Divisions of the Signs for the Whole Earth.
Chapter 1. The Fire, Air, Water, and Earth Signs 47
Chapter 2. The Choleric, Sanguinary, Phlegmatic, and 48
Melancholy Signs
3

=== Page 127 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Chapter 3. The Masculine and Feminine Signs 49
Chapter 4. The Diurnal and Nocturnal Signs 52
Chapter 5. The Northern and Southern Signs 53
Chapter 6. The Mobile, Fixed, and Common Signs 53
Chapter 7. The Commanding and Obeying Signs 55
Chapter 8. The Antiscion Signs 57
Chapter 9, The Signs that Aspect Each Other and Those 59
that do Not
Chapter 10. The Conjunct and Inconjunct Signs 61
Chapter 11. Some Other Divisions of the Signs that 62
Should Plainly be Rejected
Chapter 12. The Constellations of the Firmament 63
Index of Persons 67
Bibliography 69
4

=== Page 128 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
Translator's Preface
In this Book Morin begins with an elaborate explanation of
why the Primum Caelum^ is divided into exactly twelve sections,
called the Signs of the Zodiac, and he also discusses the several
ways in which the Signs are classified. He repeats the assertion,
made in earlier Books of the AG, that at the beginning of the world
(roughly 6,000 years ago) the Sun was in the beginning of tropical
Aries as was the solar apogee. And he cites these reasons as prov-
ing that Aries is the first Sign of the Zodiac. He also relates Aries to
the season of spring, and he says that this is another reason for
making it the first Sign. This brings up the fact that the seasons of
the year are reversed south of the equator, and Morin briefly al-
ludes to that, but he insists that Aries is Aries, both north and
south.2
The four elements, the four qualities, and the triplicities of the
Signs are mentioned. And in a digression into number symbolism,
he adduces reasons why 3 is a prime number, which combined
with the 4 of the elements, gives 12—the proper number for the di-
vision of the Zodiac into 12 Signs.
From time to time, objections to all of this by Pico della
Mirandola (1463-1494) and Alexander de Angelis are mentioned
and refuted. Those men wrote books in which they pointed out
what they believed to be irrational beliefs held by astrologers.
Their books were still familiar to readers in the first half of the 17th
century, so Morin thought it necessary to deal with their com-
' Stated to be the outermost sphere of the universe.
2 Morin takes up this matter at much greater length in Book 15. Modem southern
astrologers agree with Morin's statement. I recall raising the question with the
New Zealand astrologer Donn Forrest (1919-1987) in 1982. He retorted angrily
that "we don't stand on our heads below the equator," and went on to assert that
there was no reversal of the signs below the equator. But still, since the seasons
are reversed, then either the signs must be reversed or else the arguments by Ptol-
emy and Morin that are based upon the seasons must be considered to be invalid.
5

=== Page 129 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
plaints. Today their works are no longer read either by critics of as-
trology or by partisans of the art; and in fact even their names are
scarcely known. Therefore, the present day astrologer may regret
that Morin went to such lengths to present their criticisms and his
refutations of them. Still, something can be learned from the dis-
cussion, even though it is now of mainly historical interest.
In the present Book 14 and in some of the later ones, the
reader will notice that Morin talks a lot about the "Four Elements,"
which he says are Fire, Earth, Air, and Water, and occasionally
about a sort of fifth element, "Ether." He also talks about the "Four
Qualities," which he defines as Heat, Cold, Moistness, and Dry-
ness. But both of these terms, as he uses them, are now out-of-date.
They were current in the science of the first half of the 17th cen-
tury, but both chemistry and physics were in their infancy then.
The old philosophers had coined these terms to describe material
substances and some of their obvious properties, but as science
progressed, beginning in the 17th century and extending into the
18th century, new discoveries and theories eventually displaced
these terms.
Morin's reason for talking so much about them is that in addi-
tion to teaching practical astrology, he had two other goals: (1) to
demonstrate that astrology was soundly based upon physical sci-
ence; and (2) to show that astrology was not at odds with Roman
Catholic religious dogma. But we must recognize that science has
changed a lot since Morin's time, and that the necessity for prov-
ing that astrology is not irreligious has largely vanished.
And while 21st century astrologers know that "elements" are
now defined as material substances that are unique and not com-
posite, they can still benefit from the older definition by analogy.
The old Four Elements can also be viewed as Qualities of mat-
ter—"fiery heat," solid, gaseous, and liquid substances; and the
term Ether was still in use as late as the 19th century, but has now
been replaced by the more stylish term "space," which might be
defined as a nothingness that has physical properties.
The reader will also note that Morin discusses magnets and
6

=== Page 130 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14-
magnetism. This probably reflects John Kepler's speculations
about them. It seemed to Kepler that there must be some attractive
force in the universe, and he thought that it might either be magne-
tism or something similar to it. We now call it gravity, but it is still
a mysterious force. Again, Morin's reason for discussing magne-
tism that he is trying to relate astrological influences to something
physical.
As astrologers, we are mainly interested in learning Morin's
methods of reading charts and using the auxiliary features of as-
trology to make predictions. Experience teaches us as it taught
Morin that the methods he explains are valid and effective. And we
are prepared to ignore the criticisms of people who know nothing
of astrology and have had no experience with it. Consequently, the
fact that Morin's concepts of physics and chemistry are now out-
dated does not detract from his exposition of his astrological meth-
ods. We do not understand the physical mechanism by which as-
trology works, but experience teaches us that it does work, and that
is sufficient for us.
I would like to say something about the translation. I have
tried to translate Morin's Latin as literally as possible, but some-
times I have thought it necessary to paraphrase his words, and I
have often inserted some words that are common and needful in
English sentences but less common or not found at all in his schol-
arly 17th century Latin. And since Morin had a large Latin vocab-
ulary, he often uses uncommon Latin words for the sake of variety.
I have preferred to render them by their more common English
equivalents, so I have dulled his literary style to some extent.
He seldom uses italics except for his Preface, chapter titles,
and quotations. I have retained the first two of these, but I have
generally handled quotations by enclosing them in double quota-
tion marks. And I have italicized a number of words to point up
some of the items under discussion in the several chapters.
Morin uses a number of words in a technical sense. I have ren-
dered them by their most common English equivalent, even when
their most common present-day meaning is not what he had in
7

=== Page 131 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
mind. An example is the Latin word virtus, which I have translated
as 'virtue'. The Latin word's root meaning is 'strength', but it car-
ries the implication of a particular kind of strength arising from the
condition of its possessor. The English word 'virtue' now means
mainly 'moral uprightness'. But to translate virtus as 'strength' is
not adequate, for to Morin it referred to the characteristics of a
planet as well as to its active force—'strength' does not carry that
implication. So I have rendered it simply as 'virtue', but I have
added a footnote to explain the term more fully.
The word determinatio 'determination' is another similar
case; it is a very important technical term in Morin's astrology. In
classical Latin the word means 'boundary', 'conclusion', or 'end'.
But Morin used it as a noun derived from the verb determino,
whose secondary meaning was 'to fix or settle something'. Conse-
quently, for him a 'determination' was the making of a particular
Signification, especially by the action of a celestial house on a
planet that was in it or was its ruler. The usual sense of the word in
English is 'maintenance of a fixed purpose to do something', al-
though in legal circles it means 'a judicial decision' or 'the logical
resolution of a question', which is somewhat like Morin's mean-
ing. I have explained its technical meaning in a footnote.
In the case of the Latin word Caelum, which means 'sky' or
'heavens', I have chosen to retain the Latin word in italics. Morin
sometimes uses it to refer to the 'sky' in general, but more often he
has in mind the orientation of the Zodiac and the placement in it of
the planets at a particular time, when it could be translated as 'ce-
lestial configuration', but Caelum is simpler. In Morin's day the
old term Primum Caelum 'first sky' was still in use. It referred to
the outermost sphere of the universe, on which the Signs of the Zo-
diac, were thought to be located. Since the Earth was still consid-
ered by him to be the center of the universe, the sphere of the Pri-
mum Caelum, sometimes called the Primum Mobile or the 'First
Mover', was thought to be in daily rotation about the Earth. Within
the Primum Caelum was the sphere of the second Caelum, on
which the constellations and the fixed stars were supposed to be
8

=== Page 132 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
located. It was dragged along by the motion of the Primum
Caelum, so it also rotated once every day. These were old and now
abandoned astronomical concepts, but they were still current to
some extent in the first half of the 17th century.
The terms 'influence', 'element', and 'quality' are defined in
the text.
There are a number of other technical terms whose meaning
may differ somewhat from the more common meaning of the Eng-
lish word used to translate them, but, as with the two words above,
I have explained them in a footnote at their first occurrence in the
translation.
James Herschel Holden
3 July 2005
9

=== Page 133 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
10

=== Page 134 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
ASTROLOGIA GALLICA
BOOK FOURTEEN
PREFACE
In this Book the Primary and Supreme Arcana of Judicial As-
trology is set forth and disclosed by us; namely, the division of the
Primum Mobile into 12 parts, differing among themselves in their
elemental nature and disposed in a certain order. And yet what is
the reason, indeed the faith of surpassing that may be seen; that
the Primum Mobile is said by common consensus to be the sim-
plest ofall physical bodies and the most homogeneous; yet it has a
foundation in nature similarly chosen by rational experience, as
will be stated below. But for investigating the cause of that divi-
sion, the work was for us not a meager or unhappy intellectual ef-
fort. But if the cause assigned by us will have been laughed at by
any astrologer, let him assign a truer one; since astrology stands
upon experience; seeing that in the truth of the matter the Caelum
itself is divided into parts differing in their elemental natures.
11

=== Page 135 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
SECTION I.
The Prime Physical Cause and the Division
into Twelfths.
Chapter 1.
Among the Effective Physical Causes, there is One that is First
and Most Universal of All, and That is the Primum Caelum.
Since in nature there is a subordination of acting causes;
therefore, either there will be a procession to infinity in the order
of the causes, which is rejected by all the philosophers; or else
there will be one prime cause of all things, which is proposed here.
But now, that such a cause is the Primum Caelum is proved thus.
The prime effective cause of all things, and the one that is most
universal, must be said to lie in Nature, to which everything else is
subordinated, but nature is subordinated to nothing else; or how
would everything else be determined to a specific kind of action,
but Nature to none. Or, what would be concurring with all natural
effects, when none concurs with itself by a superior physical
cause, according to Book 7, Chapter 10. And yet, such a one is the
Primum Caelum, whose very simple and marvelous nature was
stated in Book 3, Section 3, Chapter 3. For when man generates
man, the elements of the seed determine per se the generation of a
man; and those elements determine the Sun, the Moon, and the rest
of the planets to acting in accordance with their own effects; that is,
the individual planets make their influxes on the fetus in accordance
with their own proper natures, as reasonable experience proves.
Moreover, the Sun, the Moon, and the rest of the planets determine
the Primum Caelum similarly to act upon the native, just as that
part of the Caelum, under which the Sun is located at the beginning
of his generation, acts like the Sun, in a solar manner,1 with respect
to that same fetus, at least until it is brought forth into the light.
1 Here Morin is referring to the position of the Sun at the moment of conception.
And he goes on to say that it acts in a solar manner on the fetus while it remains in
the womb.
12

=== Page 136 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
Moreover, in the actual moment of the nativity, which is the fe-
tus's completed and full generation, the Sun again determines the
Primum Caelum with respect to the native, so that that part under
which the Sun was at the moment of the nativity is like another
Sun, although one that is invisible and morally spiritual, that acts
in a solar manner or makes its influx with respect to the native,
subject to the rule of the Caelum so long as he lives his life, as is
plain from the directions of that location of the Sun and the transits
of the other planets through that same location, during the life of
the native. And not only is the Primum Caelum determined to act-
ing on the native with the nature of the Sun, the Moon, Jupiter, etc.,
but also according to the nature of the elements. For if in the na-
tive's ASC there is that part of the Caelum that is called Aries, it
will cause the native to be of a fiery or bilious1 temperament; if it is
Cancer, of a watery temperament; and so on with the rest of the
Signs, which will be more fully explained in its own place.
And so the Primum Caelum is actively determined to the na-
ture of the planets, the elements, and the parents, seeing that with a
man it generates a man, with the element of Water it moistens, and
with the Sun it heats, and of these in acting as thus it completes its
effects. And the same must be said about the Caelum itself and
about the rest of the particular causes devoting attention to their
own natural effects. Therefore, since so broad an active determina-
tion does not agree with any element, with the Ether, and the circle
of the Caelum, or a planet, as does the Primum Caelum, and it does
not actively determine any other physical body, it is plain that the
Primum Caelum is the prime physical cause of all things and the
most universal cause, which eminently contains the virtues2 of all
the other causes. But because the position of that first cause and its
approval is of the greatest moment for astrology, we have proved
those same things in another way. For since Aries and Cancer do
1 The word bilious refers to one of the Four Humors, namely Yellow Bile, which
in excess produces a charismatic, active temperament, sometimes called cho-
leric. It does not refer here to its modem meaning "sickly."
2 The technical term virtue is used to refer to the strength and characteristic of a
planet.
13

=== Page 137 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
not do the same things in the ASC, but different things—that is,
Aries gives a bilious temperament and a martial character, but
Cancer a phlegmatic temperament and a Lunar character—there-
fore, diverse virtues are inherent in the Signs themselves; and
therefore, either formally, or eminently, or only determinatively;
but not formally, for the Primum Caelum is homogeneous, because
(otherwise) it would be heterogeneous; and it is not sufficient that
it would be eminent, because since Aries and Cancer, as parts of
the Caelum are essentially the same between themselves and all
the rest; also the same eminent force is in (all of) them; notwith-
standing that their strengths are diverse; therefore, they will have
these with diverse determinations.^ Since, therefore, the virtues of
the elements and the planets are in the twelve divisions, Aries,
Taurus, Gemini, etc., as experience proves; therefore, those Signs
ought to be determined to those virtues or natures. It is therefore
necessary for the Signs themselves that they should be parts of the
Primum Caelum, or that there is an eminent force in the Primum
Caelum itself, indiscriminatingly complicating those natures and
determinable to the individual ones of them; which, moreover, is
such that it is the prime and most universal physical cause of all
things; for there is nothing else in nature with which a universal
determination agrees more.
You will object. If the Primum Caelum is the prime physical
cause, being strong with a virtue appropriate to itself, why does it
not by means of this alter and change all the bodies that are inferior
and subordinated to itself?
I reply. The proper virtue of the Caelum is not formally ele-
mental or planetary, but another one surpassing them, contrary to
no other virtue, but friendly to all of them. Therefore, from the Pri-
mum Caelum seen in all its own simplicity, nothing can be altered,
corrupted, or changed, but rather all things that are in its abyss are
fostered and conserved, just as fish in the sea—their own proper
element—are fostered, nourished, and conserved, and only from
1 The technical term determination is used to signify the effect that is characteris-
tic of a Sign or a celestial house.
14

=== Page 138 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
other causes are they altered and corrupted. And such a thing must
the prime physical cause be, a thing that is contrary to none, but the
friend of all, and determinable by everything, as by its own arche-
type; indeed, by a perfect analogy it agrees with God. But from the
Primum Caelum seen beyond its simplicity, like its own determi-
nations, as is said below, all these inferior things1 are generated
and corrupted, as will be proved in its own place.
Chapter 2.
The Primum Caelum Consists of Parts of Diverse Virtue.
Since all the planets always move by their own or second mo-
tion under the same course of the Primum Caelum, which they call
the Zodiac; and consequently they affect sublunar things2 in vari-
ous ways, in accordance with each one's own different site under
that Zodiac, it ought to be divided by Nature into parts of various
powers with respect to the Globe of the Earth, from which the for-
mer are discovered and in which they are reduced to action. Other-
wise, the same planet with an active virtue, moving with that same
active virtue through the whole Zodiac, would accomplish differ-
ent things in the same passive virtue, contrary to Axiom 9 of the
Elements of Astrology, for which see Book 19.
Moreover, the same forces are twofold in kind—that is, ele-
mental and influential. And the elemental forces correspond to the
natures of the elements—namely, hot, cold, moist, and dry; for
sublunar things experience such things, and the intensifications or
relaxations of them from the places in the Zodiac and from the de-
scent of the planets [to places] in the Zodiac; but the influential
forces correspond to the proper natures of the planets; in fact, all
the influences are generically reduced to the primary governors of
the World—that is, the natures of the planets—not indeed exclud-
ing those that are proper to the fixed stars. And those forces in the
1 By inferior things, i.e. Mower things', Morin is referring to things upon the earth
or 'sublunar things' as he sometimes calls them.
2 Morin uses the expression sublunar things to refer to things on the earth.
15

=== Page 139 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Zodiac are not confounded, but are distinguished in such a way
that experience, the faithful instructor of things, proves that each
part of the Zodiac preserves its own constant nature—both ele-
mental and influential. Therefore, this division of the Zodiac or of
the Caelum must be inquired into by us, which inquiry indeed
other than by fictitious reasons would therefore seem to be impos-
sible; both, because the Caelum is a circular body, and circles by
their nature have no beginning or end; and then because it is the
simplest and most homogeneous in its material form and virtue.
Truly, because for whatever is sought, Nature is never devoid of a
light leading the way for our minds; if we have followed that lead,
we shall finally enter into the sanctuary of that hitherto hidden
truth. But it must be noted that when the discussion here is about
the division of a spherical body that is the simplest and most ho-
mogeneous of all, the method of division will not be sought from
the material, the form, or the figure, but from something beyond
and above that, as something delicate and spiritual, acting from the
purpose of the Creator of the World, which is the source and prime
cause of all principles.
Chapter 3.
The Primary and Actual Division by Nature.
In the beginning, therefore, attention must be wisely directed
to what thing Nature supplies to be divided; then in addition, to
whether it appoints any primary divisions, since it would make
nothing in vain, but it would put in front of the eyes of men the pri-
mary ways of things and the primary principles, from which, as
running hither and thither from more familiar things to the less
known, he might then proceed. Moreover, the Primum Caelum
shows that it is divided in the first place by the equator, the pri-
mary circle of motion of the Caelum itself. But this circle is again
divided first by nature into two equal parts by the ecliptic, the
proper circle of motion of the second Caelum, or the sphere of the
fixed stars; whence the ecliptic is called the circle of the second
16

=== Page 140 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14-
motion, common to all the stars, as the equator is the circle of the
first motion, only proper to the Primum Caelum; and one half of
the ecliptic inclines towards the north, the other half towards the
south; but its points of division are called the equinoctials, and
they are the most effective of the whole Caelum', because, situated
in both circles, they are powerful from the strengths of both
circles, and their power is plain from experience.
Besides, this division of the ecliptic would not yet suffice,
unless that same nature had indicated another division estab-
lished by the poles of the equator and the ecliptic, defined by way
of another circle, which they call the solstitial colure, by which a
certain union of the first and second circles is made. And both
halves of the ecliptic are cut twice in two other points called sol-
stices, so that the whole thing is seen to be divided into 4 equal
parts by an act of nature, because these circles and their poles are
real and not fictitious; therefore, this division is said by us to be a
real one.
Therefore, since this division of the Zodiac or the Caelum is
primary and complete, it would be stupid to think that it was made
in vain by Nature. Therefore, it is necessary that it was made on ac-
count of the action of the Caelum and the stars on these inferior
things. Moreover, the celestial bodies act with their elemental and
influential qualities, for they transmit both of them; and the Pri-
mum Caelum eminently contains all of them, as stated in Chapter 1
above. Therefore, since the elemental qualities, heat, cold, dry-
ness, and moistness, are the primary and most universal qualities
of nature, indeed those to which every sublunary body is suscepti-
ble, but not to the influential qualities, Nature seems to invoke the
four points of the above said division of the ecliptic to be ap-
pointed to the four sources of heat, cold, moistness, and dryness in
the Caelum.
17

=== Page 141 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Chapter 4.
The Secondary and Virtual Division by Nature.
For this reason, that division is called secondary and virtual
because it does not seem to be actually made by nature, but only to
originate from the virtue of the primary division while that ema-
nates into the ecliptic circle and multiplies itself. For each one of
the four above said points or sources is perceived to have two oth-
ers with them of the same nature—those namely by which it makes
an equilateral triangle in the ecliptic, so that consequently the
whole ecliptic is thus divided into twelve parts, each three of
which posited in trine aspect (to each other) are all of the same ele-
mental nature—of course, hot, cold, moist, and dry. Which,
though it is confirmed by experience, yet reason can scarcely ar-
rive at, on account of the subtlety of the thing, which is common to
all first principles.
Two reasons are set forth by the old astrologers, the first of
which is this: namely, that the Sun runs through the whole Zodiac
in a period of one year, but meanwhile the Moon comes together
with the Sun twelve times by twelve revolutions of the Moon it-
self, which are called months. So that, therefore, a year is divided
into 12 months, and the annual motion of the Sun under the Zodiac
is divided into 12 conjunctions with the Moon; so, that the Zodiac
or the Sun's way must be divided into 12 parts by nature, which is
rightly taught, so they have judged. But this division is not equal
and exact, for the annual period is not exactly distributed into 12
conjunctions of the Moon with the Sun.1
The second reason is that in the year there are 4 primary parts
differing in qualities among themselves, namely Spring, Summer,
Autumn, and Winter, to which correspond the 4 quadrants of the
Zodiac; but any one of these again admits manifest diversities of
time—that is, in its own beginning, middle, and end. For the ex-
tremes of each quadrant participate in the qualities of their neigh-
1 Since the length of the mean month is only 29.531 days, 12 mean months are
completed in only 354.4 days, and 13th month begins.
18

=== Page 142 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
bors on either side; but the middle preserves the exact temperature
of the quadrant. Whence, even though Spring is hot and moist,
nevertheless its beginning, on account of Winter, is more moist
than hot, but its end, on account of the Summer immediately fol-
lowing, is more hot than moist. And so on with the rest of the quad-
rants. So that as a result there are twelve differences of weather in
the whole year. Therefore, since both the year and the differences
of its parts are [resulting] from the different parts of the Zodiac that
the Sun runs through, it is not without logic that they have judged
that the Zodiac itself is naturally divided into twelve parts. And
this reasoning seems to me to be more accurate than the one above,
at least in the temperate zones; but in the torrid zone, especially un-
der the equator, when Summer, Winter, and the other parts of the
year are duplicated, it does not satisfy them, even in accordance
with the twelve part division. Moreover, neither of these provides
a reason, why the parts of the ecliptic that are placed in trine aspect
are allotted the same nature among themselves.
And so we must try to raise up the sharpness of the mind a little
higher with regard to the causes of this division and the finest and
simplest principles, which is the nature of the principles; for the first
principles are (based) upon reason, and there is no reason for them
except only God—the supreme principle of all principles and the
simplest truth, embracing the truths of all the sciences in itself. And
consequently, for us it suffices here to be from the natures of things
and from experiences, or to expound things agreeing with the phe-
nomena, from which neither in discourse nor in Nature are absurdi-
ties introduced, and especially not in the science of astrology itself.
But if any insolent person rejects our concepts, let him produce
some truer one, and ones more conformable to experiences on the
parts of the Caelum. For here there are only sought reasons for those
things which are perceived in the Caelum; namely, that one part of
the Caelum is of a fiery nature and the domicile of Mars; another
part is of the nature of Water and is the domicile of the Moon, etc.;
and I do not think that anyone would be happier for his success than
I, who do not even attribute these things to my intellect, but I con-
sider that they must be referred to the Father of Lights.
19

=== Page 143 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Because, therefore, whatever point is taken in the ecliptic,
even aside from any consideration of a planet, it determines the
other eleven points in the same circle, and in those twelve points, it
can thus be conceived that there are triplicities of the same nature.
For since whatever point of the greatest circle on a sphere has its
own essence from a pole, from which that circle is described, just
as both that whole circle, and therefore with the pole itself, the
point above has an essential connection, the circle of connection is
drawn from the point itself to the pole; and two circles are made
cutting themselves into two halves, the poles of which, because
again they are mutually from themselves, just as they are derived
from the poles in essence, as points of the circles; if again they are
connected by another circle drawn from the prime point taken as a
pole; there will now be 3 circles dividing themselves; and not from
the first point taken above, but beyond the third it can advance this
mutual connection of the poles. And because from what was said
above, the circle has its own essence from the pole from which it is
drawn; therefore, the circle's essence and virtue will eminently be-
long to that pole. And consequently, since from the three circles
above having been divided in turn into quarters, each one of the 4
sectional points of each circle, is the pole, and as far as the point of
that same circle, it has its own essence from two other poles, and
that in turn; and therefore, in any sectional point of the circle itself,
the virtue of the pole is threefold in number, which nevertheless is
of one kind and nature, because in those poles and circles there is
no inherent diversity of nature; if from any such point as a pole the
threefold virtue into the circle of which it is the pole is conceived
to be poured out, there arise in that same circle four times three vir-
tues of the same nature taken three times, and consequently twelve
in the whole circle itself. And therefore, since each one of these
four sectional points is thus equal to another in virtue and preroga-
tive; there will not be any reason why from these individual points
there should not be an equal effusion of that threefold virtue onto
the whole circle; therefore, from the four threefold virtues of these
points, the whole circle may be divided into twelve equal parts.
And because each of these parts unfolds its own threefold virtue on
80

=== Page 144 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
the whole circle, and that equally among themselves, therefore the
parts of the circle that are placed in trine aspect will be of the same
nature among themselves, for otherwise the efftision of the virtue
of that triplicity would be made unequally in the whole circle by
those four sectional points; contrary to the hypothesis.
Furthermore, both divisions of the Caelum are similarly ex-
plained here, namely the primary or the actual, and the secondary
or virtual; for the former is made by the two circles dividing the su-
perimposed circle at four points, distant by quadrants. But the lat-
ter by the efilision of virtue of each of those four points onto the
others, by trine aspect from the effusing remote ones. Whence,
from these there arises the identity of natures or properties in the
circle, and from the former ones the opposite.
Besides, lest any incapacity of the higher mind disfigure the
speculative reasoning, let him see how many masters of the specu-
lative numerical science, who, along with Pythagoras and Plato
have asserted that they eminently comprehend the unity of all
numbers, their virtues and properties; let him see Proclus On Eu-
clid about the dignity of a point, but especially let him read Kepler,
Copernican Astronomy, Book I, pp. 48 & 49, on the dignity of the
center, when he says:
The center is the origin of the sphere, which
taken away, there is no sphere or circle; and that
center is indivisible and not investigatible. More-
over, the spherical surface is the character and im-
age of the center and like a lightning flash from it
and the way to it. And who sees the surface, sees
in it itself and the center not otherwise.
and other things there set forth, as it shows to be inherent in the
sphere of the TRINITY that must be adored as a marvelously ex-
pressed image that is plain from those things that we have said
above.
Indeed, the eternal TRINITY is from infinite Love, and it is
the source and substance of infinite Love; in which the one who
21

=== Page 145 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
loves is first, the one who is loved is second; and there comes
forth from both of them Love, which is third, (but) they are one in
number in Nature; and therefore it is the simplest and most per-
fected in Love, whose infinite perfection pours out with itself
onto all things; and yet more perfectly in itself more by analogy is
poured out the sort of things that are those that stand together in
the union of the Three; whence it is said "the whole Three per-
fected"; first, that is, and the most universal of the prime Three by
that perfection that exists in Love, which all the Three with na-
ture's own capacity participates in various ways. And this is the
first essential and hidden cause, why, when the Zodiac or the
Ecliptic from the fourfold creation of the primary qualities, led
into the divine Ternary of Love, is perfectly and absolutely di-
vided into twelve parts, some of which are opposed, others
square, others in trine aspect, etc. The wiser ones of the more re-
cent astrologers, instructed by their experiences, have discovered
in the twelve parts of that same ecliptic aspecting each other by
trine, a general identity of Nature; in those the perfection of the
Trine, that is Love is indeed manifestly flourishing; so that, in the
kind of effective aspects discovered in the circle, they have
claimed the trine to be an aspect of the identity of Nature, or per-
fected amity, and among other things of good and natural felicity
greatly diffused upon sublunar things, as daily experience here
and there proves in natal figures.
And let these things that have been said be sufficient about the
cause of the secondary division of the Caelum into parts, and into
neither more nor less than twelve parts; which are therefore called
Twelfths, commonly too the Signs of the Zodiac and the domiciles
of the planets, under which the individual planets make their own
revolutions. Moreover, their names and their order, begun from
the intersection of the ecliptic and the equator, towards the north-
em part of the World are Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo,
Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, and Pis-
ces; of which the characters are also put here in the same order: T,
y, S, ^1, tlP, HL, /, "YS, H. But note that these names
fabulously imposed (on them) by the Heathen do not express the
22

=== Page 146 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
true natures of the Signs,1 which ought to be expressed by means
of the natures of the planets, as is stated in the following Book, in
the second chapter.
Chapter 5.
The Proper Elemental Natures of the Individual Signs
are Investigated and Proved.
Having stated the things above as known, it must be more
fully determined from which of these four cardinal points heat is
derived, from which moistness, and from which cold or dryness
(acting) upon these inferior things. But this task, this labor, must
yet be conquered by the light of Nature.
Since, therefore, the cutting of the ecliptic by the equator is
the first and most evident of all; indeed it is also the cause of an-
other that is made through the poles of both circles, that will be the
equinoctial points, which, among others, not only of the ecliptic,
but also of the whole Caelum are the primary and most powerful
ones; that is because at the same time there exist in both the ecliptic
and the equator, the celestial circles that are altogether primary in
their virtue, the latter in moving, and the former in influencing.
And since there are also middle places in the World, but the sol-
stices face the extremes of the World or the poles, (then) rightly
and wisely there ought to be assigned to the equinoctial points
qualities that are between the others in the dignity of the primary
and the nature of the middle places; and consequently, all those of
nature that are most friendly and rejoice in the middle—such as
heat and moistness are—from which there is generation and life
for sublunar things, and the name for the Zodiac itself,2 as corrup-
tion and death are from cold and dryness, which are also deadly to
living things, hence from this they are relegated to the extremes of
1 Morin means that the nature of a Sign should not be taken from its name, but in
this he differs from most other astrologers both ancient and modem.
2 The word Zodiac, ho zodiakos in Greek, means literally 'the thing containing
living creatures'.
23

=== Page 147 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
the World; and therefore it seems to have been of the highest wis-
dom that a dispersed virtue is weaker than a united one; for if in the
middle of the World the sources of cold and dryness had existed, it
is by no means doubtful that the corruptive causes would have pre-
vailed over the generative ones, especially because both equinoc-
tial points are mutually opposed to each other as antiscions, which
gives strength to both of them. And from that, not only would gen-
erations have been rarer, but a fitting duration would also have
been denied to the things generated because of the strength of the
corruptive virtues. For, just as moistness is pre-eminent over the
birth of things, but especially of animals, and heat is pre-eminent
over their vigor, so dryness is pre-eminent over their decline, and
cold over their demise. But on the contrary, God had indeed from
the beginning of creation intended for frequent generations and a
fitting duration for generated things, so that the individual species
might be multiplied, like that divine saying Increase and multiply
yourselves and fill up the earth.1 Very wisely, therefore, did God
Himself arrange these causes—namely, by locating the primary
generative causes in the middle of the World and the primary cor-
ruptive ones towards its extremes. Therefore, the sources of heat
and moistness will be inherent in the equinoctial points, whence
under the equator heat and moistness flourish at their greatest, and
it heats up very much and rains very much. But the solstices are the
sources of cold and dryness, whence towards the extremes of the
World there is a greater intensification of cold and dryness.
Finally, led thus by that same Nature, we shall find in which
equinoctial point heat is inherent and in which one cold is inherent
(which seems to be the target of our investigation).
It is therefore certain that the one of the equinoctial points, to
which heat is suitable with respect to the Earth, will have it either
from itself or from another. Because, since the Primum Caelum is
certainly homogeneous, as has already been shown, those points in
it only differ (so that) one is not another, but one is in one part of
1 Genesis, 1. 22 "Increase and multiply yourselves and fill up the waters of the
sea; and let the birds be multiplied on the earth."
24

=== Page 148 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
the Caelum and the other is in the opposite part; wherefore, since
all things are equal in these, heat cannot agree with one of them
more than with the other; but even though both of them are dis-
posed to heat or moistness according to what was said above, both
of those qualities will be inherent in whichever one is innately nei-
ther the one nor the other. But no other point in the whole Caelum
will have it, because the Caelum displays itself in the same way to
both (points). And finally, not from any other part of the Caelum
itself, because of its homogeneity, by reason of which it is not suit-
able to confer heat on that point which is neither one point nor the
other. Therefore, that by which heat is conferred upon the other
point will be extrinsic to that point and to the whole Caelum.
And consequently, since those qualities are assigned to parts
of the Caelum that are not seen in them, either intrinsically, be-
cause of the homogeneity of the Caelum, but (rather) with respect
to the Earth, it must be seen whether from the Terrestrial Globe ei-
ther one of the equinoxes can be determined to heat or moistness,
or to a fiery or an airy nature, with respect to it. And so, it will ei-
ther be determined for the whole globe of the Earth or from that
part of it that is turned towards that point at the beginning of the
World, rather than the one opposed or another, for the application
of the one that is turned toward it is more perfected and conse-
quently more effective. Not from the whole globe, because since it
is in the center of the Primum Caelum, it is equally placed with re-
gard to any point of it; therefore, it will determine itself neither to
heat in preference to any other quality. But not even from the part
that is turned toward it, because both equinoctial points had a
turned part of that same globe at the beginning of the World; and
therefore, when those points and the parts of the globe turned to
them, in that they existed altogether equal at the beginning of the
World, there is no reason why one of the points was determined
from the turned part to heat rather than to moistness. Which is con-
firmed by this: because on the first day of Creation, the Terrestrial
Globe was homogeneous everywhere on its surface; the whole
Water-Earth, and the surrounding sphere, were not yet fertile with
the seeds of things and with the divine blessing, as can be con-
25

=== Page 149 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
eluded from the first chapter of Genesis. Therefore, at the begin-
ning of the World, neither of these points was determined to heat
by the Terrestrial Globe or to moistness, or to a fiery or airy nature.
Nor indeed was it rather determined to cold and dryness or to a wa-
tery and earthy nature by the nature of that same Globe. And by the
same reasoning it will be proved that it was not determined by the
elements Air or Fire.
Moreover, it stands among all the masters of the astronomy
that was finally restored by us that not only was the solar apogee at
the beginning of Aries at the beginning of the World, but from Ex-
odus, Chapter 12,1 the body of the Sun is also the substantial
source of celestial heat, because the month of Nisan or March is
truly the first month of the year, as was shown by us in Book 2,
Chapter 4, so that consequently the Sun will be between the begin-
ning of Aries and the middle of the Terrestrial Globe; and the
Earth, from all the parts of the Caelum, (but) only from the begin-
ning of Aries, was first noticeably heated by the heat of the
Caelum. Moreover, by reason of these things the beginning of
Aries is made much more important than the beginning of Libra,
and that between the two I have determined the greatest difference
with respect to the Earth, no one of sound mind will deny. There-
fore, the beginning of Aries will be the beginning of the Earth it-
self, as long as this will be subject to alteration, the source and
cause of the planetary or celestial heat\ not formally and per se, but
only extrinsically and determinatively. Even so, as in a natal figure
the point of the Caelum under which the Sun is placed with respect
to the native, and to that native through the determination by the
Sun, (is) the source and cause of the solar force, both elemental
1 Probably the reference is to Exodus 12:2 Mens is iste, vobis principium
mensium; primus erit in mensibus anni 'This month, for you the first of the
months; it will be the first among the months of the year*. The month is named in
Exodus 13:4 Hodie egredimini mense novarum frugum 'Today you are going out
in the month of new fruits'. The phrase 'new fruits' is a translation of the Hebrew
month name Abib, which after the Exile was renamed Nisan. The original name
refers of course to the swelling of buds on plants and trees at the beginning of
spring.
26

=== Page 150 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
and influential, so long as that native lives; or the ascending point
of the Caelum is to that same native the source and cause of life by
the common consent of astrologers, who from that point judge on
the duration and quality of his life—a thing that is certainly en-
tirely wonderful that will be explained in detail in Book 21. Conse-
quently therefore, from what was said previously, the beginning of
Libra will be the similar source of moistness.
Furthermore, since the source of heat in Nature is the greatest
heat, and similarly with the moistness; moreover, a moderate dry-
ness (goes) with the greatest heat, and a moderate heat with the
greatest dryness from the elemental nature that is in the planets and
Signs; and the intense heat will be at the beginning of Aries, hav-
ing put aside the dryness, and consequently fiery in nature, which
is also inherent in the determined Sun. Moreover, in the opposite
point (there is) intense moistness and having put aside heat, and (it
is) therefore of an airy nature.
Truly, it would hardly have been sufficient at the beginning of
the World for the Sun to have been established under any other one
of the aforesaid points for the sake of determining that, since the
Sun will not determine that point that was put there first, unless as
the point and the beginning, to which therefore it is only the begin-
ning of virtue and that virtue itself is not proper; but from the
twelve aforesaid parts of the Caelum that are called Signs it is
proper for anything to be determined, since they had to differ in
virtue, and they were individually determinable in their virtue, in
so far as the parts of the first cause, to which it is only capable of
being actively determined by all the others, as was said above.
Moreover, the Sun at the beginning of the World, posited under the
same equinoctial point, was in the middle between two Signs, one
northern and the other southern. To which, since it holds itself per
se equally by body and apogee, it was able to determine neither per
se to heat-, therefore, it was still the task for another (cause), by
which the Sun might finally determine another one of the Signs.
This moreover was the motion given to that same Sun by God, by
which, since it could have equally aimed at a southern part through
27

=== Page 151 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
the Sign that is said to be Pisces, and to the northern part through
Aries; it could also have equally determined both of them to heat\
but, because by the sole will of God it turned to the north, and an
indifference of motion was taken away from it, therefore the Sign
that it first began to traverse, and which is called Aries, it made the
source of heat, or fiery in its nature, wherefore the one opposed to
it was also airy.
But with these things being thus, the Sign beginning from the
northern solstitial point next to the invasion of the Sun, that is
called Cancer, will be the source of the greatest cold,1 with moist-
ness abated, or watery, but Capricorn is opposed to it in the south-
em part—the source of the greatest dryness, with cold abated, and
consequently earthy, and so, Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn
will be the primary sources and the celestial origins of vigor, de-
cline, and the destmction of things that are generateable and cor-
ruptible. Moreover, this is the reason: because when both halves of
the Zodiac, the northern and the southern, are divided into two
sources, they ought to contain all those qualities in turn that are
necessary for generation, lest the first division in Nature be ac-
cused of imperfection or error. Moreover, the primary source of
the northern half, Aries, is hot and dry, therefore, there will be an-
other, namely Cancer, that is cold and moisf, and similarly, the pri-
mary source of the southern half, Libra, is moist and hof, therefore,
the remaining one, Capricorn, will be cold and dry. For thus, in the
sources of both halves, heat, cold, moistness, and dryness will be
found, as far as it greatly suits the generations and corruptions in
both parts of the World. And because the first qualities are primar-
ily divided into active and passive, therefore the Sun, the most ac-
tive of all the celestial bodies, by its first position and motion in the
northern part of the World, has determined it to the active quali-
ties, such as Aries to heat because it is hot.
But finally, from the virtue of the trine set forth above, of the
whole World, but especially of the celestial, divine impressed,
1 This certainly does not agree with the facts in the northern hemisphere. Morin's
reason for making this statement is not clear.
28

=== Page 152 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
four triplicities of Signs of the same elemental nature arise, that is
fiery from Aries, airy from Libra, watery from Cancer, and earthy
from Capricorn—not fictitious, as many think, but from what was
said before, the true foundation allotted in Nature that has until
now been unknown; however, by very frequent experience it has
become known that planets posited in the trine of Aries act ele-
mentally as if (they were) in Aries itself, although not influen-
tially, as will be more fully explained in its own place; and so with
the rest of the cardinal Signs. Nevertheless, it must be noted that
the ecliptic or the path of the Sun and the planets having been
placed as has already been seen, the natures of the Signs of the Zo-
diac were able to be varied in four ways at the beginning of the
World. First, with the Sun placed in the beginning of Aries and its
motion to the north contrary to the motion of the Primum Caelum,
as it was done. Second, with that same Sun left in that very point
that was said to be the beginning of Aries, but its motion inclined
to the south in accordance with the prime motion. Third, with the
Sun located in the beginning of Libra, and with its own motion to
the south, contrary to the motion of the Primum Caelum. Fourth,
with that same (planet) placed in that same place, with its own mo-
tion to the north in accordance with the prime motion. But now the
second and fourth modes were contrary to the decree of the Divine
Mind from their opposition to the first and second motions; of
which this is not only the cause that the planets remain longer
above the horizon, and thus operate more effectively on sublunar
things. But in addition, it expresses the motion of a sensitive ap-
proach that in the Cabala of the Houses or Spaces' is more fully
explained by us. Moreover, of the first and the third, God wanted
the first, for the sake of ennobling the northern part of the World,
as will be set forth more evidently below.
Therefore, from these causes it is established that the elemen-
tal forces of the Signs are not formally inherent in the Caelum, but
1 A reference to Morin's early book, Astrologicarum domorum cabala detecta a
Joanne Baptista Morino... 'The Cabala of the Astrological Houses disclosed by
Jean Baptiste Morin...' (Paris: J. Moreau, 1623).
29

=== Page 153 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
in another twofold scheme, certainly eminently since those very
Signs are parts of the first physical cause; then determinatively
from the location of the Sun at the beginning of the World, which
was pleasing to God. And because that first determination of the
Caelum was a general one with respect to the Earth or to the region
elemental at a birth; therefore, to it are subject all things from the el-
ements immediately after they were generated—and especially
man, for whom nevertheless all his own and particular force is also
inherent in his birth for the determining of the prime physical cause,
by which the Caelum itself through its own location with respect to
that man being bom, and through the planets, are determined to
those things that are the own things of that man, as is shown in its
own place and may be confirmed by experience. And consequently
that opinion of Kepler's is false, when in Chapter 6 of his Book on
the Fiery Triplicity, (he says that) the denomination of the
triplicities or the Signs of the Zodiac from the elements, namely
those that are otherwise said to be fiery, watery, etc., are not from the
nature of things, but from human judgment, and which he does not
prove, nor can it be proved. And if from the above said division of
the Caelum, approved by experiences, anyone can think up any
better reasons, he will without doubt merit a bravo! But I don't see
that there can be given better reasons that are self-consistent and
more conformable to the division of the houses and the aspects than
those which I do not doubt must be adhered to.1
Chapter 6.
The Twelve Divisions or the Signs of the Zodiac Cannot be Es-
tablished in any other Caelum than the Primum Caelum; and
What a Twelfth Part is.
That any Caelum other than the highest one cannot be divided
into the Signs or domiciles of the planets is plainly proved from
this: because whatever Sign or domicile of a planet (about which
However, it should be noted that all of Morin's arguments based upon the sea-
sons are only valid for the northern hemisphere.
30

=== Page 154 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
we shall speak below) is established in such a way by the constant
and immutable location of that Sign with respect to the intersection
of the ecliptic and the equator, which is only conceived by astrono-
mers to be in the Primum Caelum. But no part of any Caelum other
than the supreme one can retain itself invariable. For the sphere of
the fixed stars is moved under the Primum Caelum in the sequence
of the Signs, that is from the beginning of Aries to Taurus, Gemini,
etc. And if between the sphere of the fixed stars and the Primum
Caelum other Caeli are given because of the motion of trepida-
tion,1 as many astronomers wrongly suppose, the trepidation of
these would also take away the superior constancy of the site.
Therefore, those Signs can only be established in the Primum
Caelum. For them, each Sign has these two things—namely, that
the same Sign always exists in its own place; then, that it is in mo-
bile, diumal motion around the Earth, with the stillness of the
Earth shown by us.2 But these things cannot be obtained from
spheres lower than the Primum Caelum, as has already been said;
and also not from that space of the whole World; first, because no
part of it is mobile around the Earth; and then because the equi-
noxes always occur at no place on Earth under the same point of
mundane space; consequently, they are not fixed in any (part) of
that space. But they ought to be fixed in a fixed location in the
Signs; therefore, it is necessary that a Sign have those two (re-
quirements) from another (source), which cannot be (anything else
1 This refers to the so-called "Trepidation of the Equinoxes," a theory mentioned
by the late classical astronomer Theon of Alexandria. He said that according to
the "old astrologers," the equinoxes moved back and form through an arc of plus
or minus 8 degrees. The original purpose of this theory was to state the difference
between the fixed Zodiac of the Alexandrian astrologers and the tropical Zodiac
introduced by Hipparchus and adopted by Ptolemy. But the astronomers, begin-
ning with Theon himself, did not understand its purpose, and so it continued to
confuse astronomers down to the 16th century.
2 Morin steadfastly adhered to the old belief that the sky rotated about the Earth,
while the Earth stood still in the middle of the Universe. This had the advantage
of not conflicting with Roman Catholic religious dogma. In 1616 the Inquisitors
had declared the motion of the Earth to be heretical. Copemicus's book had been
placed upon the Index, and the Church absolutely forbade any assertion that the
Earth moved.
31

=== Page 155 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
than) the Primum Caelum itself with a mobile, diumal motion, and
in which the equinoctial points are fixed. Therefore, the Primum
Caelum is that one that is divided into domiciles or twelve Signs
for the seven planets.
Moreover, that division is made through the poles of the
ecliptic and not through those of the equator; because since the
Caelum itself is divided on account of the planets, as is established
below, it must have been divided for them not according to the mo-
tion of that Caelum or equator, but with the proper oblique motion
of the planets, which is about the poles of the ecliptic. For thus, any
planet and especially the Sun is most aptly carried through the
middle of its own Sign, in which the virtue of that Sign flourishes
more intensely, and from which it would perpetually diverge too
much if, with a division made by circles passing through the poles
of the equator, the middle of each Sign would stand on the equator.
Therefore, a Sign is a twelfth part of the Primum Caelum, di-
vided from a fixed equinox by circles passing through the poles of
the ecliptic, with a virtue appropriate to itself provided by a deter-
mination. Since it is said to be "a twelfth part of the Primum Mo-
bile," it is removed from lower spheres and from the mundane
space. Since it is said to be "divided from a fixed equinox," the lo-
cation of each Sign is denoted, and its invariability (of position)
with respect to the equinox. Since it is said to be "by circles pass-
ing through the poles of the ecliptic," it teaches that the ecliptic is
in the middle of each Sign and (that it is) the shortest way from the
location of that Sign to the equinoctial point. Therefore, certainly
in the ecliptic itself the virtue of each Sign ought to flourish by rea-
son of its location, but less beyond it, which squares with experi-
ence. Then, besides that, it also teaches the division of the Primum
Caelum into twelfths, not agreeing per se with the Caelum itself,
but only through determination. Finally, since it is said "with a
provided virtue appropriate to itself," it is declared that each Sign
is distinguished from every other Sign and also from the Caelum
as a whole by a particular virtue by reason of its determination.
Besides, someone might argue thus against the superior divi-
32

=== Page 156 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
sion of the Primum Caelum and the determination of its parts by
the Sun: "If the Sun, because it is hot, has determined Aries to heat
by its presence and motion, it has therefore also determined it to its
own influential nature." But both of these (arguments) are false,
since Aries is determined to the elemental nature of Mars, which is
fiery, as is Aries itself, and then to the influential nature of Mars it-
self, of which Aries is said by astrologers to be its domicile; there-
fore, it has not determined Aries to heat.
But it could (also) be said in reply: It is certain from what has
been said previously that heat, cold, moistness, and dryness are
prime qualities in the corruptible World, which comprises the ele-
mentary & ethereal or planetary region; and therefore the division
of the Caelum into these prime and common qualities of all cor-
ruptible Nature ought to be before any other; moreover, the Sun,
by its own position in the beginning of Aries, made this first divi-
sion and determination primarily, certainly determining Aries to
its own elemental nature, which is also fiery like the nature of
Mars; moreover, the rest of the Signs (to their determinations), as
was said above. But secondarily, it also determined it to its own in-
fluential nature, which especially becomes known by the twofold
essential dignity of each planet in the Caelum - that is, by its ruler-
ship and exaltation', and these, since for the Sun they are in differ-
ent and separate Signs, in which the former cannot naturally be
placed together, it is sufficient that with respect to the Earth it has
determined Aries to its natural element, namely fire, then to the in-
fluential (nature) of the exaltation; for Aries is the exaltation of the
Sun, as the astrologers say, because its influential virtue is very
much exalted especially in Aries, as (is stated) more fully about
these things in their own place.
As for these things, since in the realm of astrology nothing is
more evident than that in particular nativities of men the individual
planets determine to their own influential nature those places of
the Caelum in which they are located with respect to the individual
natives; moreover, they act along with those very places or Signs
of the Caelum, according to the nature of each one of them, that ex-
33

=== Page 157 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
ists invariably in it from the origin of the World. Indeed, from Ve-
nus in Aries a mixed action of the nature of Venus and Aries comes
forth; and from that same Venus in Gemini there is another mixed
action of the nature of Gemini; and it is certain that the Primum
Caelum of itself is homogeneous and only determinable to differ-
ent things by causes inferior to itself, which are the planets, that in
individual moments are prominent with respect to the inferior
things being bom, as was said above. And that determination can-
not be harmonized by many planets at the same time, on account of
the greatest confusion that would arise from it. For which planet
shall I like best among the rest? Rightly and deservedly that one
will be qualified first, and also for the whole Earth from its origin,
it will be a universal and perpetual determination, certainly it will
be the Sun, which is not only of a fiery nature and an elemental
heat, with an abundance no less than its light and mass of body, but
it far and away surpasses everything, so that it also bums, but be-
sides that it obtains the principle place among them, as their cho-
ms-master and moderator; indeed, five of them, Saturn, Jupiter,
Mars, Venus, and Mercury are its satellites, but the Moon is like its
spouse, namely because the Sun and the Moon have their own or-
bits arranged around the Earth, but the planets around the Sun it-
self?1 Moreover, that thing is entirely confirmed by (the fact that)
the apogee and the body of the Sun at the beginning of the World
was located at the beginning of Aries,2 which the Sacred Scrip-
tures or the (Rudolphine) Tables do not show for any other planet.
More shrewdly will that one seem to urge at the outset, who
says from the first chapter of Genesis that the Sun was only created
on the fourth day, but that the Earth had also produced living
1 This is the scheme of the solar system devised by Tycho Brahe and adopted by
Morin.
2 Morin had already discussed this in Astrologia Gallica, Book 2, Chapter 3. See
the translation of that chapter in an addendum to my translation of Book 22, pp.
207-208. In it he adopted Kepler's estimate of the creation of the world as having
taken place 3,968 years before the birth of Christ. Modem figures would put the
Solar apogee at 0 degrees in the tropical Zodiac at about 4075 B.C., which is
fairly close to Kepler's 400-year old estimate.
34

=== Page 158 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
plants and other things; and consequently, neither the Sun nor the
Signs of the Primum Caelum were in charge at the beginning of the
World.
To which objection, we may reply first: that chapter of Gene-
sis on the creation of the World1 is explained in very different
ways by various theologians and philosophers; and they have en-
gaged greatly in controversy among themselves as to whether the
light created on the first day was a substance of the Sun or not; in-
deed, whether the entire World and its arrangement was made at
that same moment of time. Second. It follows from the text of that
chapter that the water was not made on the second day, but was
only divided from the middle of the firmament; and similarly, the
Earth was not made on the third day but only revealed from the wa-
ters; and by consequence, the Earth, the water, and the entire ele-
mental region were made on the first day simultaneously with the
Caelum and light; because, moreover, that light is the globe of the
Sun itself, not yet condensed as it is now, or (as) the material of the
planets, still covered up in such a way as the Earth was covered up
until the third day, so that only imperfectly did it illuminate; from
which it is proved, because it is established from the literal sense of
the words—to which it is safer to adhere—that when it is said that
evening and morning were made on days one, two, three, etc.,
those days are understood to be with reference to the Earth or the
elemental region. But this cannot be the case, unless there was
some globe that was at least obscurely luminous, (which) by the
diurnal motion of the Caelum circling around the Earth had made
the evening and morning and had divided the diurnal light from the
1 Here, it may be helpful to give a summary of the Creation according to Genesis,
Chapters 1&2: "On the first day, God created light, and evening and morning
were made; on the second day, He divided the firmament (the Caelum) from the
waters, and evening and morning were made; on the third day, He created the dry
land separated from the waters and seeded it with plants, and evening and morn-
ing were made; on the fourth day. He created the luminaries in the Caelum, and
evening and morning were made; on the fifth day He created animal life, and eve-
ning and morning were made; on the sixth day He created male and female hu-
mans to rule the Earth and all that was in it, and evening and morning were made;
on the seventh day. He completed his work and blessed it."
35

=== Page 159 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
nocturnal darkness. Since therefore the light that was made on the
first day provided that, and on the fourth day that same duty was in
general entrusted to the Sun, which ever since has performed by
dividing the day from the night or the light from the darkness, to be
sure it seems that it must be proposed that the light created on the
first day was nothing else than the body of the Sun itself, either not
yet condensed or more truly covered up with that material, from
which on the fourth day the rest of the planets were made; and that
on the fourth day it was completed or disclosed, as the Earth was
on the third day. For, as in an elementary region, so in the ethereal
or planetary region, it is entirely probable that in the first days
there was a confusion that is called Chaos by the poets. But now,
either all things were made at the same moment, or the light that
was created on the first day was the globe of the Sun upon them,
(so) the doctrine stated above by us holds. For always in the birth
of the Earth, the Sun is found in the beginning of Aries with its
own motion towards the northern part of the ecliptic; and so the
Primum Caelum, in itself homogeneous, has determined (itself)
into different parts with elemental qualities, as was stated above.
Chapter 7.
What Kind of Error Concerning the Elemental Natures of the
Signs was Introduced by Ptolemy and Cardan.
Ptolemy, the ancient prince of astrology, in Book 1, Chapter
10 of the Quadripartite,x says of the "general things," i.e. the ele-
mental powers of the Signs, with their times, that they correspond
1 This reference is to Telrabiblos i. 10 "Of the Effects of the Seasons and of the
Four Angles', which begins "Of the four seasons of the year, spring, summer, au-
tumn, and winter, spring exceeds in moisture on account of its diffusion after the
cold has passed and warmth is setting in; the summer, in heat, because of the
sucking up of the moisture during the hot season just past' and winter exceeds in
cold, because the sun is farthest away from the zenith. For this reason, although
there is no natural beginning of the Zodiac, since it is a circle, they assume that
the Sign which begins with the vemal equinox, that of Aries, is the starting-point
of them all..." (Robbins's translation).
36

=== Page 160 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
to the quarters of the year; and consequently the vernal Signs are
Aries, Taurus, and Gemini, as spring, hot and moist, and therefore
of an airy nature. The summer, moreover, (embraces) Cancer, Leo,
and Virgo, hot and dry, and therefore fiery." And (he speaks)
about the rest (of the seasons) in the same manner. Which he cer-
tainly confirms in the 10th Chapter, saying that the ancients estab-
lished the first Sign as Aries, in which the vernal equinox is, so that
they might start the moist nature of spring just as a live animation.
Cardan explains that same thing at length in his Commentary, as-
serting that Taurus is the most temperate Sign that is in the
Caelum, or the hottest and most moist according to its substance,
for he talks about it thus because the homogeneity of the Primum
Caelum was unknown to him, and its extrinsic determination,
about which (see) above; and he thinks that the parts of the Pri-
mum Caelum are substantially and intrinsically different. More-
over, Cardan's rationale about Taurus is because it is the most tem-
perate Sign of the vernal quarter, which is more temperate that all
the other (quarters); and he philosophizes about the rest (of the
Signs) in the same manner, concluding that the natures of the
twelve Signs are had down to the marrow. But Ptolemy professes
the same thing a second time in Quadripartite, Book 1, Chapter
17, when he says: "for since of the twelve Signs the two northern
ones come closest to our summit, and Cancer and Leo make the
greatest heats and the summer, etc." and a little after that he says
"the opposite Signs Capricorn and Aquarius are cold and wintry."
But that this opinion about the nature of the Signs is false is proved
by this: that according to Ptolemy's and Cardan's reasons, the Sign
Taurus in the southern part of the world will be the coldest and dri-
est because it is in the middle of autumn; and Scorpio will be the
hottest and most moist because it is in the middle of spring; and
consequently, if this is agreed, the nature of the Signs is mutable;
and this does not agree with them intrinsically and according to
their substance, as Cardan says (it does), but rather accidentally
and extrinsically from the part of the years and the place on the
Earth; whence, it is plain that the accidental nature of the Signs
was only unknown to Ptolemy and Cardan, which nature is not even
37

=== Page 161 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
inherent in them by impression or determination, as those things
were explained above, but only by their designation, so far as a Sign
that in one place on Earth is named hot, because when the Sun is in it
is summer in that place, but by a contrary cause in an opposite place
on Earth it is also said to be at the same time cold. But they are com-
pletely ignorant of the essential thing that coincides with them—ei-
ther in so far as the parts of the Primum Caelum, or in so far as the
Signs,. And with regard to this, we shall prove in its own place that
the Signs are immutable in any place on Earth.
Moreover, all the Arabs, observing more accurately the essen-
tial natures of the Signs from their effects, have agreed on this: that
some of the Signs are a fiery triplicity, others airy, others watery,
and others earthy, but because they have assigned no cause for this
division, it seems that they did not know any; and only through the
Cabala was that very doctrine, nevertheless concordant with experi-
ences, received from the bequeathed knowledge of Adam.
And so, from the doctrine set forth above, it is concluded that
the Signs, as parts of the Primum Caelum, are formally of the same
nature among themselves because they are of the same (stuff) as
the entire Caelum, which is homogeneous; moreover, the Signs, as
Signs, are formally of diverse natures among themselves. Namely
this happens to the parts of the Primum Caelum through their ex-
trinsic determination, so that the Signs are of diverse natures; and
therefore that diversity of natures is thus accidental for the parts of
the Caelum', moreover, it is essential with regard to the Signs; and
therefore it will have to be judged thus about the nature of the
Signs, as the Signs, are, by what is here and what follows.
Chapter 8.
What Objections were Made by Pico Mirandola and Alexander
de Angelis to the Division of the Zodiac into Twelve Signs.
Besides our own objections to the superior division of the Zo-
diac as set forth in Chapter 6, it doesn't seem that those proposed
in addition by Pico Mirandola should be omitted here, in order to
38

=== Page 162 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
overturn this fundamental basis of astrology; for if we should de-
termine that those reasons are false and absurd, from that it will be
doubtful to no one that that division would stand more firmly,
however de Angelis forces upon us here and there the twice
cooked cabbage that is the cooked over objections of Pico.
And so, first Pico: In Book 6, chapter 4, and in de Angelis,
Book 4, Chapter 2, they say:
"Astrologers, before the time of King
Alphonso [1226-1284] did not know that above
the Eighth Caelum there were innumerable stars
shining, among which the twelve Signs of the
starry Zodiac1 made up a certain number, and they
used these in (making) judgments of the stars at
the time of that Alphonso. But more recent astrol-
ogers have thought up another Caelum above the
fixed stars, only so that they might give a reason
for the apparent movement of the fixed stars away
from the equinoctial points; and they have di-
vided that fictitious Caelum into twelve Signs,
called by the same names as the stellar (Signs)
and with their same powers; and consequently,
some astrologers use the starry Signs, but others
the imaginary ones for the purpose of (making)
judgments, which cannot be done without tangi-
ble ignorance and absurdity; both because the
imaginary Aries can be of no real virtue, and be-
cause the starry Aries differs in its location very
much from the fictitious one, and on account of
the motion of the fixed stars it does not preserve
the same location with respect to the equinoctial
points, which nevertheless the astrologers require
in their own division of the Zodiac. Whence, it is
(certain) that both Zodiacs are useless for astrolo-
gers."
1 That is, the constellations.
39

=== Page 163 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
But I reply that de Angelis almost always fights against as-
trologers with bad faith. For the motion of the fixed stars began to
be noticed by Timocharis [3rd cent. B.C] even 330 years before
Christ, but afterwards it was plainly known to Hipparchus and then
to Ptolemy from the fixed stars observed in Signs that were im-
movable with respect to the equinoctial points. For these astrono-
mers did not use any other Zodiac in assigning true places to the
fixed stars than the immobile one, as is plain from Ptolemy's Al-
magest. But, having apprehended the motion of the fixed stars in
that same Zodiac, it was necessary for them to conclude that either
the fixed stars have a duplex motion per se, contrary to the laws of
physics, or to create another Caelum above the fixed stars, in
which that Zodiac would be immobile, which down to this day
both astronomers and astrologers have used. Therefore, although
both the constellations and the Signs were once confused, or al-
though the Chaldeans observed only the starry Signs,1 which de
Angelis throws up to us, namely because then, at least as far as was
noticeable, the constellations coincided with the true and immo-
bile Signs; nevertheless, after their motion had been detected, they
were distinguished one from the other, and they were entirely dis-
tinguished, lest to the fictitious images the real powers of the Signs
be attributed, or to the Signs themselves those (powers) of the im-
ages of a fictitious nature, which is still wrongly done by many as-
trologers, who say of the Signs of the true and immovable Zodiac
that some are human, others animal, some mute, others of good
voice, etc., only because they have the same names as the spurious
starry Signs that have such natures. But no one of sound mind can
fail to see that this is the greatest ignorance; and it must be greatly
lamented that the true names of the Signs are unknown to us, and
that they were distinguished by the names of the fictitious constel-
lations, since the true names of the Signs would disclose their true
nature; although it can rightly be said that Leo must be called a So-
lar Sign, Cancer a Lunar one, Aries manifestly a Martial one, Scor-
1 It is now known that the Babylonians (Chaldeans, as Morin calls them) used a
fixed zodiac, but that it consisted of twelve 30-degree Signs with the same names
as the zodiacal constellations (which are of very unequal length).
40

=== Page 164 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
pio a hidden or internal one, and so on with the rest (of the planets).
Second. They assert that a division of the Caelum into twelve
Signs, and each degree into sixty minutes, etc., is only an arbitrary
and imaginary one for the more ready calculation of the celestial
motions, but not a natural one. And de Angelis attempts to prove
this both from the authority of Kepler and Avenezra1 and by rea-
son; because (he says) the Primum Caelum ought to be a simple
and homogeneous body, and consequently it cannot be divided
into parts of a diverse nature, just as that same simple motion does
not agree with parts diverse in nature.
But I reply that Kepler wavered in his approval of astrology,
because he did not profess or make any trial of this science that
was hitherto devoid of true reasons. But Avenezra did not say that
the division of the Caelum into twelve Signs is arbitrary, as de
Angelis says he did, but only that the division of the Signs into
thirty degrees and each degree into sixty minutes is arbitrary,
which we also freely concede, but this does not cause us any diffi-
culty, since we only deny that the division of the Caelum into
twelve Signs is an arbitrary one. But I say this about de Angelis's
reason: In the previous chapters we assert that the Primum Caelum
is the simplest and most homogeneous body of all Nature, and yet
it is divided into 12 parts or Signs that among themselves are of a
diverse nature—not to be sure formally, but only determinatively,
as was explained above; and de Angelis does not have anything
that he can put in opposition to that division, since experience
proves that in individual hours—indeed, in individual mo-
ments—it is similarly divided in nativities, namely into Solar
parts, Lunar parts, Satumian parts, Jovial parts, etc., by the planets
that are moving in it.
Third. They say that astrologers have been deceived in their
division of the Caelum because they have observed that the planets
do something in one Sign and something else in another. For ex-
ample, the Sun in Aries produces a temperature vivifying all
1 Abraham Ibn Ezra (1089?-! 167), famous Jewish scholar and astrologer.
41

=== Page 165 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
things, but in Leo it emits a violent heat that consumes and bums
up everything. And again, in mid-summer sudden cold occurs, and
in mid-winter heat, which astrologers insist cannot be referred to
anything other than the diverse nature of the Signs through which
the Sun is passing. And yet, since these things are produced by the
approach of that same Sun to our zenith and its departure there
from, or from a particular combination of sublunar causes.
But I reply. The Caelum is not divided into parts of diverse
nature principally on account of these elemental alterations, but
rather on account of the influential effects, which, as de Angelis
was unaware of them, he did not even hit upon the word here, for to
bring in the heat of the Sun by its approach and to withdraw it by
its departure is known to everyone; but for astrologers, that alter-
ation of the elemental heat is not from any division of the Caelum.
Fourth. Finally, de Angelis tries with this ultimate batter-
ing-ram to attack and demolish that division of the Caelum.
"Let us give (he says) to the astrologers that
there are various properties of the Signs; let us
concede that the planets produce various effects
in accordance with the Sign in which they are lo-
cated; still they have got nothing that can act as a
cause. For if the planets borrow all their efficacy
from the Signs, as the horoscope-makers dream, it
is plain that the astrologers cannot say first by
thought or predict what they will do or not do, un-
less it is known to them what Signs the planets are
running through at individual moments of time;
however, they don't know that, for let it be sup-
posed that Jupiter is in 29° 59' 59" JC, then it is
judged to be in its own detriment and to have 5
black points. After a minute of time it has entered
the first minute of Cancer—now exalted and for-
tunate, it is thought to rejoice with 4 white points.
But now it is unknown to the horoscope-makers
that (exact) minute in which Jupiter emigrates
42

=== Page 166 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
from Gemini to Cancer; therefore, it ought to be
unknown to them what Jupiter will do from Gem-
ini, and what from Cancer."
But I reply first that de Angelis himself has dreamed that all
the efficacy of a planet is borrowed from the Signs, and he imposes
that (notion) upon horoscope-makers; for if so, the planets would
of themselves be of no virtue or efficacy, contrary to the under-
standing of all horoscope-makers who hand down the strengths of
each planet, with a planet having been seen for itself, and accord-
ing as it removes from any Sign, as can be seen in Ptolemy, Quad-
ripartite, Book 1, Chapter 5, and other places, where it must inci-
dentally be noted that if the Caelum were not divided into Signs of
a diverse nature, and if the planets did not receive some force from
the Caelum, the individual ones would receive only the same force
and (that) perpetually; and so, no diversity of effects could arise
from the Caelum itself; and the reason is that the Caelum itself is
innately homogeneous and the simplest in its substance and virtue.
But (we speak) about these things elsewhere.
I reply secondly. The previous demonstration of Alexander
de Angelis is absurd, for during the whole year in which Jupiter re-
mains in Gemini, could it not be observed what it performs in
Gemini? Because if he could, which is foolish, want to look for
that moment of time, in which Jupiter goes out of Gemini and is no
more in Gemini? Similarly, during the whole year in which Jupiter
will remain in Cancer, could it not be observed what it does in Can-
cer? Why, therefore, is there any need to take note of that moment
in time, in which Jupiter is entering Cancer and is not yet in Can-
cer? So indeed like some man staying in cold water—the moment
of time when he is coming out of the water will have to be looked
for, so that it may be known whether the water is cold, as if it can
only be apprehended in that moment. Now de Angelis cries out:
"Madness, it is madness, to attribute various kinds of power to
parts fastened together in the tenth sphere by the decision of the as-
trologers" and other such like (statements) in his own manner (of
speaking). And it is sufficient for us to make it plain to everyone in
43

=== Page 167 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
opposition to these weapons of straw and Alexander's madness
that astrology remains unshaken; and not by the unsubstantial
words with which de Angelis overflows, but necessarily by includ-
ing solid reasons (in which he is perpetually lacking, and cannot
fail to be lacking) the overthrow of astrology must be undertaken,
if of course it can be overthrown.
Perhaps, moreover, someone might force Lucius Bellantius1
on us, an astrologer of no small reputation, who, in Question 7, Ar-
ticle 4, (says) the Sun in Cancer or in other Signs acts to vivify
these things with its own heat and influx, and that the Signs are like
material things, the Sun moreover and the planets (adopting) the
form of the Signs. And consequently, the Signs themselves are of
nothing per se, or at least they appear to be of different virtues
among themselves. But here Bellantius made a big mistake. For
since there is always the same virtue of the Sun and the individual
planets, therefore any one of these Signs always vivifies anything
in the same manner; and consequently the same planet in any par-
ticular Sign would only do the same thing, at least when it is alone
in the Sign; but this is contrary to experience, which states that a
particular planet does one thing with one Sign and something else
with another one; therefore, the diversity of action, since it cannot
be from the identity of the planet's virtue, it must be from the con-
trariety of the Signs, in which consequently a diverse virtue is in-
herent.
Chapter 9,
How Outstanding are Those Things that Follow from the Causes
of the Division of the Caelum Assigned Above.
Since from true things nothing but truth and agreement are ac-
customed to result, but from false things nothing but falsity and
contradictions; it must already be seen what results from the
causes of the division of the Caelum assigned above. First, there-
1 Lucius Bellantius, De astrologica veritate "The Truth of Astrology' (Florence:
Gerard of Harlem, 1498. folio; repr. Basel, 1554).
44

=== Page 168 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
fore, it follows that the prime cause or the Caelum does not act
upon these inferior things unless in accordance with all the subor-
dinate causes that are determined to some particular effect that is
especially proper to that prime cause.
Second. There is the greatest agreement on the universal de-
termination of the Caelum itself by the Sun with respect to the
Earth that was set forth above, along with its particular determina-
tion with regard to men in their nativities. For just as the Sun in its
own location in the beginning of Aries at the birth of the Earth de-
termined the points of the Caelum to differing elemental natures
with respect to the Earth, so that same Sun or any other planet, by
its own position under any point of the Caelum, when a man is be-
ing bom, has determined 12 points of that same Caelum, that is 12
aspects of that planet, to various influential forces with respect to
man himself, as will be more fiilly explained in its own place.1
Third. The homogeneity of the Primum Caelum is confirmed
more effectively from this: an outstanding virtue to marvel at, and
one that is indifferent to agreeing with any other cause inferior to
itself; and that, while remaining the same in its simplicity, it is
made very diversified through the determination of its own
parts—not indeed formally and intrinsically, but accidentally and
extrinsically by the determination.
Fourth. Because even if the apogee of the Sun had been at the
beginning of Libra at the beginning of the World, nevertheless,
from the Sun's having been posited in the beginning of Aries, the
Sign Aries would have always been fiery; and therefore from the
motion of the apogee itself and its passage into the southern part of
the World with the succession of the centuries, no change in the
nature of the Signs is to be feared. But in turn, if at the time of the
creation the Sun's apogee in the beginning of Aries (as many im-
portant men will have it, and Longomontanus, Origanus, and Kep-
ler among the astronomers) had been in the beginning of Libra,
there is no doubt that the Sign Libra would have been fiery, con-
1 The aspects of the Planets are discussed in detail in Book 16.
45

=== Page 169 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
trary to all the opinions of astrologers, which is (a fact) most wor-
thy of note. And these things most strongly confirm the creation of
the world at the time of the vernal equinox; and consequently, they
support the Roman Church entirely against the Greek and Jewish
(religions).
Five. Therefore, these twelfths or Signs are of these sorts; that
is, fiery, airy, etc., with respect to the whole Earth because the Sun
was at the beginning of the World of the whole Earth in the begin-
ning of Aries; and hence the whole Earth received the celestial heat
first, and the Sun's influence that penetrates the whole Earth, as
was said elsewhere; Moreover, from the determination by Aries,
the determination of the other Signs followed, also with respect to
the whole Earth, as was explained above.
Sixth. In the Triplicities of the Signs of the same nature, the
Signs and the cardinal points, Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn
are of principal virtue, as in the fiery (Triplicity), Aries, but espe-
cially its beginning; in the watery (Triplicity), Cancer, especially
its beginning; and so on with the others. But from the cardinal
(Signs), the equinoctials push forward to the solstitials, and from
the equinoctials, Aries to Libra; so that consequently, Aries is the
first Sign in Nature, then the first in nobility, then in virtue; and not
only by its number, as is believed by many; but of the solstitial
(Signs), Cancer prevails over Capricorn, because in the latter there
is a passive dry quality, and in the former an active cold reigns.
Moreover, of the other Signs of the same Triplicity, that one will
be second in virtue that is the one after the cardinal Sign, partici-
pating more in the nature of that Triplicity because it follows the
cardinal itself in that same Triplicity, or it occupies the sinister
trine of that cardinal (Sign).
Seventh. The northern part of the World is hotter and dryer,
for in it there are two fire Signs and two earth Signs; but in the
southern part there are two air Signs and two water Signs; and
therefore, the northern part will be masculine and the southern part
feminine—subordinated to the former because the latter is
moister.
46

=== Page 170 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
Eighth. From the fact that in one half of the Zodiac the active
northern qualities, heat and cold, rule the cardinal points, but in the
opposite southern qualities, only the passive qualities, moistness
and dryness; from which the primary physical reason is made mani-
fest: (we can see) why the northern part of the Zodiac was truly said
to be commanding by the ancients, but the southern part obeying.
And from the beginning of the World, each half was allotted its own
effect as the stronger one on the globe of the Earth; in the northern
part of which they always flourished, and so far the first and most
important commands still flourish; but not in the southern part, all of
which will therefore be subjugated by the northern part, and the
northern part will never be subjugated by the southern part. But
about the dignity of the northern part over the southern part, it will
be stated more frilly below, and then in Book 10, Chapter 5.
Section 11.
The General Divisions of the Signs for the
Whole Earth.
Chapter 1.
The Fire, Air, Water, and Earth Signs.
Since in a Sign there are two characters; namely, the formal
nature of the Sign, and its location in the world or the ecliptic;
therefore, by reason of each of these, the Signs of the Zodiac are
divided in various ways.
First therefore, by reason of their nature they are divided into
Fire, Air, Water, and Earth Signs. And the Fire Signs are Aries,
Leo, and Sagittarius, of which Aries is cardinal, hotter, and the
source of heat, which is followed in the order of virtue by Leo, then
by Sagittarius, the least hot of the Fire Signs. Similarly, the Air
Signs are Libra, Aquarius, and Gemini,1 of which Libra, the
1 The Latin text has the Sign □ by mistake for the Sign IC both here and twice
more below in this paragraph.
47

=== Page 171 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
cardinal Sign, is the moistest of all, then Aquarius, and finally
Gemini. And so on in the rest of the triplicities, beginning from the
cardinal Sign in accordance with the succession of the Signs. But it
must be noted that although these things are said generally and
with respect to the whole Earth, they are nevertheless true for us in
the northern regions, Leo is a hotter Sign, because it is closer to the
rest of the Fires and a summer Sign. It is moreover of a quarter of
the year, and the greatest accidental virtue of nearness to the Ze-
nith, in extending effectively the proper and essential natures of
the Signs; seeing that from the vernal quarter alone Ptolemy along
with Cardan wanted Aries, Taurus, and Gemini1 to be formally or
according to their substance hot and moist. Thence, therefore, in
the southern part of the world, Sagittarius will be hotter than Leo.
And by which reason it is said above that the northern part of the
world is hotter and drier than the southern part. And by that reason
it is said above that the northern part of the world is hotter and drier
than the southern part; here we say those same things—(namely),
that the heat in the northern part of the world—at least beyond the
zone that they once called torrid—is hotter and drier than in the
southern part of the same latitude; namely, because in the summer
quarter of the north, the Sun runs through a Fire Sign; however, not
in the south. There will be for us similarly from the Air Signs a
more moist Sign, with airy moistness, because it is closer to us
than the others, and especially the Vernal Sign; but Pisces will be
principally of Water because for us (it is a Sign) of winter; but for
those in the south, Cancer will be particularly Water. And one
must philosophize in the same way about the rest of the Signs.
Chapter 2.
The Choleric, Sanguinary, Phlegmatic, and Melancholy Signs.
From the superior division of the Signs into the elemental na-
tures, all the rest are deduced by reason of the nature. And this di-
vision corresponds entirely to the prior one. For the choleric Signs
1 Again, the Latin text has the Sign □ instead of the Sign X
48

=== Page 172 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
are the same as the Fire Signs Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius; the san-
guinary Signs are the same as the Air Signs Libra, Aquarius, and
Gemini; the phlegmatic Signs are the same as the Water Signs
Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces; and the melancholic Signs are the
same as the Earth Signs. For that which is Fire in the elements is
choler in the humors, and they are the same qualities in both. And
so with the rest of them.1
Chapter 3.
The Masculine and Feminine Signs.
The Fire and Air Signs are masculine, but the Water and Earth
Signs are feminine. This would not hold otherwise if you only look
at astrology as from its own principal or cardinal points; for the
more effective principals are attributed to the masculine sex. But
the Fire and Air Signs are allotted to be the principal and most ef-
fective (Signs) of the Caelum because they are equinoctial points,
which are simultaneously in the equator and the ecliptic, the most
effective of all (the Signs) in the celestial circles—the former in
moving, the latter in influencing; namely, the Fire is the beginning
of Aries, and the Air is the beginning of Libra; from this cause,
therefore, the Fire and Air Signs are masculine; as Fire and Air;
and therefore, because of the opposite cause, the Water and Earth
Signs will be feminine; that is because they arise from the begin-
nings or from the points of the ecliptic most remote from the equa-
tor, and consequently from the weaker ones, namely from the sol-
stices; the Water certainly from the beginning of Cancer, and the
Earth from the beginning of Capricorn. However, if you look at the
sublunar physical (scene), the Fire and Air Signs will also be mas-
culine on account of the elements to which they refer; for indeed,
Fire and Air are masculine, but Earth and Water are feminine; and
1 Hippocrates (c.468-c.377) postulated that the human body contained four fluids
or humors: phlegm, blood, choler, and melancholy. So long as these remained in
their proper balance, health was maintained; but if one of them was excessive,
then health, human appearance, and behavior was affected. This theory has long
since been abandoned by physicians, but it was still alive in Morin's day.
49

=== Page 173 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
therefore the latter are subject to the former, and from them they
receive the force for producing their own fruits; not the other way
around; for clouds, rain, hail, and lightning bolts are the fruits of
air, but (also fruits) of the Terrestrial Globe, which are carried out
in the air; for their material is raised up from the Terrestrial Globe.
Hence it is rightly deduced that as primacy in order is due to
the masculine sex as the more active one, so the first of the Signs,
namely Aries, is masculine, Taurus is feminine, Gemini is mas-
culine; and so, with the sex alternating, each succeeds by the
force of the 4 Triplicities mentioned above, so that it was not
without reason that the Pythagoreans thought that those Signs are
masculine for which a masculine and more effective number har-
monized, namely an odd number—an offspring of unity, but fem-
inine Signs for which the number, taking its origin from two,
which among the numbers is female, just as unity is masculine.
Anyhow, moreover, the reasons offered by Ptolemy and Cardan
about this sex of the Signs are worthless, and not undeservedly
they are derided by Pico Mirandola (1463-1494) in Book 6, chap-
ter IS.1 Indeed, of these also the one that is apparently more valid
is that which is taken from the active motion near the equator, be-
cause thus the Sign Gemini would be with respect to Taurus fem-
inine, and Taurus masculine; for under Taurus the motion is more
active than under Gemini, which is contrary to the division
handed down by them.2
You will object to the doctrine put above that the active qual-
ity cold predominates in Cancer and the passive moistness in Li-
bra, but the active qualities are masculine and the passive ones are
feminine; therefore, Libra, Scorpio, and Pisces will be masculine
Signs, and Libra, Cancer, and Gemini feminine ones.
1 The reference is probably to the posthumously published book by Count
Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, Disputationes ad versus astrologiam 'Disputa-
tions Against Astrology' (Bologna: Benedictus Hecteris, 1496.
2 This is not altogether clear to me. I suppose Morin refers to the fact that the
ecliptic in Gemini is further from the equator than the ecliptic in Taurus; but if so,
then the ecliptic in Aries would be closer still.
50

=== Page 174 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14-
I reply to this, not at all scorning the difficulty that although
the cardinal Signs of the Zodiac were divided above by sex by
reason of their own nobler and more effective site in the world,
and not moreover by reason of their active and passive qualities,
yet the former division is not contrary to the division by qualities,
if this matter is understood with a sound mind and correct reason.
For, since besides those things that have a physical mark of
their own sex (such as man or woman), the rest are said to be mas-
culine or feminine only by a comparison of the nobler or more ef-
fective virtue among themselves; it is certain that among the ele-
mental qualities both active and passive compared one by one,
there will also be one that is masculine and another that is femi-
nine. Therefore, having compared the active qualities heat & cold
in turn, it is plain that heat is masculine in nobility and activity, but
cold is feminine. For males of whatever species are universally
hotter than females. Similarly, having compared the passive quali-
ties moistness and dryness among themselves, dryness will be
masculine and moistness feminine; then, because females are uni-
versally moister and softer than males; then, because dryness
strengthens the force of acting and resists those things that weaken
and obstruct by moistness.
Having understood these things, it is fitting that the hot
twelfths' are said to be masculine, but the others either combine
the maximum amount of cold and moistness from the passive qual-
ities of the feminine; or, having set aside the cold for dryness from
the passive qualities, they are said to be feminine. For the cold
Signs to be able to be said masculine, it is necessary that cold
should not only be combined with dryness but it should also be su-
perior to it; which granted, Saturn, intensely cold and dry, is easily
said to be a masculine planet. Capricorn, however, moderately
cold and very dry like the Earth, is said to be feminine.
But against this explanation, someone might again argue that
Venus was said by us to be hot and moist like the Sign Libra, and
1 That is, the 12 signs.
51

=== Page 175 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
yet feminine; therefore, the Sign Libra will also be feminine, or at
least Venus will be masculine.
I reply that the Sign Libra refers to the nature of Air, which by
the philosophers is held to be twice as moist as it is hot; moreover,
Mercury is put by us to be four times more moist than hot—and
also according to Ptolemy; from this, therefore, it is manifestly
plain that Venus is farther away from a masculine nature than Li-
bra is; and with respect to Libra's being said to be feminine, add
the fact that Libra does not have its own essence as masculine from
the elemental qualities of the Sun, but especially from its nobler lo-
cation in the world, as was said above. Moreover, those things that
are asserted here about the cardinal Signs, should also be under-
stood to be asserted about their entire Triplicities.
For this reason, moreover, this division must be noted, be-
cause, other things being equal, the masculine Signs are more ac-
tive than the female Signs, and in the latter the planets incline to
feminine or weaker effects, in the former to masculine or more
intense effects.
Chapter 4.
The Diurnal and Nocturnal Signs.
The diurnal Signs are masculine as was explained above, but
the nocturnal Signs are feminine. Since the diurnal sect harmo-
nizes with the masculine sex, the nocturnal sect harmonizes with
the feminine one due to the nature of the active or passive virtue.
But it must be known that there is a duplex sect within the Signs,
that is an intrinsic and an extrinsic one. The former is from its own
nature, and it is simplex-, for each Sign is per se only masculine or
feminine, and only diurnal or nocturnal, but the extrinsic sect is
due to the location of the Sign above (or below) the horizon,
which, since it can occur by day or by night, there will also be a du-
plex extrinsic sect of each Sign, namely diurnal or nocturnal.
58

=== Page 176 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
Chapter 5.
The Northern and Southern Signs.
Having explained the division of the Signs according to na-
ture, now there follows their divisions due to their location in the
World or in the ecliptic.
And so they are first divided into northern and southern
Signs. The former are those that are located in the northern part of
the Caelum or the World—namely, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Can-
cer, Leo, and Virgo. But the southern ones are those that occupy
the southern part of the World, of course Libra, Scorpio, Sagittar-
ius, Capricorn, Aquarius, and Pisces. And it should be noted that
the celestial influxes penetrate the whole Earth, as we have said in
Book 12, Chapter 32. And yet even as the subterranean influxes
are weaker than the superterranean ones and those closer to the re-
moter parts of the vertex, so the northern Signs affect the southern
part of the Earth less than the northern; and the southern are the
other way around—less northern than southern; and therefore the
oblique placement of the Zodiac is due to the equator, so that for
both parts of the Earth the celestial influences are equally
distributed.
Chapter 6.
The Mobile, Fixed, and Common Signs.
The mobile Signs, which are also called cardinal, are those
that begin from the 4 cardinal points of the ecliptic, namely Aries,
Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn; moreover, they are called mobile
because more than the rest of the Signs they cause changes in
things; and in these, the universal nature causes its own changes
primarily through the position of the Sun and the rest of the plan-
ets. Then, because things that begin under their influx are of short
duration, or the changes are obnoxious. And indeed the position of
the Sun makes the changes of the seasons noticeable; namely, of
winter into spring, of spring into summer, of summer into autumn,
53

=== Page 177 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
and of that into winter; which seasons of the year seem to begin
from those 4 places, like doors opened by nature, and moving
around their own hinges. But those points are divided into equi-
noctial and solstitial or tropical. The former are Aries and Libra,
so called because they begin from the equator, and when the Sun in
the beginning of them makes the day and night equal like a pair of
scales everywhere on Earth; and thereafter the excesses of day and
night begin and end in tum. They are also accustomed, not without
reason, to be called Signs of religion or ecclesiastic Signs; both,
because it is well known in histories that outstanding changes of
religion have occurred with the superior planets or the Sun running
through those Signs; and then, because just as between the Signs
Aries and Libra1 they lay claim to the primacy for themselves, as
we have said above; so (they relate to) religion among human af-
fairs. But the tropical Signs are Cancer and Capricorn, so called
because they constitute the terminals towards the poles,2 from
which the Sun itself is converted to the equator; standing through
some days in the solstitial points as if it were immovable to the
Judgment of the senses. Moreover, they are also called political,
both because in histories it is well known that great changes in
kingdoms and empires have happened from the superior planets or
the Sun, penetrating those Signs; and then because just as the plan-
ets extending their own courses towards the north and south finally
stand in the tropical points, and from there they go back to the
equator; so, kingdoms and empires expand themselves 15) to cer-
tain limits, where, if at any time they stop, they are finally con-
tracted to their own beginnings; if in fact they are given the origins
of all the temporary things to which the increment pertains—vigor
or standing still, decline and destruction. Furthermore, those
things that are subject to the mobile Signs are either not lasting or
they are very much exposed to change and instability. But those
things which they rule either because of celestial charts or because
1 The Latin text has "between Capricorn and Libra," which does not appear to
make sense. So I have changed it to "between Aries and Libra."
2 My photocopy is blurred in the area at the top of p. 326, column 2, but I think I
have read the words correctly.
54

=== Page 178 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
of the planets' traversing through them, or because of their
verticality,1 are subject to those (circumstances); and so, those that
detect under the tropics are particularly subject to the Signs Cancer
and Capricorn.
The fixed Signs are Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius—so
called because in them nature celebrates a standing still from
changes or vigor; and when the Sun is in them a change in the air,
once begun, lasts; then, because things that are begun under their
influx are of long duration or are entirely stable. But among them
the more fixed are the masculine Signs Leo2 and Aquarius, in
which the steady states of heat and cold occur for us. Moreover,
there is a property of the fixed Signs by which they confer stability
and durability on the things that they rule.
Finally, the common Signs are Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius,
and Pisces—so called because (they are) a middle mode between
the mobile and the fixed Signs, with regard to the effects that they
have; and when the Sun is in them, it already inclines toward the
nature of the following quarter; and consequently it serves as a
mean between two quarters.
Chapter 7.
The Commanding and Obeying Signs.
This division of the Signs, and those divisions that follow, in
addition to the fact of their location in the Zodiac, also comprises
those of the Signs that have a certain relationship among
themselves.
And so, the commanding Signs are Aries, Taurus, Gemini,
Cancer, Leo, and Virgo—so called because they are in the north-
em part of the Zodiac or the world, which part is masculine and
more active than the southern part, on account of the two sources
of the active qualities of heat and cold, which are located in the
1 I suppose he means "when they are at the highest point of the ecliptic."
2 The Latin text has the symbol instead of $1.
55

=== Page 179 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
northern part and therefore belong to that right of dominating or
commanding.
But the obedient Signs are Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capri-
corn, Aquarius, and Pisces—so called because they only contain
the sources of the passive qualities, moistness and dryness;
whence they agree with being subject to the southern part of the
Earth and to obeying that which is subordinated to the obedient
Signs; but the reasons of Ptolemy, Proclus, Pontanus, and Cardan
for this division are worthless and not universal; indeed, for the
southern Signs they are contrary, and null under the equator, when
they say that the northern Signs are commanding because the Sun
in them makes the days longer than the nights, and the southern
Signs are obedient for the opposite reason.
Moreover, the old astrologers wanted the northern Signs to
command the southern ones that are equidistant from the equator,
not however having just any but having equal and parallel right as-
censions. And also because Aries brought in Libra and Pisces.
Truly, the rulership is duplex, that is legitimate or friendly and (at
the same time) tyrannical or hostile. Friendship is between the Signs
that are equidistant from the same equinoctial point, if indeed be-
tween them they are joined together by any bond of association and
sympathy, of which sort are Aries and Pisces, mutually (friendly) to
each other since they are from either side of the equator in the mid-
dle. Hostility is between the Signs that are equidistant from the op-
posite equinoctial points and therefore opposed to each other, of
which sort are Aries and Libra; and these achieve an antipathy (to
each other) from the opposition. And here Taurus commands
Aquarius in a friendly manner, but is hostile to Scorpio; Gemini is
friendly to Capricorn, but hostile to Sagittarius, and so with the rest
of the Signs. In such a way however that the first degree of Aries
commands the last degree of Pisces, and the 2nd degree of Aries the
next to the last of Pisces; and similarly with the rest.
Moreover, it is (characteristic) of the commanding Signs
(that) they stimulate and exalt to rulership subjacent regions, and
also men whose life and actions they rule; but it is (characteristic)
56

=== Page 180 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
of the obedient ones that they are subjected and suppressed. And
so, Cardan in his Commentary, Book 1, chapter 14, rightly notes
from Aristotle that of men, by nature some are bom free, but others
are bom slaves. And that someone having all or his principal
Significators in commanding Signs will scarcely ever obey anyone
unless he is forced to do so, and he will always seek command.
However, if he has Significators in the obedient Signs, he will find
himself in an opposite mode, and scarcely anyone will obey him
unless from force or fear. And this is worthy of note between
masters and servants.
Chapter 8.
The Antiscion Signs.
Those Signs are mutually antiscions to each other, that in the
same part of the northern or southern Caelum are equidistant from
the same solstitial point. As Aries and Virgo, Taums and Leo,1
Gemini and Cancer in the northern part, then, Libra and Pisces,
Scorpio and Aquarius, and finally Sagittarius and Capricorn in the
southern part. These Signs are not only mutual antiscions, but
much more effectively their degrees are taken equidistant from the
same solstitial point, as are the first degree of Cancer and the last
degree of Gemini, the 2nd of Cancer and the 29th Gemini, and so
on thereafter; which nevertheless you should so understand that
the beginning of the first degree of Gemini is the antiscion of the
end of the last degree of Cancer; and the end of the first degree is
the antiscion of the beginning of the last degree; or if it is more
than the first minute of Cancer, it is the antiscion of the last minute
of Gemini; for only thus is the equidistance of the antiscions from
the same solstitial point maintained.
Besides, those Signs themselves are said to be antiscions be-
cause from opposite sides they are casting a shadow2; namely, be-
1 Here again the Latin text has the symbol ^ instead of
2 This is an exact definition of antiscion, which is a compound of the Greek words
anti 'opposite' and skia 'shadow'.
57

=== Page 181 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
cause when the Sun is in them, it makes the days among them-
selves and the nights among themselves equal in the whole terres-
trial globe, even so as the day and the night among themselves
(with the Sun) in the equinoctial points; nevertheless, with this dif-
ference—that where on Earth the days are increasing from the Sun
in one Sign, in that same place the days are equally decreasing
from the Sun in its antiscion, which is the reason why they are said
to cast opposing shadows.
Moreover, by Ptolemy1 and others they are also called Signs
seeing each other, and those that command and obey, (and) Signs
hearing each other, because they say sight only differs from hear-
ing in mobility and certitude; only the antiscions differ in efficacy
from the commanding and obeying; and it is not surprising, since
the latter are in different halves and parallels of the world, while
the former are in the same half and parallel; consequently, they are
more united, and their virtue is more strongly united. But that logic
and appellation of seeing and hearing Signs is so barbarous and in-
ept that it rightly offers an opportunity to the haters of astrology
for laughing and jeering.
Furthermore, these two things should be noted about the
antiscions and the commanding and obeying Signs. First, that hav-
ing found the antiscion of any point of the ecliptic, there is always
a commanding or obeying point for it in the opposition to the
antiscion, so that therefore the commanding or obeying (point) is
what is called a contra-antiscion by others, to which they also at-
tribute no little virtue, which however it seems ought to be as-
cribed to the abovementioned logic of the commanding and obey-
ing Signs, and so, the antiscion of the 2nd degree of Taurus is the
28th degree of Leo, but its contra-antiscion or obedient (point) is
the 28th degree of Aquarius. Moreover, the Signs that are equidis-
tant from the same equinoctial point are, in the motion of the world
and the Caelum, just like two oxen pulling under the same yoke,
and mutually helping each other. Second, that the closer the
1 Ptolemy does not mention antisicons, but he does devote a chapter (Tetrabiblos
i. 14) to "Commanding and Obeying Signs."
58

=== Page 182 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
antiscions and the commanding Signs are to the tropical points, the
more powerful they are to a great extent. Because the degrees of
the ecliptic near the tropics differ very little in declination or in ris-
ing and setting. But around the equinoctials, because it is the oppo-
site, therefore the virtue of the degrees is not thus extended, and
the antiscions ought then to correspond partilely to the command-
ing and obeying Signs; otherwise, their effect will either be null or
small.
Chapter 9.
The Signs that Aspect Each Other and Those that do Not.
The Signs that aspect each other (which must also be under-
stood about their individual degrees) are called those that are dis-
tant in turn from some part of the circle that taken many times ex-
actly makes up a whole circle; and that particular distance is called
an aspect, which by Ptolemy and the rest of the old astrologers was
stated to be only fourfold; namely, opposition, trine, square, and
sextile,1 having only taken their reasons from harmonic propor-
tions. Therefore, the sextile aspect is between Signs whose begin-
nings are distant from each other by an arc of 60 degrees. Such as
Aries and Gemini, Taurus and Cancer, etc.; for that arc taken six
times equals the whole circle. The square is between Signs whose
beginnings differ from each other by 90 degrees; which, having
been taken four times, equals the circle. The trine has a mutual dis-
tance of 120 degrees, or the third part of the circle; but the opposi-
tion between the distant (points) by a semicircle. But I, taught by
reason and long experience, am adding to them the semi-sextile2
aspect; namely one between Signs whose beginnings differ mutu-
ally by an arc of 30 degrees, since having taken this twelve times
1 Modem astrologers consider the conjunction to be an aspect, but the ancients
did not; for them it was a position. The Latin words that we translate as aspect im-
ply a view of something at a distance, such as from one Sign to another.
2 Morin calls this aspect a dodectile (i.e. a 'twelfth'), but here and below I will
translate it as semi-sextile, since that is its modem name.
59

=== Page 183 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
makes the whole circle; and therefore this agrees with the previous
logic of aspects; and besides, I have very frequently observed that
planets distant by the semi-sextile communicate their main forces
to each other. This is especially true when they are oriental to the
Sun or occidental to the Moon; but we shall discuss these positions
more fully when we will be treating of the aspects of the planets.1
Moreover, what we are saying here about the Signs and their be-
ginnings must also be understood about the degrees of any Sign.
Namely, the 2nd degree of Aries, for example, aspects by
semi-sextile the 2nd degree of Taurus, by sex tile the 2nd degree of
Gemini, by square the 2nd degree of Cancer, by trine the 2nd de-
gree of Leo,2 and by opposition the 2nd degree of Libra; and thus
with the rest of the Signs.
But it should be noted that by physicians, by Kepler, and
some other astrologers, many other aspects are conceived—if not
among the 12 Signs, at least among their parts—such as the octile,
the decile, the quindecile, etc., but these are fictions without any
foundation in nature. For every point of the Caelum determined by
inferior causes determines not more than 11 others along with it, as
was said above; and among those 12 points, only the aspects listed
above as aspects are here defined.
Finally, there are Signs not aspecting each other, which in
turn are distant from some part of the circle, which taken a number
of times does not complete the whole circle—which sort are the
5th and the 7th from any Sign s s s3 numbered is Virgo and Scorpio
with respect to Aries, Libra and Sagittarius with respect to Taurus,
etc. for the distance between the beginnings of Aries and Virgo
taken twice is less than a circle, but three times is more; but I shall
teach more fully about aspects elsewhere, where we shall also ad-
mit the quincunx.
1 In Book 16.
2 The Latin text has the symbol instead of
3 The Latin text has Signo s s s numeratus 'Sign s s s numbered'. I do not know
what the three s's signify unless they were put in place of a fraction such as 5/12.
60

=== Page 184 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
Chapter 10.
The Conjunct and Inconjunct Signs.
Those Signs are said to be conjunct that are connected by any
of the above said three modes—namely, by an aspect defined
above, an antiscion, or by rulership; but those are inconjunct that
are not mutually related by any one of those modes.1
Moreover, for any cardinal or mobile Sign, it is unconnected
because it is opposed by the cardinal succeeding it, as for exam-
ple Aries and Scorpio opposed to Taurus which succeeds Aries.
Also, Cancer and Aquarius, Libra and Taurus, Capricorn and
Leo. To any fixed Sign are those Signs inconjunct that are op-
posed to it, among which that one holds the middle place, as for
example Taurus is unconnected with Libra and Sagittarius,
which are opposed by Aries and Gemini, between which Taurus
is located; And so Leo is unconnected to Capricorn and Pisces;
and finally Scorpio to Aries and Gemini. Finally, any common
Sign is inconjunct that one that is opposed to the common Sign
preceding it. So, Gemini is unconnected with Scorpio, Virgo
with Aquarius, and Pisces with Leo; for Leo is opposed to Aquar-
ius, which precedes Pisces.
But it must be noted that those Signs are said to be uncon-
nected that are distant by a part of the circle that taken several
times is not exactly restored to its own beginning in one circuit;
and they constitute the quincunx aspect between themselves.
Those Signs are therefore said to aspect each other inadequately,
and therefore they are inadequately conjunct, but the other Signs
are adequately conjunct.
1 The older astrologers called those Signs that were not related by a sextile,
square, trine, or opposition inconjunct, that is to say unrelated to each other by
one of the classical aspects.
61

=== Page 185 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Chapter 11.
Some Other Divisions of the Signs that Should
Plainly be Rejected.
Besides the above true and physical divisions of the Signs,
others were introduced in addition from the nature of the bodies,
the images of which, affixed to the starry Zodiac, are believed by
ignorant persons, and the names of which are attached to the true
Signs of the Zodiac after the proper motion of the images or the
fixed stars was noticed; and so, some of the Signs are said to be hu-
man and rational, such as Gemini, Virgo, Aquarius, because the
constellations with that sort of name are believed to be images of
humans; some are animals, such as Aries, Taurus, Leo, Cancer,
etc.; some are mixed, such as Sagittarius; some are beautiful, such
as Gemini and Virgo; some are deformed, such as Taurus, Cancer,
and Capricorn; some are mute or lacking a voice, such as Cancer,
Scorpio, and Pisces; some having a good voice, such as Gemini,
Virgo, Aquarius, and Libra, but nevertheless it is often said of Li-
bra that it lacks a voice; some having a moderate voice, such as
Aries, Taurus, Leo, and Capricorn, since these animals surpass
Gemini, Virgo, and Aquarius, etc.
Truly, in these divisions a manifold ignorance and stupidity is
perceived. For in the first place it is established from Stoeffler's
Commentaries on the Sphere ofProclus] that the images of the Zo-
diac and of the whole Caelum were only introduced by the fables
of the old pagans, which 1 believe were suggested to the minds of
men by the iniquity of the Devil, so that the Caelum, having been
1 Johann Stoeffler (1452-1531). He was Professor of Mathematics at Tubingen,
the author of almanacs and ephemerides, and a well-known astrologer. Morin re-
fers to his book ...Prodi Diadochi, authoris grauissimi Sphaeram mundi... 'The
Sphere of the World by Proclus Diadochus, a most Important Author' (Tubingen:
H. Morhardinis, 1534. folio). O. Neugebauer, A History of Ancient Mathematical
Astronomy (Nevj York Heidelberg Berlin: Springer Veriag, 1975. 3 vols.), vol. 2,
p. 1036, says that this treatise, falsely ascribed to Proclus, is actually an excerpt
from Geminus, Eisagoge eis ta Phainomena 'Introduction to the Phenomena'.
See the edition and French translation of that work by Germaine Aujac, Introduc-
tion aux Phenomenes (Paris; Societe d'Editon 'Les Belles Lettres', 1975).
62

=== Page 186 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
polluted with monsters and fables, Divine Providence might be
hidden more scattered, (and also) noble knowledge—from which
now at last the major laughing-stocks are exposed—and what
should be attributed to God would be attributed to creatures.
Secondly. There is no constellation that refers to that body of
whose image it is said to be, which entirely convicts the comment
of the images; how, therefore, does it refer to a virtue, even though
it refers to an image? The idea that the Signs themselves have bor-
rowed their own force from sublunar bodies, especially at the be-
ginning of the world, when animals and man had not yet been pro-
duced, which was only done in Days 5 and 6, is nonsense!
Thirdly. Since the images successively migrate from one Sign
to another,' even if the credited virtue is inherent in these fictitious
images (which of course cannot be the case), would it not be stupid
to characterize the Signs with the virtue of a (now) absent image
rather than the present one?
Therefore, on account of these reasons, the aforesaid divi-
sions must absolutely be rejected,2 and the Signs must only be
called, either from the causes of the divisions explained by us
above, or by the natures and properties of the planets ruling those
Signs, as is shown below.
Chapter 12.
The Constellations of the Firmament.
Since the constellations were seen under the Zodiac, and they
were once held to be the true and immobile Signs of the Zodiac; it
will not be improper here to add this chapter on the constellations.
1 Morin refers to the fact that due to precession many of the stars of a Zodiacal
constellation have moved into the next Sign, which bears the same name as the
next constellation.
2 But Morin's argument against tradition was largely unsuccessful, since the ma-
jority of astrologers from his own time down to the present day continue to apply
the Significations of the constellation images to the Signs of the Zodiac.
63

=== Page 187 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
And so I say that the entire firmament is divided into those
schemata of the fixed stars that are called constellations, which are
like certain regions of the Caelum, differing among themselves in
powers and natures. For it appears to the senses that the stars mak-
ing up the constellation of Orion pertain thus to that image or
schema, so that they truly separate it from any neighboring
schema. And so with the constellation of Scorpio and many others
that are seen in the serene Caelum and with the Moon in the merid-
ian; although not all the constellations are so perfectly seen to be
separated from the others, especially in the absence of the Moon,
and the major part of them have their names solely from men's
fantasies.
But now it cannot be denied that just as the whole Earth does
not show all things, but the regions of Earth differ among them-
selves in their properties, because some are sandy, others clayey,
others covered with stones and flints, etc., so diverse regions of the
starry Caelum differ among themselves in their properties and in-
fluences. Moreover, the proper influences of the constellations are
unknown to us—a great loss to astrology—and only the proper
strengths of a few of the principal fixed stars are known to us. For
just as it is absurd to suppose as many do that every kind of min-
eral, vegetable, and animal has in the Caelum a fixed star or partic-
ular constellation peculiar to itself, by which it is ruled in its origin,
life, and death, since that is not even true of a man, who is subject
to the influences of all the planets and fixed stars, so it is absurd to
suppose that the constellations are similar in nature and virtue to
the things by which they are designated. For example, that the con-
stellation of Aries is similar in nature to the animal ram, the con-
stellation of Taurus to a bull or a bovine animal, etc., which was
nevertheless credited by the ancients and wrongly handed down
by their successors. And much more disgracefully even now are
those astrologers in error, who say that the effects of an eclipse of
the Sun that occurs in the Sign Taums pertains to bulls or bo-
vines—thereby taking the Sign Taurus for the constellation of
Taurus, which is now in the Sign Gemini!
64

=== Page 188 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
So, however, the nature and virtue of the constellations could
be discovered in the long succession of the centuries. And firstly of
those that are under the Zodiac1 of the Primum Mobile by noticing
the New Moons, Eclipses, Great Conjunctions, Comets, and other
similar things that occur in them; and by observing what effects
they have, not only by reason of the Sign and the ruling planets,
but also by the constellation and the fixed stars that are in it, and on
what kinds of things they act most powerfully; indeed, in the nativ-
ities of men by observing the places of the ASC, the MC, and the
planets in the constellations. But for those constellations that are
beyond the Zodiac, their powers cannot be discerned by means of
the planets; for otherwise the forces of the constellations that are
beyond the Zodiac to the north or the south would be confounded
with those that are within the Zodiac, and the latter could not be
discerned separately from the former. And so, only those of them
posited in celestial charts, or Comets rising or moving under them,
can disclose their force on these inferior things. But to explore
these things by means of accidents in the past or future of the world
throughout the entire Globe of the Earth would be too much of a
task, even for many astrologers making observations at the same
time in different parts of the Earth, on account of the very slow mo-
tion of the fixed stars, which hinders our being able to discern the
proper virtue of a constellation (as distinct) from the proper virtue
of the Sign that it occupies. And I do not suppose that men will
ever be able to acquire that knowledge.2
END OF THE FOURTEENTH BOOK.
1 He refers here to the so-called Zodiacal constellations—Aries, Taurus, Gemini,
etc.—as distinct from the extra Zodiacal ones.
2 However, in the 450 years that have passed since astrologers began to publish
their collections of natal horoscopes in the 16th century, the stars have moved
forward more than 6 degrees, and that is probably a sufficient change for their in-
dividual natures to be detectable by careful analysis.
65

=== Page 189 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
66

=== Page 190 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
INDEX OF PERSONS
Adam, first man, 38
Alphonso X, King of Castile and Leon, 39
Angelis, Alexander de, Jesuit, author, 5,38-44
Arabs, 38
Ansiodz, philosopher, 57
Aujac, Germaine, editor and translator, 62n. 1
Babylonians, 40n. 1
Bellantio, Lucio, astrologer, 44
Brahe, Tycho, astronomer, 34n.l
Cardan, Jerome, astrologer, physician, mathematician, 36-37,48,
50,56-57
Chaldeans, 40
Christ, 34n.2,40
Copernicus, Nicolaus, astronomer, 3In.2
Euclid, geometer, 21
Forrest, Donn, astrologer, 5
Geminus, astronomer, 62n. 1
God, 15,19,24,27-30,35n. 1,63
Hipparchus, astronomer, 31 n. 1,40
Ibn Ezra, Abraham, scholar and astrologer, 44n. 1
Kepler, John, astronomer, 7,21,30,34n.2,41,45,60
Longomontanus, Christian Severin, astronomer, 45
Mirandola, Giovanni Pico della, Count, author, 5,38,50
Morin, J. B, astrologer, 5-8
Neugebauer, Otto, science historian, 70
Old astrologers, 18,3In. 1,56,59
Origanus, David, mathematician, astrologer, 45
Pagans, 62
Physicians, 49n. 1,60
Plato, philosopher, 21
Pontano, Giovanni Gioviano, scholar 56
?roc\\xs, philosopher, 21,56,62
67

=== Page 191 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Ptolemy, Claudius, science writer, 3In. 1,36-37,40,43,48,50,52,
56,58,59
Pythagoras, philosopher, 21
Robbins, F. E., editor and translator, 36n.l ,68
Stoeffler, Johann, mathematician, 62,68,70
Theon of Alexandria, astronomer, 3 In. 1,68
Timocharis, astronomer, 40,68
Note: the characterization given for each person is not neces-
sarily complete, but it represents the type of work that he did to
which reference is made in the Preface or in the Translation or the
footnotes. Book publishers' names are not listed. They may be
found in the Bibliography.
68

=== Page 192 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 14
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Angelis, Alexander de (Angeli, Allesandro)
In Astrologos coniectores. Libri Quinque.
[Conjectures against the Astrologers. Five Books.]
Lyons: H. Cardon, 1615. 4to xxviii,351,xxxi pp.
Rome: B. Zanetti, 1615. 2nd ed. 4to
Bellantius, Lucius (Bellanti, Lucio)
Responsiones in disputationes Johannis Pici
ad versus astrologicam veritatem.
[Reply to the Disputation of Giovanni Pico
Against the Truth of Astrology]
published together with:
De astrologica veritate.
[The Truth of Astrology]
Florence: Gerard of Harlem, 1498. folio
Basel, 1554. reprinted
Mirandola, Giovanni Pico della, Count
Disputationes adversus astrologiam.
[Disputations Against Astrology]
Bologna: Benedictus Hectoris, 1496.
Morin, Jean Baptiste
Astrologicarum domorum cabala detecta a Joanne Baptista
Morino.
[The Cabala of the Astrological Houses disclosed by Jean
Baptiste Morin]
Paris: J. Moreau, 1623. 8vo 38 pp.
Astrologia Gallica.
[French Astrology]
The Hague: A. Vlacq, 1661. folio pref (xxxvi), 784 pp.
69

=== Page 193 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Astrologia Gallica: Book Twenty-Two Directions,
trans, from the Latin by James Herschel Holden
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 1994. paper xv,292 pp.
Neugebauer, O.
A History of Ancient Mathematical Astronomy.
New York Heidelberg Berlin: Springer Verlag, 1975. 3 vols.
Stoeffler, Johann
Procli Diadochi, authoris grauissimi Sphaeram mundi...
[The Sphere of the World by Proclus Diadochus, a most
Important Author]
Tubingen: H. Morhardinis, 1534. folio.
70

=== Page 194 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Astrologia Gallica
Book Fifteen
The Essential Dignities of the Planets
Translated from the Latin
By
James Herschel Holden, M.A.
Fellow of the American Federation of Astrologers

=== Page 195 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Translator's Preface 5
Book Fifteen
Preface 7
Chapter 1. Whether the Signs of the Zodiac are of the same 7
Nature and Virtue Throughout the Whole Earth
Chapter 2. At the Beginning of the World the Zodiac was 26
divided by the Sun into Parts Conformable to the Individual
Planets by their Elemental and also their Influential Nature
Chapter 3. In which the Influential Natures of the Signs are 27
Disclosed and the Domiciles of the Planets are Established
Chapter 4. The Exiles of the Planets 35
Chapter 5. The Exaltations and Falls of the Planets 36
Chapter 6. The Triplicities of the Planets, or the Trigons and 42
the Trigon Rulers According to the Opinions of the Ancients
Chapter 7. The Trigons and the Trigon Rulers According to 45
our Opinion
Chapter 8. To What Regions of the World the Trigons 50
Pertain; and Consequently, Which Regions of the World
the Trigon Rulers Principally Rule
Chapter 9. Some things that should be Particularly Noted 54
about these Trigons and their Rulers
Chapter 10. The Faces or Personalities or the Almugea of 56
the Planets
Chapter 11. The Thrones, Seats, or Chariots of the Planets 58
Chapter 12. The Joys of the Planets 59
Chapter 13. The Terms, Novenas, Decans, Dodecatemories, 60
etc. of the Planets in the Individual Signs; Then, the Light
and Smoky Degrees, the Pits, the Vacant Degrees, and the
Monomoiriae
3

=== Page 196 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Chapter 14. The Friendships and Enmities of the Planets 65
Among Themselves 36
Index of Persons 69
Bibliography 71
4

=== Page 197 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
Translator's Preface
In this Book, Morin explains the various classifications and
subdivisions of the Signs and gives his opinion as to why some of
them should be changed or rejected altogether. He gives what
seems to him to be logical reasons for these features of the Zodiac.
And as usual he quotes Holy Scripture from time to time. We
should be aware that he was also primarily motivated by two
things in astrology: (1) a dislike of anything that did not have a
definite relationship to astronomy; and (2) a distrust of anything
that seemed to him to have been originated by Arabian astrologers.
Unfortunately, Morin's knowledge of the history of the
World and the history of astrology, while consistent with what his
17th century contemporaries believed, was inferior to our knowl-
edge today. Therefore, some of his "proofs" are no longer valid.
And some of the subdivisions of the Zodiac that he discusses have
fallen out of use and are hardly even known to modem astrologers.
Still, his observations and comments are interesting, displaying as
always his determination to put every facet of astrology on a logi-
cal basis. And unlike the majority of astrological writers, he does
not simply enunciate a rule, but he also gives an explanation of
why he believes it to be valid.
In Chapter 1 Morin resumes his argument that the signs are
the same both above and below the equator. And we are surprised
to leam that he held a mistaken idea of how to calculate house
cusps for places in the southern hemisphere. In the examples that
he gives, he has simply taken the house cusps from the House Ta-
bles as if the Southern latitude was Northern latitude, which is of
course incorrect. The proper procedure is to add 180 degrees to the
RAMC and then copy the degree numbers of the cusps but reverse
the Signs shown with them in the table. However, since he appar-
ently only had two horoscopes of persons bom in the southern
hemisphere, this error did not affect his practice of astrology in
Paris. It seems that he was so intent upon asserting that the Zodia-
5

=== Page 198 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
cal Signs were not reversed below the equator, as some astrologers
had suggested, that he was reluctant to change the procedure for
using the House Tables, since that would imply that there was
something different about astrology in the southern hemisphere.
In order to make my translation of Morin's text easier to com-
prehend, I have italicized a number of technical terms. And I have
broken up some of his long sentences into shorter ones. I have also
added some words in parentheses, since he sometimes speaks
rather shortly, especially towards the ends of sentences. And I
have added some footnotes either to clarify the text or to provide
my own comments.
James Herschel Holden
25 November 2006
6

=== Page 199 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
ASTROLOGIA GALLICA
Book Fifteen
The Essential Dignities of the Planets.
Preface.
If in Book Fourteen it was especially difficult to investigate
the important causes of the division of the Primum Mobile into 12
parts, differing among themselves in their elemental natures, and
to assign such natures to them as cannot be made more probable;
it would certainly seem to be very much more sublime and difficult
to have undertaken these things that are taken up to define and put
them on a firm basis with reasons: Namely, whether the Signs are
of the same nature and virtue throughout the whole Earth. Then,
whether at the beginning of the World the Zodiac was divided by
the Sun into parts conformable in elemental and influential nature
to the individual Planets, and some other things that follow from
that. For these are the prime and more abstruse fundamentals of
astrology. Moreover, we hope that we shall enter upon this book,
and with Divine lightfavoring, bring it to a favorable completion.
Chapter 1.
Whether the Signs of the Zodiac are of the same Nature and Vir-
tue throughout the Whole Earth.
After having explained in the previous book the division of
the Caelum into elemental natures, it must now be seen in this
book by what reason that same Caelum in its 12 Signs is divided
7

=== Page 200 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
among the influential natures of the Planets with respect to the
globe of the Earth, so that from this it may be plain with which of
them the individual Planets agree, and with which they disagree;
and so, the dignities and debilities of the Planets that are called es-
sential are disclosed and established; not only against those who
debauch astrology, but also against those who, while affecting the
name of astrologer, nevertheless overturn these divisions, not no-
ticing that they only produce arbitrary ones, and thus overturn the
whole doctrine of astrological judgments.
Moreover, Ptolemy first took an opportunity to display this
error in Quadripartite, Book 1, chapter 17, where he says this
about the domiciles of the Planets:
"The domiciles are distributed by a natural rea-
son. for since of the 12 Signs two northern ones
come close to our pole, and in particular Cancer
and Leo make heat, these two Signs must be
judged to have the greatest and most effective
light; Leo indeed is the Sun's, because it is a mas-
culine Sign, but Cancer is the Moon's because it
is feminine."
Moreover, to each one of the rest of the Signs he gives two domi-
ciles as is seen in that same chapter.
As for the rest of that division of the Zodiac into the Planetary
domiciles, which has subsisted solely on tradition down to our
times, Ptolemy did not know the causes; for if he had brought for-
ward reasons there that were natural and true; [then] certainly from
those same causes, Capricorn and Aquarius will in the southern
part of the World be Signs that are especially hot and summery,
and the domiciles of the luminaries will indeed be Aquarius for the
Sun because it is a masculine Sign, but Capricorn for the Moon be-
cause it is feminine; moreover, Cancer and Leo will be the domi-
ciles of Saturn, into which what is surely an altogether absurd
opinion I marvel that Cardan has fallen in his Commentary with
these words: "From this it finally follows that in the southern half
(of the World) Capricorn will be the domicile of the Moon and
8

=== Page 201 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
Aquarius of the Sun, Pisces and Sagittarius of Mercury, Aries and
Scorpio of Venus, Taurus and Libra of Mars, Gemini and Virgo of
Jupiter, and Cancer and Leo of Satum.1
But Campanella (1568-1639), the great corrupter of the sci-
ences (which I would like to have stated as a caution to those who
take delight in his books that are full of novelties) amplified
Cardan's error in his Astrology? Book 1, Chapter 3, Article 3,
where he offers this:
"the early astrologers only considered our lati-
tudes; and therefore, the Spaniards who estab-
lished colonies beyond the tropic of Capricorn
have need of a new astrology." Moreover, in
Chapter 6, Article 3, he says: "It is not a symbol
for the Planets, with certain Signs of the Caelum,
but to those who dwell beyond the equator, equi-
distant with us from the equator, to have the domi-
ciles of the Planets in an opposite location—and
the domicile of the Sun is in Aquarius, the domi-
cile of the Moon in Capricorn, of Satum in Cancer
and Leo, and the domiciles of the rest of them as
above."
But under the equator (which Cardan had not foreseen) the two
and the same domiciles he attributes to the Sun and the Moon,
namely Aries and Libra, to Satum Cancer and Capricorn; and to
the rest of the Planets he attributes two whole Signs, he says it is
impossible.
But of such weight is the truth of this thing in this science, that
there is a notable foundation for all judgments; and consequently
they must be diligently considered. Moreover, we shall begin with
Cardan's opinion, which indeed consists of fewer ambiguities; and
1 Not well stated. If the signs are reversed south of the equator, Cancer and Leo
will still be the domiciles of the Moon and the Sun. For when the Sun is in Capri-
corn and Aquarius in the northern hemisphere, it will at the same time be in Can-
cer and Leo in the southern hemisphere.
2 Tommaso Campanella, Astrologicarum libri VII (Frankfurt, 1630).
9

=== Page 202 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
that, so that it may be made more evidently to be avoided; then we
think of the error of Ptolemy, then of the error all the astrologers
until now, who, thinking that of the whole globe of the Earth only
the northern part that contained Europe, Asia, and Africa is habit-
able, which is not a fifth part of the globe, have not (thereby) made
astrology a universal science, but only a particular observation for
Asia, Europe, and Africa; for which alone Ptolemy wrongly di-
vides the whole Zodiac in Quadripartite, Book 2, chapter 2. But
for an astrologer meditating on a universal science for the whole
Earth, neither inclining towards the north nor the south, but it must
be standing under the equator, where on account of that it is neces-
sary that he establish himself at least mentally, and from a position
held with respect to no part of the north or the south, with the na-
tures of the Signs and the Planets having been looked at, not unless
a thing is universal for the whole globe, he will therefore
pronounce them common to both parts.
Therefore, having postulated the action of the stars on these
inferior things, he will consider that light of Nature; there is no
place of Earth that is not subject to the influxes of the celestial bod-
ies, and before the others, the places of the right sphere, which
among the other places of the Earth are more perfectly applied and
subjected to the influences of the Zodiac and the Planets. There-
fore, since the right sphere is the norm both for itself and for both
oblique spheres, then it will declare that they are immutable—not
some to the north and others to the south, and there are the same el-
emental natures of the Signs everywhere on Earth, and conse-
quently the same rulerships by the Planets. Moreover, this will be
the reason for it; for if some were to the north and others to the
south as Cardan [1501-1576] will have it, therefore it is necessary
that none of them are in the right sphere, since those that are to the
north cannot be there, nor those which are to the south; and there is
no reason why some of them are rather with the northern (parts)
than with the southern ones. No nature, therefore, will be able to be
assigned there nor the qualities of the effects from the celestial
causes, as from eclipses of the Sun or the conjunctions of the
lights. For from Ptolemy, Quadripartite, Book 2, Chapters 6 & 7,
10

=== Page 203 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
and all the rest of the astrologers, the nature of such effects must be
taken from the natures of the Signs of the eclipses or the conjunc-
tions, then from the Signs of the Planets ruling them; but the qual-
ity, whether of goodness or evil, from the benefic or malefic state
of the Planets ruling those Signs, none of which naturally is found
in the right sphere. For there, having been affected by the natures
of the Signs, and consequently the rulership of the Planets, the pri-
mary cause of the status of the Planets would be taken away; but in
fact this cannot be said about any one of them, whether it is in its
own domicile or exaltation, or in its contrary position of exile or
fall; in fact, whether it is in the places of the benefic or the malefic
Planets; that is in no place that any Planet rules; therefore, in that
place no nature or quality of effect can be assigned. Therefore, no
effects will occur, since none can happen anywhere whose nature
and quality cannot be determined. But from eclipses and conjunc-
tions of the lights or syzygies no one denies that effects are pro-
duced in the right sphere. And of the uniform status of the things in
the sphere itself, let us not suspect confusions of the natures, Signs,
and rulerships there, from which they would produce monsters and
continuous prodigies, against experience. And the same reasoning
can be established with regard to the particular constitutions of
those who are born in that sphere. From which nothing could be
foreseen about the native's temperament, habits, intelligence,
riches, honors, death, and the rest of his accidents, with the essen-
tial dignities and debilities of the Planets taken away, and also the
rulers of the individual houses of the figure. Therefore, the natures
of the Signs and the rulerships of the Planets must not be put some
to the north and others to the south, contrary to Cardan's opinion.
Let us come now to Campanella, who seems to have wanted
to remedy Cardan's disadvantage, and nevertheless fell into Scylla
while trying to avoid Charybdis.1 If, therefore, as he will have it,
there is no conformity or symbol with certain Signs of the Caelum,
why in the region of the north up to the arctic pole will Cancer be
the domicile of the Moon, not of the Sun, and Leo will be the domi-
' That is, while trying to avoid one disaster, he fell into another one.
11

=== Page 204 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
cile of the Sun, and not of the Moon? Or why is there not the same
domicile for the Sun and the Moon? Here it was necessary for
Campanella to become silent or to say something only absurd. Be-
sides, if from the Tropic of Cancer to the arctic pole, Cancer and
Leo are the domiciles of the lights, and from the Tropic of Capri-
corn to the Antarctic pole, Capricorn and Aquarius are their domi-
ciles, as he says, relying on Ptolemy's reason; moreover, below the
equator Aries and Libra are given to the Sun and the Moon for do-
miciles, it is plain that he wants the domiciles of the lights to be es-
tablished solely by their greater approach to the zenith; and he says
that in Chapter 7, Article 3, saying these express words;
"Therefore, since the Sun, when it appears the
most powerful, and when the Moon appears to be
the closest, will make great effects of the sort that
are appropriate to the lights, because they are the
domiciles of the lights, everywhere that sort of
nearness and strength of theirs is (directed) to
their own inferiors."
Granted that, at least it follows from those statements that for
those who live between the equator and the tropics, it is necessary
to construct other domiciles for the Sun and the Moon, namely in
Taurus, Gemini, and Virgo for the northern peoples, for whom
those Signs are vertical, and in Virgo, Sagittarius, and Pisces1 for
those in the south. And so all the Signs that are the domiciles of the
lights will be ambulatory and local, only serving to designate the
proximities of the Sun and the Moon with respect to the vertical,
although these could be defined without the Signs simply by their
declinations, but otherwise they are plainly of no virtue, because
Campanella himself seems to have been driven by that opinion to
declare (that) in distinct words, when he said above that there is no
symbol for the Planets with certain Signs of the Caelum. For if any
1 These sets of three signs seem to be incorrect if verticality is the criterion. You
would expect Gemini and Cancer in the first set and Sagittarius and Capricorn in
the second set. Why Taurus and Scorpio are included is not clear. Taurus is of
course the exaltation of the Moon, but if that is mentioned, why not Aries?
12

=== Page 205 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
celestial virtue is inherent in the Signs, it cannot be denied that be-
cause of that they harmonize with some Planets and not with oth-
ers. But it is plain that inherent in the Signs are great virtues from
somewhere else, as from that same Campanella, that is in Book 2,
Chapter 2, Article 3, where he says: "Aries makes fierce, very
lively, savage, bold, perverse, treacherous persons." Therefore,
since Mars also makes such persons according to that same
Campanella, in Book 4, Chapter 7, Article 4, it is established from
that that it is the symbol of Mars with Aries; and the reasoning is
the same for the rest of the Signs and Planets according to those
chapters. Therefore, since this doctrine of Campanella destroys it-
self by its evident contradiction and only affects a particular or lo-
calized astrology, but not astrology in general, or astrology for the
whole Earth, which he promises in Book 1, Chapter 3, Article 3,
there is no need to spend any more time to refute these statements,
especially since, with the rulerships of the Planets taken
away—which would only be imaginary if the virtues of the Signs
were taken away—the universal astrology of Campanella, which
is concerned with those two angles, collapses.
Nevertheless, this can be sought from Campanella, or from
the supporter of his absurd imaginings—-if that Sign with respect
to each race is the domicile of the Sun, through which the Sun it-
self is nearer to the vertex of that same race, will that Sign be the
domicile of the Sun for that same race during the whole year, or
only during that month in which it moves through that Sign? For
why would it be for the whole year? With regard to this, since in
the two antiscion Signs of the Sun and the Moon they are made
equally near to the vertex, since of the antiscions it will be the do-
micile of the Sun and the Moon for any race throughout the whole
globe of the Earth, and why not another? Then, why under the
equator are two domiciles attributed to the Sun, otherwise unique?
The solution of which questions certainly no astrologer of a sound
mind would accept.
And so, having omitted the rest of the absurdities which this
opinion produces, solely for its more evident falsity, we are putt-
13

=== Page 206 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
ing here the horoscope of Zaga-Christ, Prince of the Abyssinians,1
bom at Corcora, under a 6 degree elevation of the North Pole and a
difference of longitude from Paris of 36 degrees.2 He was driven
out by his uncle, so he said, and was carried through various re-
gions and finally into France, where recognized by the King, by
Cardinal Richelieu, and by the whole royal court and also by me, at
last worn out by poverty and destitution he died at Ruel on 21
April 1638 from an unfortunate direction of Saturn to his ASC to
the square of the Moon, ruler of the 4th.
UJ.J
leit
Scptembrii vv
D.H.M.
A. a Luiiudti ExTiKRudoJ
b1
in. 9
Prince Zaga-Christ,
Corcora 6N 38E, 1 September 1614 8:10 P.M.
1 An account of the life of Zaga Christ is given in Father Eugene Roger's book La
Terre Saincte ou Description topographique.-.des Saincts Lieux...et une relation
veritable de Zaga Christ, prince d 'Ethyopie, qui mourut a Ruelprez Paris (Paris:
Antoine Bertier, 1646. 4to 440 pp.). But I think we should wonder whether the
birth data that Morin gives for him is correct. He may have obtained it from the
prince himself, or he may have found it in Roger's book., but considering the dif-
ference between the Abyssinian calendar and the Western calendar and the possi-
ble difference in the way in which Abyssinians counted their age, there were
opportunities for error. Still, right or wrong, Morin's discussion of the horoscope
gives a good example of his methods of interpretation.
2 Perhaps the town Adi Corcora, Tigrd, at 13N05 39E28. Geographical coordi-
nates were not accurately known in Morin's time.
14

=== Page 207 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
All the Planets are peregrine, with the exception of Mercury,
and connected by no benefic aspect, if you make an exception of
the corrupted sextile of Mercury and also the corrupted trine of the
Moon and Saturn. Furthermore, Saturn ruler of the MC is in exile
and particularly in the ASC on account of its southern latitude of
2043,,l and the Sun and the Moon are unfriendly to the 10th space
(house),2 and the Sun is opposite the Lot [of Fortune] in the 12th.
All of which argued that the man would be unfortunate in his dig-
nities, his actions undertaken, and his general fortune. And be-
cause Mercury, ruler of the 3rd which is the house of relatives, was
square the MC and opposite Saturn, ruler of the MC, and also the
ASC, and also square Mars,3 ruler of the ASC, it Signified rela-
tives not kindly disposed to the person and dignity of the native,
and it also Signified enemies, especially because Mercury in the
6th would also indicate enemies; moreover, Jupiter, ruler of the
Sun, in the 7th subjected his fortune to the power of enemies, more
especially because Jupiter itself applies to the square of Venus,
ruler of the 2nd. He was a talented and refined person on account
of Mercury in sextile to the Moon under the rulership of Venus,
and the Moon in trine to Saturn and to the ASC from the 5th house,
being strong in reasoning and eloquence, but stubborn on account
of that same Mercury opposed to Satum and to the ASC; he was
also extravagant on account of the Moon ruler of Venus in the 5th.
And with the Sign of Leo in trine to Satum and the ASC, indeed
and Mercury ruler of the 5th and the Sun in the 6th, on account of a
lover of senatorial rank it caused him to be imprisoned at Paris,
from which however by order of the king he was freed. He was
1 Calculation from the coordinates of Satum given by Morin shows that Satum
would rise with 14o04' Aries, which as he says would be in partile conjunction
with the ASC in 14042' Aries.
21 am not sure why he says this. The Moon is in Leo and the Sun is in Virgo. Since
the 10th house contains parts of both Capricorn and Aquarius, the Moon in Leo
opposes the Aquarius portion; but the Sun in Virgo is trine the Capricorn portion
and only quincunx the Aquarius portion.
3 But this is a "heads and tails" aspect with a wide orb or more than 8 degrees,
since Mars is in 28 Gemini, and Mercury is in 602r Libra.
15

=== Page 208 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
also very sad and melancholy on account of Saturn's being in exile
in the ASC, and he was very prone to anger on account of Mars
ruler of the ASC, and a fiery Sign in the ASC. And because Mars
was found in the 3rd in trine to Jupiter ruler of the 9th and the 7th;
and they are all angular in mobile Signs; therefore, long and varied
journeys and inconsistencies of fortune and life were Signified. Fi-
nally, Mars, ruler of the ASC and the 8th, in the 3rd, was plainly
portending at the least a wretched death outside his native land be-
cause by nature it is malefic, but not a violent one, because neither
is the ASC injured by Mars, nor Mars by Saturn, nor are the lights
injured by the malefics, nor were these in violent Signs. Moreover,
Father Eugene Roger, a devout missionary to barbarous countries,
(in his La Terre Saincte), Book 2, Chapter 2, of his own travels in
the Holy Land, sets forth Zaga-Christ's life and the misfortunes of
his circumstances. From which it is plain that Zaga-Christ was not
an imposter, as many thought, but truly a very unfortunate prince
of the Abyssinians, as his chart sufficiently testifies.
This figure therefore is very conformable to the fates of this
Prince according to the domiciles of the Planets given out hitherto
by Ptolemy and the rest (of the astrologers); and consequently by
this experience near the equator; and then the reasons given above
prove that the Signs of the Zodiac are per se of the same nature and
virtue for the whole Earth; moreover, the domiciles of the Planets
are also the same in the northern sphere, the southern sphere, and
the right sphere; contrary to that which Cardan and Campanella
have handed down from simple opinion devoid of experiences and
reasons. Indeed, one could be more certain of this thing by having
notices from celestial charts of persons bom in the southern part of
the World, of which until now I was unable to see any; but because
no experience is ever contrary to reason, and moreover reason en-
tirely favors our opinion, and also I certainly think that it would be
true in the southern World and conformable to experience, as is
plain here from the nativity of Zaga-Christ.
But at last, having passed more than 20 years from the time in
which I gave out a letter transmitted by me to the northern and
16

=== Page 209 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
southern astrologers, that most generous and especially learned in
astrology Mr. N. de Groenembergue, Commander of the Fleet of
the King of Portugal, sent to me the birth times of two men bom on
the far side of the equator, along with their character, intellect, and
some accidents; for which times I erected the celestial charts,
which I have drawn to be added here, in a confirmation most wor-
thy of note of the doctrine given by us above.
The first is that of Francisco Gomez Cortez, bom on the 4th of
the month of October in the year 1627, called the day of St. Fran-
cis, at the rising of the Sun at Olinda Pemambuco, 8 degrees on the
other side of the equator. He was inclined to painting, arithmetic,
music, dances, and the gladiatorial art; and yet he followed the mil-
itary calling from his youth. He has many yellowish marks on his
face, hands, and body, which are called Jewish Signs; he also has
reddish hair; and he had a quarrel with someone whom, while not
wanting to, he (nevertheless) killed.
Francisco Gomez Cortez
Pernambuco, Brazil 8S09 34W59, 4 October 1627Sunrise
1 This chart is drawn incorrectly! Morin has mistakenly calculated all of the inter-
mediate house cusps for 8 degrees north latitude instead of for 8 degrees south
latitude. Calculation from modem figures shows that Sunrise occurred at 5:57
I N
17

=== Page 210 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
His propensity was to arithmetic, writing, painting, music,
and dancing, since Venus, ruler of the ASC is in the domicile of
Mercury and joined to it. These things, however, would not have
been if Venus had not been ruler of the ASC;1 therefore, Libra is
the domicile of Venus and Virgo is the domicile of Mercury. But
if they had been inverted in the southern part (of the World),
Mars would have been the ruler of the ASC in a domicile of Jupi-
ter, from which the inclination given above could not have been
produced, as is sufficiently plain from the nature of the Planets,
which agree with their Signs, as is proved with reasons in its own
place, in addition to the experience that is very well known to all
astrologers.
In addition, he followed the gladiatorial and military (profes-
sion), since Mars, ruler of the 1 st house, which is the house of char-
acter on account of Scorpio in the 1 st,2 and then ruler of the 7th,
which is quarrels, and Mars is in the 8th conjunct the Eye of
Taurus,3 a bright and violent fixed star of the nature of Mars, in trine
to the ASC. But with the rulerships inverted, that ought to have been
from Venus joined to Mercury in the domicile of Jupiter, which
does not agree with the nature of these Planets and their Signs—in-
deed it is contrary. Therefore, the same natures of the Signs are in
the southern part of the World as are in the northern part.
Finally, because this native had reddish hair and had freckles
on his face, hands, and body, he had that from the Sun in the ASC
in trine to Mars, ruler of the 1st joined to the eye of Taurus, a fixed
Martian star, in trine to the ASC, then from the square of the Moon
LAT or 5:46 LMT, at which time the RAMC was 99° 15', and the ASC was
10o45' Libra. (If refraction is taken into account, Sunrise would have occurred 2
or 3 minutes earlier than those times.)
1 But in the following paragraph, Mars is said to be the ruler of the ASC!
2 With Libra on the cusp of the 1st, and 20 degrees of Libra in the 1st, and only 10
degrees of Scorpio in the 1st, it hardly seems appropriate to call Mars the ruler of
the 1st house. On the contrary, if the signs had been reversed, Aries would have
been on the cusp of the 1st, and Mars would have been its ruler.
3 Aldebaran or a Tauri was at 4035, Gemini.
18

=== Page 211 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
to Saturn1 and the Sun in the A SC. Everything, therefore, agrees.
The second (chart) is that of Felipe Bandeyra de Mello, con-
cerning whom Mr. de Groenembergue wrote these words for me:
Felipe Bandeyra de Mello was bom in the year 1612 on the
15th of the month of April, Palm Sunday, at 5 A.M. or 1 hour be-
fore Sunrise at Pemambuco.
He was always inclined to arms, and he followed a military
career from childhood; he had many quarrels with various persons;
and in the year 1635 he killed a man with whom he had had a quar-
rel; and this happened on a riotous evening. He traveled through
various parts of Europe; he experienced many storms at sea and
also shipwrecks; in the year 1638, having been shipwrecked, he
escaped by swimming. He was captured three times by the Dutch,
and he has had little good fortune.
Felipe Bandeyra de Mello
Pernambuco, Brazil 8S09 34W59,15 April 1612 5:00 A.M.2
1 But the Moon is not square Saturn and the Sun; it is sextile Satum and the Sun.
Probably Morin still had in mind the fact that part of Scorpio was in the 1 st house,
and he reckoned that the Moon in Leo was square Scorpio.
2 This chart is also drawn incorrectly! Again Morin has mistakenly calculated all
of the intermediate house cusps for 8 degrees north latitude instead of for 8 de-
grees south latitude.
vM-t
19

=== Page 212 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
This native was dedicated to a military career from childhood,
with many quarrels and a homicide, because Mars was the ruler of
the ASC and of the Sun which was exalted in the 1 st house, which
is the house of character, then the 7th and 8th houses,1 which are
the houses of quarrels and wars and dangers of death; with Mars's
exaltation in the MC, which is the house of actions and profession,
and applying to Saturn, the ruler of the MC; and consequently,
both of the malefics rule his actions and profession.
He suffered in the sea many dangers to his life and ship-
wrecks, since Mars, ruler of the ASC, is also ruler of the 8th, on ac-
count of Scorpio, a water Sign; and both Mars and Saturn, rulers of
the MC, are conjoined in Pisces, a water Sign, and Mars is apply-
ing to Saturn. And yet he escaped on account of Jupiter, ruler of the
9th, and then Mars and Satum in trine to the ASC and the Sun.2
Many times he was a captive, because Mars and Satum, rulers
of the MC and the ASC, by their presence besieged the cusp of the
12th, which is the house of prisons, and they were both in the 12th;
for this same reason, he has hitherto had little success in his under-
takings and actions and dignities; and he will scarcely be more for-
tunate in the future; it is clear that there will be perpetual difficul-
ties on account of the Sun and the Moon being opposed from the
1st and 7th houses. He should be on his guard against a violent
death on account of the Moon in the 7th in the antiscion of Mars
and Satum.
Can nativities be given in the northern part of the Earth that
more accurately agree with the temperament, character, intelligence
and accidents of fortune? Therefore, that which I formerly disclosed
and postulated solely by reason, is now proved to be very true by ex-
perience; namely, that in the northern part as in the southern part of
the Earth, the natures of the Signs and the rulerships and natures of
the Planets are the same and invariable, which, nevertheless, it is
pleasing to confirm here with the three following reasons.
1 Mars can only be said to rule the 7th because part of Scorpio is in that house.
2 Mars and Satum in early Pisces are not in trine to the ASC and the Sun in Aries.
The sign they are in is semi-sextile the ASC and the Sun sign.
20

=== Page 213 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
First. Because the Sun in both hemispheres is found to be hot
and dry in whatever Sign it is located; the Moon, cold and moist;
Saturn, cold and dry; etc. Therefore, since these (qualities) are not
received from the Signs of the Zodiac, it must necessarily be con-
cluded that these are their own proper natures, which, through the
motions of the Planets in their own orbits, even changed by the ec-
centricity, when they pass from the northern part of the World to
the southern part, it would be silly to think (that they are changed).
For what would their own proper natures be under the equator?
Second. If the natures of the Signs were otherwise in the
southern part than in the northern, the nature of the triplicities
would collapse. For if Sagittarius among the southerners was a wa-
ter Sign, then Aries and Leo would also be water Signs, contrary to
the experiences of northerners in the temperaments of the air and
of natives (of those Signs).
Third. If an astrologer living in the southern part should erect
the figures of many northern natives, he would find by experience
that Mercury in Virgo and in the 1 st house would produce an intel-
lect that was very excellent and with more aptitude for mathemat-
ics than in any other Sign, other things being equal; and if he
would judge otherwise, he would stray away from the truth; but we
observe the same thing in the northern part; therefore, the Plane-
tary nature of the Sign Virgo is not other in the southern part than
in the northern one; and in both cases it is Mercurial.
Truly with regard to these southern figures, the reader must be
warned that in the Rudolphine Tables^ abbreviated by me, I have
said incidentally how they should be erected. But here it is pleas-
ing to explain another and shorter method, with the following sent
in advance.
First. The right ascensions of opposite points are distant ev-
erywhere by 180 degrees from each other.
1 Tabulae rudolphinae ad meridianum Vraniburgi supputatae a Joanne Baptista
Morino... (Paris: J. Le Brun, 1650). These were Morin's version of Kepler's
Rudolphine Tables.
21

=== Page 214 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Second. The oblique ascensions and descensions of points of
the Caelum have in the southern part of the Earth, through their
right ascensions and ascensional differences, (values) only abso-
lutely contrary, to these that are observed in the northern part.
Third. The oblique ascensions of opposite points in the same
latitude of the place, or in the same place on Earth, differ among
themselves in the sum of the ascensional difference of those same
points, and the ascensional difference of these is the same.
Fourth. The oblique ascension and descension of the same de-
gree of the ecliptic or of a point of the Caelum in the same latitude
of the place differ in two ways in the ascensional difference of that
degree.
Fifth. The northern ascension and the southern ascension of
the same degree in equal latitudes of the place, or in places on
Earth that are diametrically opposed, differ in two ways from the
ascensional difference of that degree.
Sixth. The northern ascension of any degree and its southern
descension in places of equal latitude are identical; and the same is
true of the northern descension and the southern ascension.
Seventh. The oblique ascension of a point of the ecliptic in the
northern part, and the oblique ascension of the opposite point in
the southern part in equal latitudes differ by a semi-circle; and the
same is true of the northern descension and the southern
descension.
Eighth. As in the northern part of the Earth, the degree of the
cusps of the ecliptic, or the first degrees of the houses, correspond
in their own oblique ascensions, and those opposed in their own
oblique descensions, according to the Tables constructed by
Regiomontanus; but on the contrary, in the southern part the de-
grees of the eastern cusps of the 11th, 12th, 1st, 2nd, and 3rd ought
to correspond to their own oblique descensions, and those opposite
(cusps) to their own oblique ascensions by those same Tables. And
the reason is because the part of the Caelum that ascends for us, de-
scends for the southerners, and vice versa. And therefore, because
22

=== Page 215 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
for the northerners it is an ascension, for the southerners it is a
descension; and vice versa. And the above said is very evidently
plain on a celestial globe.
Ninth. The right ascension of the Sun, and the given hours
converted into degrees of the equator make everywhere the right
ascension of the MC at the given time.
With these things understood, now for the erection of a celes-
tial figure, this will be the general method in the southern part of
the World,
First. For the given time in the southern part, converted into
degrees of the equator and the right ascension of the place of the
Sun, taken at that time and properly corrected and equated, makes
the right ascension of the MC, and the degrees of the ecliptic corre-
sponding to it are taken.
Second. If Tables of Houses corresponding to the latitude of
the place for which the figure is to be erected are lacking, to the
right ascension of the MC 30 degrees are added for the oblique as-
cension of the house, or the cusp of the 11th; and to that 30 more
degrees for the oblique ascension of the 12th; and to that 30 more
degrees for the oblique ascension of the ASC; etc.; and this is done
in the erection of a figure in the northern part for the 5 eastern
houses, the 11th, 12th, 1st, 2nd, and 3rd.
Third. Let the elevation of the pole, north as well as south, be
found above the circles of position of those same individual
houses; and let there be found from Regiomontanus's Tables the
degrees of the ecliptic corresponding to the ascensions of those
houses as it is given for the northern part; for the degrees of those
same cusps will be the degrees of the cusps of the oriental or as-
cending houses in the southern part, although in that part their
oblique ascensions differ from the oblique ascensions of the same
degrees in the northern part. This, moreover, will be nothing else
than to construct a northern figure for the southern part.1
1 But this is wrong! And it disagrees with his own definitions given above. The
proper way to use the house tables calculated for the northern hemisphere is sim-
23

=== Page 216 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Let it be proposed as an example the figure of Francisco
Gomez Cortez erected for Pemambuco in the year 1627 on the 5th
of October at 18:02:24, at which moment the Sun arises there; and
to that time let there be added 3:04 for the 46 degrees difference in
meridians from Uraniborg,1 the place of origin of Kepler's
Ephemerides; and they make 21:06:24. From which, subtracting
0:12 for the equation of time from our Table, and there remain
20:54:24 for the mean time at Uraniborg.
The place of the Sun at that time from Kepler is 10 degrees
38'. the right ascension of which is 189° 46' and hours 18:02:24,
and they make 270° 36', of which the sum is 100° 22' for the right
ascension of the MC, to which corresponds 9° 31' Cancer. To
these 100° 22' add 30°; they make 130° 22' for the northern
oblique ascension of the 11th house, which has a north pole ele-
vated 4° 02'; and therefore the corresponding degree of the ecliptic
for that house or cusp will be 9° 14' Leo, neglecting the seconds.2
To these same 130° 22' add 30°; they make 160° 22' for the north-
em (oblique) ascension of the 12th house, which, from
Regiomontanus's Table of the rational houses has a northern pole
elevated 6° 57'; and the degree of the ecliptic corresponding to that
cusp will be 9° 47' Virgo. Therefore, in the figure for the southern
part (of the World), the MC will be 9° 21' Cancer, the 11th house
will be 9° 14' Leo; the 12th house will be 9° 47' Virgo; and so on
with the other houses 1, 2, and 3. Moreover, the opposite houses
ply to add 180° to the RAMC, take the cusps from the house tables and reverse the
signs of the zodiac. It is surprising that Morin did not realize this.
1 The actual difference in longitude is 12E42 + 34W59 = 47° 41' or 3:10:44, but
Morin's figures were close enough.
2 The Polar Elevation is calculated by the formula tan P.E. = tan Lat. X cos 60° for
Houses 11 and 3 or from tan P.E. = tan Lat. X cos 30° for Houses 12 and 2. For
North Latitude 8°, the Poles are 4° 01' and 6° 56', very close to the values Morin
gives. To find the cusp of the 11th house from the tables, add 30° to the RAMC
and subtract 90° from the sum; then for that value of the RAMC find the ASC for
the Polar Elevation; and that will be the value of the 11th cusp. For Morin's ex-
ample 100° 22' + 30° - 90° =40° 22'; and with that value of RAMC, we find for
Latitude 4° 01' North the ASC 9° 14' Leo; and that is the value of the cusp of the
Regiomontanus 11 th house.
24

=== Page 217 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
will have the opposite degrees of the ecliptic. And the southern fig-
ure will be erected by this method, by means of the southern
descensions of their own oriental or rising cusps in the southern
part of the World.
But the southern oblique ascension of each of these houses
11, 12, 1, 2, and 3 is found thus by the directions of the ascending
part of the Caelum.
Let the southern oblique ascension of the 11th house, or 9° 14'
Leo,1 be found; its right ascension has the value 131° 41'. And the
north declination is 18° 07'. And the ascensional difference under the
pole 4° 02' is 1° 18'; the double of which, 2° 36', added to the north-
em oblique ascension of the 11th house, namely 130° 22' makes the
required oblique ascension 132° 58', which also will be had if to the
right ascension of 9° 14' Leo is added the simple ascensional differ-
ence of 1° 18'. Moreover, if the declination had been south, the
ascensional difference or its double would have had to be subtracted.
And in short it should similarly be done for the southern oblique as-
censions of the other houses, 12, 1,2, and 3. As all these things are
plain from the nine notes above or from a celestial globe.
But from this it is sufficiently made known that in a southern
figure the directions of the Significators in the ascending or de-
scending part of charts must all be done in accordance with the
Regiomontanus Tables or with those of Argol, as in the northern
figure (above). Therefore, in the figure of Felipe Bandeyra de
Mello, and (in the case of) the homicide committed by him on the
evening of a drunken party in the year 1635, it is deduced that the
given time was truly later by around 13 hours, which done, the di-
rection of the ASC on the day of the party was in sinister sextile to
Mars, ruler of the ASC, of the Sun in the 1st, and of the 8th house;
and on that day, the Sun was by transit partilely on the radical
place of Mars; moreover the Moon, which occupied the 7th in the
radix transited through the radical place of the Sun. But let what
has been said so far about the southern figures suffice.
' Here, as elsewhere from time to time, the Latin text by mistake has the symbol
Q instead of the symbol
25

=== Page 218 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Chapter 2.
At the Beginning of the World the Zodiac was Divided by
the Sun into Parts Conformable to the Individual Planets by
their Elemental and also by their Influential Nature.
Since four primarily contrary natures are found separately in
the Zodiac; but none of these are inherent in the Caelum, which is
very homogeneous, but only from the Sun's determining them, as
was said in Book 14, Chapter 5, therefore the Zodiac itself will
also be divided by that same Sun into the elemental natures of all
the Planets; for anyone of these is from anyone of the four contrary
(qualities); indeed, the Sun and Mars are hot and dry and therefore
fiery, and Mars is the more intense; but Jupiter, because in it too
heat dominates, is more inclined to a fiery nature than to another,
but less than the Sun. But the Moon is of a water nature, Saturn of
an earth nature, Venus of an air nature; and finally Mercury, be-
cause in it dryness prevails with some little bit of cold, must also be
reduced to an earth nature. Wherefore, from the parts of the Zo-
diac, determined as stated above, the differing natures of all the
Planets are poured out upon these inferior things; namely, those
natures that are inherent in the very bodies of the Planets, as it was
said in Book 14, Chapter 5, about the Sun in Aries at the beginning
of the World. If in fact the qualities of the elements are inherent in
the Planets, and they are also more perfect and more efficacious
than the elements themselves, as is plain from the heat of the Sun,
which the heat of a ball of red hot iron of ten times the apparent
diameter of the Sun would not equal, circling around the Earth at
only a thousand miles.
And because the nature or the complete virtue of the Planets,
on account of their mixture and substantial form consists of ele-
mental qualities and influence, from whatever rising Sign, the
emptiness of Planets is observed to produce the native's tempera-
ment, character, intelligence, etc; qualities both elemental and in-
fluential proper to any Planet; it certainly follows that from that
same Sun, the Zodiac at the beginning of the World was simulta-
neously divided by determination into the natures of the Planets,
26

=== Page 219 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
both elemental and influential; And therefore both natures in the
Planets are inseparable, so in the parts of the Zodiac, or the Signs,
they will be inseparable; and consequently there are given in the
Zodiac places or Signs conformable to both the elemental and in-
fluential virtue of each Planet. And that not only allows homoge-
neity to the Caelum and an eminential indifference, determinable
to any kind of nature, but it can also be proved by reason thus. For
since it is proved by experience that with a Planet posited in what-
ever place of the Zodiac, it produces influxes on these sublunar
things according to the nature of the Planet and its place or Sign; if
a Planet and a Sign coincide both in their elemental and influential
nature, a simple influx will arise from that, from which the nature
of both the Sign and the Planet can be easily detected; but if they
do not coincide, an influence mixed from different natures will
arise; and yet an understanding of that mixture is not given, or a
previous notice of a simple (influx); or there will therefore be no
understanding of the influx of the Planets and the Signs, contrary
to experience; or, there will be in the Zodiac parts coinciding both
in their elemental and influential nature with the individual Plan-
ets, by which the simple influxes of the Planets may be known in
advance, since it is always necessary that each one of the Planets
be posited under some one of the 12 Signs of the Zodiac.
Chapter 3.
In which the Influential Natures of the Signs are Disclosed and
the Domiciles of the Planets are Established.
Having therefore explained those things above, since as in the
Signs so in the Planets but more or less, they share the same ele-
mentary nature, for which see Book 12, Section 2, Chapter 1, and
then Book 13, Section 1, Chapter 2. Therefore, if a part of the Zo-
diac is assigned to any particular Planet, agreeing more with that
one according to its intrinsic elemental nature, it also agrees more
with that same one according to its influential nature, since both
natures, as in the Planets, are thus said to be inseparable, and Signs
27

=== Page 220 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
in the Zodiac are given to the virtue of each Planet, with both ele-
mental and influential agreement; and therefore that part of the Zo-
diac will rightly be called the domicile of that Planet; namely one
in which there is nothing opposing, but just as if (it were) in an-
other self, and consequently with doubled powers, it is going to act
simply in accordance with its own predominant intrinsic nature.1
And therefore, since the Sun is of a fiery nature, it will have a fiery
Sign for its domicile. But because the Sun is not a Planet in which
an acuteness of a fiery nature greatly flourishes, Aries, in which
such a nature greatly flourishes, is not a suitable domicile for it; but
neither is Sagittarius, which shares that same nature least of all, be-
cause the Sun is not a Planet in which the fiery nature flourishes
least of all; therefore, in the case of the Sun, although it is flaming,
its fiery nature only flourishes moderately, on account of the abun-
dance of airy and etheric moistness, by which that stupendous light
of the whole World is nourished, and it may also flourish moder-
ately in Leo, Leo will [therefore] be the natural domicile of the
Sun. Moreover, Aries suits Mars, which of all the Planets is the one
most sharing the acuteness of fire; and Sagittarius suits Jupiter,
previously said to be fiery, but the least fiery of all.
But for the Moon, the most watery of Planets, the domicile
will be Cancer, the most watery of the Signs; the domicile of Sat-
urn, the most earthy, will be Capricorn, the most earthy Sign; Li-
bra, the most airy Sign, will be the domicile of Venus, the most
airy Planet; and finally, for Mercury, somewhat inclined to an
earthy nature, the domicile will be the Sign Virgo, the last in virtue
of the earth Signs.
And these are the domiciles that most agree with the 7 Plan-
1 The planetary domiciles were assigned definitively by the Alexandrian astrolo-
gers in the 2nd century B.C. by the simple expedient of moving step-by-step, in
the clockwise direction from Cancer and in the counter-clockwise direction from
Leo, with the planets in the order of the speed of their motion, viz. Mercury, Ve-
nus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. But Morin has devised an alternative method of
assignment based upon matching the natures of the planets with the natures of the
signs. However, at the end of the present chapter he gives a table illustrating the
ancient method of assignment.
28

=== Page 221 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
ets, according to the intrinsic nature predominating in them, that is
the elemental and at the same time the influential nature; and they
must therefore be said to be their primary domiciles, although
many (astrologers) would assign Aquarius for Saturn and Scorpio
for Mars as their primary domiciles, for the sake of tempering
them, which, however, is not to be considered here, but only that
any Planet must be located in a Sign similar to itself by the force of
the above said determination.
But since the Sun and the Moon are of only one sex and sect,
and are therefore of only one formal nature—that is, the Sun is
masculine, diurnal, and fiery, but the Moon is feminine, nocturnal,
and watery; therefore, a single domicile agrees with each of these
and is sufficient to exercise the total virtue of its nature in a jointly
natural manner; namely, Leo, a fiery, masculine, and diurnal Sign
for the Sun; but Cancer, a watery, feminine, and nocturnal Sign for
the Moon, even as those lights are between them opposite in their
natures.
But in the case of anyone of the rest of the Planets, because
they are strong with a duplex sex and sect, their nature is therefore
duplex and opposite, as is said in Book 13, Section 2, Chapter 2.
Therefore, a single domicile cannot suffice for it for exercising the
total virtue of its nature naturally; for even if any Sign, viewed as a
material object should eminently contain all the opposite natures;
nevertheless, viewed formally, or as a Sign, it should exist as one
(comprised) of opposite natures, namely of that to which its was
determined by the Sun at the beginning of the World. As, there-
fore, with the lights on account of their single nature, a single do-
micile in the Zodiac is suitable; accordingly, with the rest of the
Planets, on account of their dual nature, two domiciles will have to
be allowed, but both of them agreeing with the opposite natures of
each Planet, in accordance with its degree of exertion, as much as
can be done, as was already observed in the distribution of the
principal domiciles because of the reasoning set forth there.
Therefore, because Jupiter is strong in its opposite natures,
that is fiery formally and at the same time eminently, and conse-
29

=== Page 222 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
quently only eminently watery to the same degree of exertion, it is
moreover the least formally fiery of the Planets; and therefore Sag-
ittarius, the least fiery of the Signs was allowed for it as its princi-
pal domicile; also, Pisces, the least watery of the Signs will fit it for
its least principal domicile, namely the one in which it is going to
act more efficaciously with its own and eminently watery nature,
and its own and eminently feminine sex, and its own nocturnal
sect. And so, for Mercury, of the Planets the least formally earthy,
Gemini, the least airy of the Signs, is suitable for its least principal
domicile. But for Saturn, formally the most earthy, Libra would be
suitable for its least principal domicile, because it is the most airy
Sign; but because for Venus, formally the most airy (of the Plan-
ets) it is most suitable for its principal domicile; therefore, Aquar-
ius, coming second to Libra, or posited in its sinister trine, and
therefore second in virtue in the airy triplicity, will be the second-
ary or least principal domicile of Saturn itself. By the same reason-
ing, Cancer might suit Mars, the most fiery (of the Planets), as its
least principal domicile, but because it is the principal domicile of
the Moon; therefore, Scorpio, succeeding to Cancer, will be the
secondary domicile of Mars. Finally, Capricorn would suit Venus,
the most airy (of the Planets), for its least principal domicile, but
because it is the principal domicile of Saturn, Taurus, succeeding
Capricorn, will be the secondary domicile of Venus.
Nevertheless, it must be noted that a Planet in its own princi-
pal domicile acts elementarily more efficaciously, and also influ-
entially, if they both agree in their sex; otherwise, it will emit its in-
flux more efficaciously from its least principal one, but the one of
the same sex; thus, Saturn will chill more strongly from Capricorn,
but it will have a stronger influx from Aquarius; so, Venus more
strongly moistens from Libra, but it has a stronger influx from
Taurus; moreover, Mars pours out its elemental and influential
strengths very much more strongly from Aries; and the reasoning
is the same for the rest (of the Planets and Signs).
Besides, it must be noted that the determination of the Signs
to the natures of the Planets was not by the location of their own
30

=== Page 223 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
rulers over them; for example, because the Sun at the beginning of
the World was not in Leo but in Aries; and because from Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, each one was allotted two do-
miciles, but in both of which it could not be at the same time.
Therefore, (that determination) was made more conformably only
by the Sun, as the king and chorus leader of all the Planets, only
until now so exposed.
So, therefore, having depended upon these causes - not ficti-
tious ones, but those with a natural foundation and experience -
the 12 Signs of the Zodiac and the 7 Planets are distributed accord-
ing to their nature. Whence, it is plain that the division of the Zo-
diac into both elementary and Planetary natures that was handed
down to us by the ancients only cabalistically and without legiti-
mate reasons, is not an invention of the human intellect, both be-
cause it is not established among the first writers of astrology
about its invention or about its author; and then because the life of
no one even of the first men had been able to supply in detecting
that by experience and establishing it; but the talents of many men
came together with regard to that same invention of so much time
and difficulty, it is alien to their nature and cooperation. And so, it
must be said that that division, even as the division of the houses of
the celestial figure, was produced by that universal knowledge that
God the Best and Greatest infused into Adam at the beginning of
the World, through which, when he bestowed true and appropriate
names on all things, as Sacred Scripture relates, he must have
stated that which was very complete and very clear in the Caelum
and on Earth.
But from what has been said above, it is proper to define the
domicile of a Planet thus—namely, that it is a Sign of the Zodiac
with an elemental or influential nature or both greatly related or
conformable to that Planet through determination.
Besides, therefore, the Caelum divided determinatively into
parts with the diverse forces of the Planets, both to supply the vir-
tue of the Planets lying hidden under the Earth, and because the
proper accidents of any space or house of the celestial figure are la-
31

=== Page 224 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
tent in any Planet by which they are excited or moved forward, and
by whose nature they are apprehended; and they are not indiscrim-
inately from any Planet, and therefore they ought to be solely from
that one that is determined to the accidents of that space, as will be
shown below in its own place. Moreover, a Planet can only be de-
termined by body or by rulership or by aspect; and consequently,
since it often happens that a space or house of the figure is devoid
of the body or an effective aspect of a Planet, it was necessary that
that part of the Caelum that occupies the space, even if it is of itself
essentially neither good nor bad, but it was determined to the na-
ture of some other Planet; namely so that accidents can be pro-
duced from the nature of the space itself, or rather accidents that
are determined to some nature of the Planets. But then the wisdom
of God is greatly commended, who, by the proper motions of the
Planets continuously wandering to the north and the south, and by
the diumal motion of the movers, wished to cause their encounters
and their absences, lest by the primary rulers of the World, the
Planets, heaped up in one place in the Caelum,—as in my own na-
tivity—the places of the Earth deprived of their aspects, then also
placed vertically too much were known—the latter by excess, but
the former by the lack of influxes from the Planets, but it will rein-
force those, the former are moderated by the disposition in the
Caelum of the virtue of the Planets, which otherwise gathered to-
gether into a single place of the Caelum would be more irresistible.
Furthermore, this very ancient division of the Signs squares
marvelously well with the Tychonic System, in which the Sun and
the Moon are placed to revolve solely around the Earth, free from
itself in turn and from the other Planets. But Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
Venus, and Mercury primarily revolved about the Sun, to which
they are bound, and which they comply with as their own chorus
master; secondarily, moreover, around the Moon and the Earth.
For thus, the domiciles of the Sun and the Moon, that is Leo and
Cancer, are just like the centers of the domiciles of the rest of the 5
Planets, whose domiciles surround the domiciles of the lights on
both sides, in the same order as in the system itself, their bodies
surrounding the body of the Sun; namely, both domiciles of Mer-
32

=== Page 225 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
cury closely surround the domiciles of the Sun and the Moon;
then, both the domiciles of Venus; then, both of Mars; and then
both of Jupiter; so that finally both of Saturn that are at the greatest
distance from Leo and Cancer; as is plain in the list placed below,
from which the truth of the system of Tycho is confirmed, and the
tme system of the World is deduced—the true system of the World
first became known to astrologers by reasoning, and then to
astronomers by observation.
TIL -TV n? s T H
h i+ cT 9 5 o D 5 9 cT 1+
Besides, this is also worthy of note, that both domiciles of
Mercury are in semi-sextile aspect to the domiciles of the Sun and
the Moon; both domiciles of Venus in sextile; both of Mars in
square; both of Jupiter in trine; and both of Saturn in opposition;
that is, the individual Planets from their own masculine domiciles
aspect the domicile of the Sun with a fortunate ray, and also from
their own feminine domiciles aspect the domicile of the Moon
with a fortunate ray, with the exception of Saturn, which in its own
domiciles is opposite the domiciles of the lights.
But on the contrary, the masculine domiciles of the Planets
are in bad aspect to the domicile of the Moon, and the feminine
ones are in bad aspect to the domicile of the Sun, which certainly
also greatly suits the dignity of the lights, and then the sex and the
nature of all the Planets.
But perhaps someone might inquire why, having based the di-
vision of the Signs on the elemental natures, according to Book 14,
Chapter 5, the domicile of the Sun is not Aries, and the Moon's do-
micile Pisces, since Aries with the Sun and Pisces with the Moon
agree in their elemental nature; the Sun was posited in Aries at the
beginning of the World, and the rest of the Planets could have their
own domiciles of the same elemental nature and arranged in the
same manner with respect to Aries and Pisces, as above with re-
33

=== Page 226 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
spect to Leo and Cancer, which is shown in the following table.
TIP s\ S X T K ^ V, -/"l
b 0" 9 5 O D 5 9 0"
A twofold reason can be offered. First, because from what
was said previously, the domiciles of the Planets are based upon
the greatest elemental commensurability of Sign and Planet, which
is not given between the Sun and Aries, but (rather) between Mars
and Aries, with which the greatest acuteness of the fiery nature
agrees; and also the greatest watery nature is not given between the
Moon and Pisces, the Sign that is least of the water Signs; and not
(either) among the other Planets and the other Signs. Second, be-
cause the rulership of the Planets should have been the same in the
northern part of the World and in the southern part; if indeed the
Sun ruled the northern part and the Moon the southern part, and
each of the others, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury,
would have had its rulership both in the north and in the south; but
there would have been the greatest difference and disparity be-
tween the two, and the south inferior and obedient to the north;
that, therefore, was not in harmony with the decree of the most
wise God on the good fortune and preeminence of the northern
part of the World.
You will object. The light—that is, the Sun according to
us—was created on the first day, but the rest of the Planets were
only made on the fourth day; therefore, the Sun at the beginning of
its own creation did not determine the Signs to the natures of the
Planets, which were not yet in existence.
I reply. That if the light was created on the first day, the globe
or the set of all the Planets were not yet distinguished among them-
selves, as we have said in a similar (discussion) about the terres-
trial globe in Book 2, Chapter 8, there would appear to be no diffi-
culty that the Sun, which was most powerful in virtue and magni-
tude in that globe—since the Sun according to Hansberger's hy-
34

=== Page 227 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
pothesis in his Uranometria1 is at least seven times greater than all
the rest of the Planets together, of which it was going to be the
king—it also on the first day of creation determined the Signs to
the natures of the 7 principal Planets.
Chapter 4.
The Exiles of the Planets.
The Signs opposite the domiciles of the Planets were called
their exiles by the ancients, then also their detriments. And conse-
quently, since the Sign Aquarius is opposed to Leo, which is the
domicile of the Sun, Aquarius is said to be the exile of the Sun.
similarly, since Cancer and Leo are opposed to the Signs Capri-
corn and Aquarius, which are the domiciles of Saturn, Cancer and
Leo will be the exiles, so determined of Satum, and thus with the
rest.
Thus, moreover, they seem to me to be rightly named for
three reasons. First, because just as among men the place of exile is
distant from that of the nativity or the place of habitation, so the
exile of a Planet is distant by the whole opposition of the Caelum
from any one of its domiciles, which we have said above to be of
the same nature as the Planet. Second. Since a Planet in exile is sit-
uated in a Sign partly contrary to its own nature and in the domicile
of a Planet elementally or influentially unfriendly, which is plain
from the Sun in Aquarius, the domicile of Satum, or from, Satum
in Leo, the domicile of the Sun, and thus with the rest (of the Plan-
ets). Third. Because the exile of a Planet corrupts its own domicile
with an opposite and malefic aspect.
Therefore, from these causes, a Planet in exile is said to as-
sume either a listlessness of virtue or a certain malignity; not be-
cause it is changed in itself, but because its proper influx is over-
thrown with respect to us, as will be explained in its own proper
place. Whence, not unhelpfully, the Planet located in its own exile
1 Possibly a reference to Philip van Lansberge (1561-1632), Tabulae motwm
coelestivm perpetuae. (Middelburg, 1632).
35

=== Page 228 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
or detriment is said to be in exile with respect to itself, but in detri-
ment with respect to us.
A Table in which is Shown the Domiciles, Exiles, and Ene-
mies of the Individual Planets, and then the Opposite Signs.
Venus Mercury Moon Sun Mercury Venus
Taurus Gemini Cancer Leo Virgo Libra
Scorpio Sagittarius Capricorn Aquarius Pisces Aries
Mars Jupiter Saturn Saturn Jupiter Mars
Leo is the domicile of the Sun, Aquarius its exile, and Saturn
is its enemy, Leo, moreover, and Aquarius are opposite Signs; and
the scheme is the same in the rest of the columns. Vice versa,
moreover, Aquarius is the domicile of Saturn, Leo its exile, and the
Sun its enemy.
Chapter 5.
The Exaltations and Falls of the Planets.
Ptolemy discusses these in Quadripartite, Book 1, and
Cardan in his Commentary. But the causes or reasons for these that
they offer are equally groundless,1 as are those that they offer for
the domiciles; from which it follows namely that the exaltations
are different in the southern part of the World from what they are
in the northern part, which is also asserted by Campanella, and
they add many other absurdities that have given Pico Mirandola
1 It is now known from the decipherment of clay tablets found in Iraq that the ex-
altations of the planets actually go back to the Babylonians, who called them the
"secret houses" of the planets but gave no reasons for their selection. Firmicus
was aware of their origin, for he says in Mathesis ii. 3 "For this reason, the Baby-
lonians wanted those signs in which the individual (planets) are exalted to be
their domiciles, saying that in fact Saturn's domicile is Libra, Jupiter's Cancer,
36

=== Page 229 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
and others an opportune and just occasion for scoffing at astrol-
ogy. But to set forth and disprove their individual reasons would
be a mere waste of time, which should not be spent on worthless
things, especially since they are sufficiently overthrown in similar
fashion by those things that were stated by us in Chapter 1 on the
immutability of the domiciles. And so, since experience confirms
the exaltations no less than the domiciles of the Planets, it only re-
mains for us here to inquire into their foundation, or their truer
causes, and to present our opinion about these.
I say, therefore, that the cardinal Signs are not rashly said to
be mobile and cardinal too; since changes more frequently happen
from them; indeed, they are the ones that are greater than the rest.
And the reason is that since those Signs are the sources of the pri-
mary qualities in the Caelum, as we said in Book 14, and conse-
quently for changes—indeed, they are suited to and inclined to-
wards greater changes than the others, but especially the equinoc-
tial Signs of the cardinals are primary, as was shown in that same
Book 14. Moreover, this was noticed in astrological observations
in the four cardinal Signs; then, in those that are contiguous to the
primary cardinal Signs, the virtues of the Planets are so exalted or
helped that they burst out suddenly in great effects, and violent
ones as it were, or ones over and above their proper virtues, which
does not happen to these Planets when they also enter their own
domiciles or pass through them. For these reasons, therefore, the
above said Signs were said by the ancients to be the exaltations of
the Planets, and not moreover (as Pico, Against the Astrologers,
Book 6 Chapter 14, says from [a passage in] Pliny) because the
apogees of the Planets were once in those Signs in which they are
said to be exalted; since Mars's apogee was never in Capricorn,
nor Venus's in Pisces, as is established in the Rudolphine Tables.
Mars's Capricorn, the Sun's Aries, the Moon's Taurus, Venus's Pisces, and Mer-
cury's Virgo." This should have given later astrologers a clue as to their origin,
but instead they followed the lead of Ptolemy and invented various theoretical
reasons for the selection of the exaltation signs. And like Ptolemy, Morin accepts
the traditional exaltation signs, but not knowing their origin, he fills four columns
of his text with what seemed to him to be appropriate reasons for those choices.
37

=== Page 230 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Furthermore, that is not at all a matter of indifference, namely
as any Planet might be exalted in any one of those Signs, but as all
the rest are done according to reason, so also should any Planet be
reasonably allotted its own Sign in which it is exalted; not to be
sure because of an affinity or nature per se, for the fiery Jupiter is
exalted in Cancer, a water Sign; and the earthy Saturn is exalted in
Libra, an air Sign; and not from friendship or enmity with the rul-
ers of the Signs of exaltation; for Saturn is exalted in the domicile
of its enemy Venus; however, Venus (is exalted) in the domicile of
its friend Jupiter. And not by similarity of sect or sex; for Jupiter,
according to Book 13, Section 2, Chapters 1 & 2, is masculine and
diumal, and yet it is exalted in Cancer, a feminine and nocturnal
Sign; and only Mercury is excepted, which happens to be exalted
in Virgo, its own domicile; but all the Planets are allotted their own
exaltations in the Zodiac by an analogy of their own virtue to the
virtue of the Signs in which they are individually exalted. So that
for that Planet which of itself is of (some) major virtue, there ought
rightly to be a place in the Zodiac for it (where it is) more effective,
so that from the conformable similarity of virtue of the Planet and
the place, the Planet may operate more efficaciously; whence, a
Planet in such a place is said to be exalted in its powers; and such a
place is deservedly called the exaltation of the virtue of the Planet.
And in fact, even as a little catapult cannot produce a great effect
corresponding to itself or to the ball with a big ball as a missile, nor
even a huge catapult with a little ball, but both ought to be propor-
tioned to the effect of the catapult and the ball, so the Planets, from
the places in the Zodiac proportioned by their degree of virtue,
produce notable effects; but from those that neither in virtue nor in
the degree of virtue are related or proportioned, they act either
against their own nature or in a weakened manner.
But from what was said above, it is deduced that since this
dignity of the Planets does not accrue to them from a similarity of
nature, it seems to be unsuitably said to be an essential dignity.
Since, therefore, the Planets are allotted domiciles in the Zo-
diac from a similarity of nature, so the exaltations are allotted ac-
38

=== Page 231 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
cording to a proportion of virtue; therefore, for the Sun, having
surpassed all the Planets in virtue, it should have Aries for its exal-
tation, which is the first and most efficacious of the Signs; but the
rest of the cardinal Signs ought to be allotted to the three superior
Planets; that is, for Saturn, the highest and most powerful of those,
Libra; for Jupiter, Cancer; and for Mars, Capricorn; Cancer is infe-
rior in virtue, as has been shown elsewhere. But the Signs that are
adjacent to the equinoctial (signs) are suitable for the three inferior
(Planets); that is, for Venus, Pisces; for Mercury, Virgo; for the
Moon, Taurus, which is also adjacent to Aries, and is midway be-
tween the northern cardinal Signs, one of which, namely Cancer,
the Moon itself rules; whence, that location for the lowest of the
Planets and the one closest to us seems most apt in the proportion
of its virtue. For, as the Moon is more powerful than Venus and
Mercury, so Taurus as a site prevails over Virgo and Pisces; but
from these, Cardan's opinion is rejected in his Book on the Judg-
ment of Nativities, Chapter 27, where he wants Mercury to be ex-
alted in Gemini. And let these (comments) on the exaltations of the
Planets suffice, which exaltations, it is plain, are Signs of the Zo-
diac, proportioned by virtue of acting for the Planets and
conformable to the individual Planets on account of the above said
cause.
But the fall or dejection of each Planet is the Sign diametri-
cally opposed to its exaltation. For every opposition among the ce-
lestial things, either of the Signs or of the Planets, is primarily and
per se a cause of contrariety with respect to the Earth, always in-
volving some malignance; and that is done not only by reason of
nature, which in opposite things is always partly contrary, but
principally by reason of its mode of acting, which happens through
the same line, in which the ends, since they are established as act-
ing on an intermediate point, restrain whatever action (there is
from) their opposed points, not with dispersed (forces) or reflected
on the other (point), but united on the same line, and through that it
attacks with forcible powers, whereby in the battle the powers of
both are as it were violently commingled. Therefore, on account of
this contrariety of the opposition, a sharing of malignity, it is con-
39

=== Page 232 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
formable to reason that Planets in opposite Signs have themselves
in a contrary mode; and consequently, if any Sign was the domicile
or exaltation of a Planet, its exile or fall is in the opposite Sign, in
which it acts lazily and as if below its own strength.
Table of the Exaltations and Falls of the Planets.
O D if 5
T 0 s TIP
-rt. YS H
Cf 9
Libra is the exaltation of Saturn; and Aries is its fall or dejec-
tion; but in turn Aries is the exaltation of the Sun, and Libra is its
dejection. And so with the other columns.
Furthermore, from the domiciles and exaltations of the Plan-
ets placed above, much more clearly is shown the excellence, dig-
nity, and vigor of the northern part of the World over the southern
part, which we have already shown from the nature of the Signs in
Book 14, Section 1, Chapters 5 & 9. And in fact the domiciles and
exaltations of the Sun and the Moon are in the northern part of the
World, along with the domiciles and exaltation of Mercury. And
therefore, even if the Sun, Moon, and Mercury are located in the
southern part of the World, their virtue and influence always flour-
ishes, however, in the northern part. Add to these (facts) that the
first motion of the lights was to the northern part—namely, with
the Sun posited in Aries at the beginning of the World, and the
Moon in Taurus, so that it might rule the night, by increasing rather
than by decreasing. Whence, it is not surprising if the principal
monarchies, all sciences and religions, have their origin in the
northern part of the Earth; in which CHRIST also wished to be
bom and to hand down the spiritual and truly divine law for estab-
lishing the Kingdom of the Heavens, which would be made known
40

=== Page 233 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
to the whole World. Moreover, in the southern part, Saturn, Mars,
and Venus rule by domicile and exaltation, but Mercury is exiled
and dejected. Therefore, the inhabitants of the southern Lands are
irreverent, idolaters, lustful, wild, and they have remained set apart
from the sciences; and if Jupiter with its own rulership in that part
(of the World) had not weakened its malignity, the life of the
southerners would have been animal-like rather than human, espe-
cially from their lack of the sciences and the recognition of the true
GOD; and these things shall only be said as far as the stars incline
some men to the higher sciences, and from those to the recognition
and worship of GOD, who by his own creatures is very recogniz-
able by his natural light; but they do not incline others in any direc-
tion, whence it follows that they remain atheists or irreligious.1
Furthermore, the southern part of the Earth abounded very much in
gold, silver, and in other riches, as is obvious from the mines of the
Peruvian kingdom, on account of the rulership of Saturn and Jupi-
ter in the southern part of the Caelum, which among the Planets is
greatly though to be in command of riches, whom Venus also aids
no little in gems, large pearls, and spices, on account of her domi-
cile in Libra, an equinoctial Sign, and the exaltation of Saturn, and
then her exaltation in Pisces, the domicile of Jupiter.
But for this consideration, the 4 cardinal points or the mobile
Signs are principally noted, which are devoted principally to ac-
tions and changes; for the equinoctial Signs belong to the rulership
of Mars and Venus, but by exaltation to the Sun and Saturn; but the
solstitial Signs to the Moon and Saturn from their rulership, but to
Jupiter and Mars from their exaltation. Therefore, Aries belongs to
the Sun and Mars, but Cancer to the Moon and Jupiter, which is
greatly in accord with the northern peoples. But Libra belongs to
Venus and Saturn, and Capricorn to Saturn and Mars, which
agrees well with the southerners; and consequently, the northern-
ers are made the most powerful by the Sun, Moon, Jupiter, and
1 In Morin's day, the southern parts of the world were mostly inhabited by wild
tribesmen and by what appeared to Europeans to be primitive civilizations, such
as those in Peru and the East Indies. And the southerners either followed animist
religions or non-Christian religions.
41

=== Page 234 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Mars, but the southerners by Venus, Saturn, and Mars, which is
most worthy of note, as being in agreement with their effects.
Chapter 6.
The Triplicities of the Planets, or the Trigons and the Trigon
Rulers According to the Opinions of the Ancients.
Nothing in the whole of astrology has so agitated my under-
standing as that the greater part of the old astrologers, but espe-
cially the Arabs, on all the sublunar effects have especially judged
from the trigons and their rulers, but not from the exaltations or
their rulers; nevertheless, since the Arabs, the Greeks, and the Lat-
ins disagree very much among themselves about the rulers of the
trigons; due to that, they have offered to the haters of astrology no
small opportunity for impugning and deriding it..
But so that this doctrine may be made more clear, it must be ap-
plied from Book 14, Section 1, Chapter 5, that there are four
triplicities of Signs in the Zodiac, that is a fire triplicity of Aries,
Leo, and Sagittarius; an earth triplicity from Taurus, Virgo, and
Capricorn; an air triplicity from Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius; and a
water triplicity from Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces. And all astrolo-
gers agree with this; and the Signs of the same triplicity, are among
themselves of the same nature or temperament; which is contrary to
Cardan's Commentary on Book 1, chapter 16, of the Quadripartite,
as was shown by us in Book 14, Section 1, Chapter 5.
But as for that which pertains to the mlers of the triplicities,
Ptolemy in the Quadripartite, Book 1, Chapter 16, gives the ruler-
ship of the /ire trigon to the Sun by day and to Jupiter by night; the
water triplicity to Mars both by day and by night, and yet to which
he associates the Moon by day and Venus by night; the air
triplicity to Saturn by day and to Mercury by night; and finally the
earth triplicity to Venus by day and to the Moon by night. More-
over, Cardan will have it in his Commenary that Ptolemy had the
sexes and the sects right in this distribution of the Signs and the
Planets.
42

=== Page 235 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
But truly those suffer from many defects. First, because he as-
signs three rulers to the water trigon, but only two to the rest. Sec-
ond, because in the water trigon he excludes the Moon from the
principal rulership, even though it is conformable by sex and by
sect, and in that same trigon it is the most powerful by domi-
cile—indeed, as ruler of a cardinal Sign; but he admits Mars,
which is in its dejection in Cancer and contrary by sex according to
Ptolemy himself; then too by its sect, namely because the reason
why Ptolemy made it of the nocturnal sect is absurd, as (is shown)
in Book 13, Section 3, Chapter 2, because in the fire trigon he re-
jects Mars, which is in its domicile and more powerful than the rest
(of the Planets)—indeed, the one that rules the equinoctial
Sign—and is similar in sex and sect, then too it is very much more
fiery than the others; and yet he wants the fire trigon to be mixed
with the south-west wind because of Mars's domicile, which
rouses up the south-west or western winds, in which he contradicts
himself. Fourth, because he wants that same trigon to be northerly,
on account of the southern Sign Sagittarius, which Jupiter rules,
since Jupiter's rulership in that trigon is less than the rulership of
the Sun or Mars; for in that trigon, the Sun is allotted a domicile
and an exaltation, but Mars is allotted a domicile in a cardinal and
primary Sign. It is therefore established from what was said above
that that distribution is not consistent and not natural but only on a
false foundation of sect and an artificial one of sex, as is
demonstrated from (the situation) with Mars.
Moreover, the Arabs, along with Julius Firmicus, John of
Spain, and the rest of that faction, assign three rulers for each
trigon.1 That is, in the fire trigon, (they assign) the Sun by day, Ju-
piter by night, and Saturn as a partner both by day and by night,
1 Unknown to Morin, the triplicity rulers given by these authorities are the stan-
dard ones of Greek astrology and presumably go back to the Alexandrian inven-
tors ofhoroscopic astrology. They are mentioned by Dorotheus, Pentateuch, i. 2.
(See the translation of the Arabic version by Pingree, Carmen Astrologicum (
Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1976), which also gives the Greek citation by Hephaestio
of Thebes, Apotelesmatics, i. 6.). But the oldest authorities give no reasons for the
choice of rulers.
43

=== Page 236 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
which is surely absolutely ridiculous, since Saturn is by nature
contrary to that trigon and in it is greatly debilitated. In the water
trigon, Venus by day, Mars by night, and the Moon always; for the
foundation of the Arabs is also similarity of sex and sect, as above;
and therefore in the case of Mars they follow Ptolemy's error, or he
follows theirs. In the air trigon, Saturn by day, Mercury by night,
and Jupiter always, which is again most absurd, since in this trigon
Jupiter has neither domicile nor exaltation, but on the contrary is
allotted an exile. Finally, in the earth trigon, Venus by day, the
Moon by night, and Mars always, on account of a false opinion
about its sect, having excluded Mercury that is of a common na-
ture, sex, and sect—as they will have it—which in this trigon is the
strongest of all.1 Moreover, Cardan, the most absurd of all, assigns
5 rulers in his Book on the Judgments of Nativities, Chapter 27,
namely Venus and Mercury by day, the Moon and Mars by night,
and Satum both by day and by night. But the famous astrologer
Schoner differs somewhat with the Arabs only in the fire and earth
trigons; for in the fire trigon, he assigns Mars by day and night, or
always; and in the earth trigon, he assigns the Moon by day, Venus
by night, and Satum always.
Therefore, Ptolemy makes the diumal trigonocrators to be
those Planets that rule the fixed Signs of the trigons, because ac-
cording to Cardan in his Commentary, those Signs are pure, sin-
cere, and most powerful. Schoner chooses those that are exalted in
the trigons themselves, on account of the unexpected changes that
result from the exaltations. But the Arabs preserve no order here;
whence, it is plain how much confusion there has been among as-
trologers hitherto with regard to these rulers of the trigons, which I
subjoin below with their authorities for the sake of easier
comprehension.
1 Dorotheus adds 'and in Virgo is also a share for Mercury' (Pingree's transla-
tion). The Greek original has: 'Taurus, Virgo, and also Capricorn Venus rules by
day, and by night the shining Moon, and third after these the god starting wars,
and now in Virgo Mercury receives an offshoot'.
44

=== Page 237 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
Ptolemy The Arabs Schoner
D N P D N P D N P
T O H O u b O u 0"
S H D 9 0" 9 o" D 9 0" D
-/-i /W /w X b 5 b 5 U b 5 H
0 ny 9 D 9 D cf D 9 b
(Where D indicates the Day ruler, N the night ruler,
and P the Partner.)
Chapter 7.
The Trigons and the Trigonocrators According to our Opinion.
Before we establish anything about this matter, by which the
errors that have been introduced with regard to the rulers of the tri-
gons may be expelled, it seems to be necessary to supply here from
the practice or observations of astrologers what if a great conjunc-
tion or a solar eclipse occurs in any particular Sign of the Zodiac,
there is made about either a judgment principally from the nature
and state of the Planet that rules the place of the eclipse or the con-
junction; and similarly if in any nativity Aries was in the ASC, the
judgment will be made about the accidents pertaining to the ASC
or the MC, from the nature and state of Mars, which is the ruler of
Aries; but not primarily and per se from the nature and state of a
Planet that in those places is lacking in rulership; and much less
even from the nature and state of a Planet that was allotted its exile
in those places. And the reason for this rule is because, as will be
explained more fully elsewhere, these Signs and their rulers are
determined to the subjects of the houses in which they are and
which they rule; and the effects of the Signs are changed in accor-
dance with the different state of their own rulers, to which, there-
45

=== Page 238 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
fore, attention must be paid for a particular judgment and not indis-
criminately to any Planet; for example, to Saturn for the effects of
the Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius {trigori) according to the Arabs. For
otherwise, there would be no certain foundation of astrology, and
consequently no certitude, which is inconsistent with the truth of
that practice.
Nevertheless, since not only do the Signs of the same trigon
agree with themselves in their nature, as we have said above in
contradiction of Cardan, but also the rulers of those Signs of the
Planet agree among themselves, either in their principal or pre-
dominating nature, which namely is inherent in them both elemen-
tally and influentially, or in the less principal, which is only inher-
ent in them influentially. Therefore, on account of that consensus,
whatever happens in any Sign or from any Sign, pertains in a way
to the whole trigon of that Sign and to the Planets that are rulers of
those Signs; whence it happens that both the latter and the former
are set in motion to act or to influence together. And no one should
marvel at this, if indeed it does seem very marvelous that on the
same guitar or on different musical instruments when any string is
touched, by its own motion another string is not touched but hav-
ing the same sound it also moves, but if it does not have the same
sound, it does not move, the reason for this effect must be referred
solely to the identity of the nature of the sound, as is learnedly
proved by the Reverend Father Marin Mersenne (1588-1648) in
his Harmonics,] Book 4, Proposition 27.
Moreover, it is shown thus singly that Planets which rule the
Signs of the same trigon agree among themselves in their principal
or less principal nature. For Mars, the Sun, and Jupiter rule the fire
Signs Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, of which Planets the Sun is to-
tally of the nature of fire, but Mars and Jupiter are principally of
that same nature, as was shown above in Chapter 3; and therefore
1 Possibly a reference to Father Marin Mersenne, Harmonicorum libri xii...
(Paris: G.Baudry, 1648), which contained reprints of two earlier books, one of
which was Harmonicorum instrumentorum libri IV(Paris: G. Baudry, 1636); but
Morin may have cited the earlier edition of that book.
46

=== Page 239 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
they agree in a fiery nature. The Moon, Mars, and Jupiter rule the
water Signs Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces, of which the Moon is to-
tally of a watery nature, but Mars and Jupiter are of that same na-
ture but less principally, (as shown) in that same 3rd Chapter. Ve-
nus, Saturn, and Mercury rule the air Signs; all of those (Planets)
are of an airy nature—Venus indeed principally, but Saturn and
Mercury less principally. Finally, Saturn, Venus, and Mercury,
with the same earthy nature among themselves, rule the earth
Signs Capricorn, Taurus, and Virgo; Saturn, indeed, and Mercury
principally, and Venus less principally, (as shown) in that same
3rd Chapter. So that consequently, in the Signs of the Zodiac mak-
ing up the trigons and their rulers the greatest consensus is brought
forth, and it is not fictitious but entirely natural, so that that thing
either should not nor cannot be conceived otherwise, unless
confusion and falsity are introduced here and there.
And here it comes to be noted incidentally that Jupiter and
Saturn are thus formally determined to a fiery and watery nature,
in such a way that they are not determined by any formal or intrin-
sic reason to an airy or earthy (nature). But on the contrary, Saturn,
Venus, and Mercury are so formally determined to an airy and
earthy nature, that they may not be determined by any formal rea-
son to a fiery or watery (nature); whence, it is evident which Plan-
ets in the individual trigons can (do) more and should be particu-
larly looked at. And how absurd it was for the Arabs1 (to say that)
Saturn was a ruler for the fire trigon, Venus for the water trigon,
Jupiter for the air trigon, and the Moon for the earth trigon]
But from these things said in advance and understood, I now
say that to each trigon three rulers or trigonocrators are assigned,
namely those Planets that exercise dominion over the individual
Signs of that trigon-, and consequently the rulers of the fire trigon
or the trigonocrators are Mars, the Sun, and Jupiter; of the water
trigon, the Moon, Mars, and Jupiter; of the air trigon, Venus, Sat-
urn, and Mercury; and of the earth trigon, Saturn, Venus, and Mer-
' But the Arabs were merely repeating the assignments of the Alexandrian astrol-
ogers, who unfortunately did not explain their rationale.
47

=== Page 240 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
cuiy; and the reasons that are evident from what was said previ-
ously need not be repeated here superfluously because they have
already been sufficiently explained by us. The whole difficulty,
therefore, consists of determining which of the Planets in which-
ever trigon, other things being equal, should be preferred to an-
other for the rulership, or which will be the first ruler, which the
second, and which the third; about which the Arabs are so much
occupied; or which will rule by day, which by night, and which at
both times but less importantly according to Ptolemy and the
others.
Moreover, these prerogatives of rulership (can be deter-
mined) by three self-consistent reasons. First. That a Planet ruler
of a cardinal Sign, as the principal (ruler) of the whole trigon, rules
principally or primarily by day; the ruler of the fixed Sign princi-
pally by night; and the ruler of the common Sign by day and by
night less principally or secondarily. Besides, this order would
plainly oppose the nature, sex, and sect of the lights; for the Sun in
its whole nature is fiery, masculine, and diurnal; consequently, it
would be absurd for it to rule principally in the fire trigon by night
and not by day, which trigon is also masculine and diurnal. But the
Moon in her whole nature is watery, feminine, and nocturnal; and
therefore (it would be) absurd for her to rule principally by day and
not by night. This order must therefore be rejected, which those
absurd (assignments) are the consequence of.
Secondly, that a Planet ruler of the fixed Sign rules by day,
the ruler of the mobile or cardinal Sign by night, and the ruler of
the common Sign rules at both times, which method by reason of
the diurnal rulership agrees with Ptolemy; but in this he seems to
go wrong because Jupiter and Mercury never rule principally, but
always and solely less chiefly according to that order;
Thirdly, that the Planet which in the trigon was more power-
ful than the rest of the Planets, namely by domicile and exaltation,
short of debility, is put in charge primarily by day, and that one
must be specially noticed in judging by triplicities; but the one that
was the ruler of the cardinal Sign also rules primarily by night, and
48

=== Page 241 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
finally the rest (of the Planets) secondarily by day and by night. So
that here they are put according to our opinion. Where note that
this is very much more powerful, that the diurnal trigonocrators
are among themselves in contrary domiciles; that is, the Sun and
Saturn between themselves; and Jupiter and Mercury between
themselves; and the same thing is (true) of the nocturnal ones;
namely, Mars and Venus' between themselves; and the Moon and
Saturn between themselves. And the same thing (is true) of the
partners; namely, Jupiter and Mercury between themselves; and
Mars and Venus between themselves, in the same order.
D N P
East T s\ o 0" 1+
North S A H D 0"
West -TV /w S h 9
South w 5 h 9
In which the Sun and the Moon are especially optimally dis-
posed; but the Moon much more reasonably than in Ptolemy, the
Arabs, and Schoner.
In addition, moreover, the one that is more powerful in the
trigon always precedes the one that is weaker, as is plain in the fire
trigon from Jupiter, which is only the ruler of the common Sign;
and therefore it is put last as the partner of the diurnal and noctur-
nal rulers. Similarly in the water (trigon), Mars, even though it is
the ruler of the fixed Sign, nevertheless because it is dejected in
Cancer, it is put in the last place. In the air (trigon). Mercury fol-
lows the reasoning of the above said Jupiter. And in the earth
(trigon), Venus (follows) the reasoning of (the above said) Mars.
And there is no Planet that does not sometimes rule principally ei-
1 The Latin text has the symbol for Mercury rather than the symbol for Venus.
49

=== Page 242 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
ther by day or by night. Therefore, this order, besides that it agrees
the most with nature and reason, is also the most self consistent;
and to sum it up, it is the most perfect (order) of all that could be
thought up; in which besides it is discerned that every
trigonocrator is at least allotted a domicile in its own triplicity, but
not by the Arabs, who most absurdly assign Saturn to the fire
trigon by day and by night, because in that trigon it is exiled and
dejected. And therefore, about a Planet's being in any particular
Sign, in which trigon it does not have a domicile, it is rightly said
to be peregrine, that is because it is peregrine in that alien trigon
due to its own nature, and where it is lacking in any dignity unless
it is exalted in the Sign that it occupies, for there it would not be
said to be peregrine, for the rulers of the trigons are established
rather by reason of their domicile than by their exaltation—that is,
the trigonocrators ought to agree with the trigons in their nature
per se; moreover, they agree by reason of their domicile as is plain,
but not by reason of their exaltation', otherwise, Mars exalted in
Capricorn would be of an earthy nature, which nevertheless is in-
herent in it neither principally nor less principally; and therefore
from those places where the trigonocrators themselves are best
placed.
Chapter 8.
To What Regions of the World the Trigons Pertain; and
Consequently, Which Regions of the World the Trigon
Rulers Principally Rule.
Ptolemy and the Arabs differ among themselves about this,
for the former in Quadripartite, Book 1, Chapter 16, the fire trigon
is attributed most strongly to the North, on account of Jupiter that
rules Sagittarius, a Southern Sign. And so all the same it receives a
mixture of the West or the Afric direction on account of Mars,
which nevertheless he expels from any rulership of that
trigon—from which it is sufficiently plain how poorly these things
hang together. For that which he says—that Jupiter rouses up the
50

=== Page 243 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
northern winds, and Mars the western ones—would it not then fol-
low therefore that the fire trigon, in which it is less powerful, is
northern. For by chance it would happen on account of another
trigon, in which it would be more powerful, such as the water
trigon. But conformably he attributes the water trigon to the West
with a mixture of the South; the earth trigon to the South with a
mixture of the East; and the air trigon to the East with a mixture of
the North; but of the Planets he gives Jupiter the command over the
North, Mars over the West, Venus over the South, and Saturn over
the East; he says, on account of its familiarity with the Sun. But the
Arabs will have the fire trigon to be East, over which Jupiter pre-
sides; they attribute the water trigon to the North, over which Mars
presides; the air trigon to the West, over which Saturn presides;
and the earth trigon to the South, over which Venus presides; but
here again no reason is apprehended in the rulers of the trigons;
and no order is consistent for them. And in fact in the fire trigon,
Jupiter is the ruler of the common Sign without any misfortune
(elsewhere in the triplicity); in the water trigon, Mars is the ruler of
the fixed Sign with a dejection or depression (in Cancer); in the air
trigon, Saturn is the ruler of the fixed Sign with an exaltation (in
Libra); and in the earth trigon, Venus is the ruler of the fixed Sign
with a fall or depression (in Virgo); and it must not be said that in
this matter the Arabs looked at the sex and sect of the trigons and
the Planets, since Mars by sex and by sect is of itself opposed to the
water trigon, as was already said above. Since, therefore, those
things that are arranged by nature are self-consistent and in confor-
mity to reason, it seems that it must be said that Ptolemy and the
Arabs here too deviate from the truth; and those things that they
have predicted from the trigons and their rulers have either oc-
curred fortuitously or from other causes. Therefore, in order to re-
solve this difficulty, Nature itself must again be consulted. More-
over, it will indicate to us that the four cardinal Signs, Aries, Can-
cer, Libra, and Capricorn, the primary (signs) of the trigons are
distributed to the four regions or comers of the World by their own
location; and there is no difficulty with Cancer in the north and
Capricorn in the south, but only with Aries and Libra—which one
51

=== Page 244 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
of these claims the east for itself, since both of them begin from the
equator or the middle of the World. But the east should be (as-
signed) to Aries, namely the more noble of the cardinals. This is
proved: First, because the active quality of heat predominates in
Aries, but in Libra the passive quality of moistness; and the active
quality is more noble than the passive. Second, because Aries is
subject to the rulership of a masculine Planet, but Libra of a femi-
nine one. Third, because Aries is in the nobler and commanding
part of the World, namely the northern part, as was shown previ-
ously; but Libra is in the less noble and obedient part. Fourth, be-
cause the east is dry, like Aries, and the west is moist, like Libra.
From these causes, therefore, Aries pertain to the east and Libra to
the west. Therefore, the fire trigon is eastern, the water trigon
northern, the air trigon western, and the earth trigon southern.
And this entirely agrees with our division of the Zodiac (as shown)
in Book 14, Section 5, Chapter 5, where we have said that the ac-
tive qualities, heat and cold, are dominant in the northern part of
the World because of Aries and Cancer in the east, namely, and the
north; but the passive qualities in the south because of Libra and1
Capricorn in the west and the south. And consequently, the
trigonocrators that we have put above rule over those regions of
the World in which their trigons fall. And from this, the reason is
now plain why Jupiter excites the northern winds—that is, because
it is the principal and most powerful ruler of the northern
trigon—the Sun is the ruler of the eastern trigon, Mercury of the
southern one, and Saturn of the western one.
You will object. The same part of the Earth is simultaneously
eastern and western; and there is no place on the sphere of the
Earth that is particularly assigned to the east or the west. There-
fore, the fire trigon does not rule the east, and the air trigon the
west.
I reply that there is of course no part that is simply and abso-
lutely eastern or western, but only as compared to each other, as
Germany is east of France but west of Hungary; and it can also be
1 The Latin text has in by mistake for &.
52

=== Page 245 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
said that Germany is north of Italy and south of Denmark. And
consequently the division of the Zodiac into two parts, northern
and southern and then into 4 trigons for the 4 comers of the World,
insofar as they are referred to the Earth are indeed universal, so
that nothing can be concluded from them as to particular parts of
the Earth; for example, if an eclipse is made in the northern half of
the Zodiac, it will primarily pertain to the northern peoples, but
from that it cannot be particularly stated to which of them. Simi-
larly, if an eclipse is made in the fire trigon, its effect will be allot-
ted to those 4 places on Earth that will be east with respect to other
places, and perhaps it will signify actively for the easterners and
passively for the westerners, as when the King of Spain subjected
western America to his rule. But it cannot be solely defined from
those (considerations), which are the eastern places and which are
the western ones. And since the east contains the space of the
Caelum and the Earth, from the rising of the Sun in the beginning
of Cancer to the rising of the Sun in the beginning of Capricorn, if
the eclipse occurs in Aries or in Leo, it will certainly be said that
the eastern place that is signified by it forms the northern part (of
the Earth); but this signification is still more general than one that
can designate it as a particular location. But a celestial figure
erected for some particular place at the time of mid-eclipse, if it
has its degree of the ecliptic in the eastern part of the figure, it will
show by its eastern place that a part of the Earth is signified that is
between its place in the figure and the 90th degree to the east;
moreover, the distance of the place of the eclipse from the merid-
ian will more particularly designate that place according to its ter-
restrial longitude, but not according to its latitude. Therefore, other
things will still have to be considered, which will be discussed in
Book 20, Section I, Chapters 4 & 5. And more precise conjectures
must be elicited from them. Moreover, if the eclipse occurs in Sag-
ittarius, the eastern place will be signified in the southern part (of
the Earth). And if the ruler of the eclipse was in the fire trigon, it
will be more certain that the signification of the place is eastern;
(but) if it is in another trigon, there will be a signification of a
place, or of many places, that is mixed from the two trigons; as, if
53

=== Page 246 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
the eclipse was in the fire trigon and its ruler in the water trigon,
the place will be signified between the east and the north; but if the
ruler was in the air trigon, which rules the west, since that place
cannot be both east and west with respect to it, at least two places
will necessarily be signified, one of which will be east of the other.
Furthermore, the things said above will be understood (to re-
fer) as well to dispositions of the air, such as winds, as to changes
in kingdoms. Moreover, in particular natal figures, if a fire Sign
was in the 9th house, it will Signify a journey to the east; if an earth
Sign, to the south; if both, to both regions. And if the rulers of the
Signs were both in a water Sign, the journey will still be made
principally to the north. And the reasoning is the same with the rest
(of the Signs). And these things are plain in my nativity, where
Sagittarius and Capricorn are in the 9th. And their rulers are con-
joined in Pisces and in the 12th house. And by my own choice, I
traveled into Provence to the south, to Paris to the north, and to
Hungary to the east with respect to Villefranche, the place of my
birth; and that was led by my own inclination impelled by the stars.
Chapter 9.
Some Things that should be Particularly Noted about these Tri-
gons and their Rulers.
The rulers and regions of the triplicities having been defined
by us as above, now some things about this follow that must be
carefully noted.
First, that in the fire trigon the Sun is the most powerful of
all—that is by its domicile and exaltation. In the water trigon, Ju-
piter is the most powerful by the same reason; in the air trigon,
Saturn; and in the earth trigon. Mercury. Since indeed those Plan-
ets also experience no debility in those trigons; and therefore, in
judging by triplicities, special account must be taken of these. And
these 4 Planets have their own domiciles opposite: namely, the
Sun and Saturn between themselves, then Jupiter and Mercury be-
tween themselves; whence it is plain that these are most appropri-
54

=== Page 247 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
ate especially for great changes in sublunar things, but very much
in the air. Moreover, Mars, because it rules Aries and Scorpio, a
fire and a water Sign, and is exalted in Capricorn, an earth Sign, is
strongly disposed to rains, lightning flashes, thunder, lightning &
thunderbolts, for fire, earth, and water concur in these; besides
which, because Mars itself is principally of a fiery nature, and less
principally of a watery one.
Second. Because the northern equinoctial Sign, namely
Aries, pertains to the Sun and Mars, and that very much corre-
sponds to northerners, who in sovereignty, glory, and arms are su-
perior to the southerners. The southern equinox pertains to Venus
and Saturn, which squares with the southerners, who are lustful,
ugly, idle, and servile.1 The northern solstice pertains to the Moon
and Jupiter, which very much suits the northern peoples on ac-
count of their fame, religion, justice, and the mutability, for which
they are well-known. But the southern solstice pertains to Saturn
and Mars, whence impiety and moral depravity are familiar to the
southern peoples. And consequently, the northern nations are prin-
cipally affected and ruled by Jupiter and Mars; but the southern
ones principally by Mercury, Saturn, and Mars, which must be un-
derstood in general and is very worthy of note.
Third. Because the particular predominance of the trigonocra-
tors ought to be defined by the following rules.
1. The one in the trigon should be preferred to one that is ab-
sent.
2. The one that is above the Earth should be preferred to one
that is beneath the Earth.
3. A diurnal (Planet) should be preferred by day if it is above
the Earth, and a nocturnal (Planet) by night.
1 Nearly all the "southerners" in Morin's day were tribesmen in South America,
South Africa, Borneo, Celebes, New Guinea, and Australia; the inhabitants of
Sumatra and Java were exceptions; but Morin's characterization of the differ-
ences between the majority of "northerners" and "southerners" was mainly true
at the time in which he wrote.
55

=== Page 248 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
4. A diurnal (Planet) has a secondary or less principal power
by night, and a nocturnal (Planet) by day—(in both cases) if they
are above the Earth.
5. With the diurnal and nocturnal (Planets) posited under the
Earth, the diurnal ones will be preferred by day and the nocturnal
ones by night.
6. With two Planets conjoined in the same Sign of their own
trigon, the ruler of that Sign should be preferred instead of the
trigon rulership of that Sign.
7. In the place of an eclipse or in the place of any
significator, let the ruler of the Sign of the eclipse or of the
significator be preferred, especially if it is above the Earth and in
the trigon and aspecting that place.
8. The partner of the rulership, or the one that rules both by
day and by night, will rule primarily when it is above the Earth, but
that one is under the Earth that either attains the rulership either by
day or by night.
But of (all) these rules, only this one is fundamental—that the
one that is stronger must always be preferred to one that is weaker.
Furthermore, what should be felt about the doctrine of the Arabs,
from those trigonocrators, in the case of universal constitutions, as
well as in the natal charts of men, here and there in a particular mode
for those judging, we shall set forth in its own place; here it is inci-
dentally sufficient to warn that it was entirely erroneous.
Chapter 10.
The Faces or Personalities or the Almugea of the Planets.
This dignity of the Planets is badly counted by Ptolemy,
Quadripartite, Book 1, Chapter 10,1 among the essential dignities,
as will be shown below. And it is only a property of the 5 lesser
Planets, or those that are secondary with respect to the primary
1 These positions of the Planets are discussed in Quadripartite, Book 1, Chapter
23, not in Chapter 1.
56

=== Page 249 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
Planets, the Sun and the Moon.
Moreover, it is said that each Planet has its own face or bears
its own person with respect to the Sun and the Moon, when it is
just as much distant from the Sun and vespertine or occidental to it,
or from the Moon and matutine to it, as the domicile of the Planet
following Leo, the domicile of the Sun, is distant from the begin-
ning of Leo; or, as much as the domicile of the Planet preceding
Cancer, the domicile of the Moon, is distant from the beginning of
Cancer. For example, if Venus was occidental to the Sun and dis-
tant from it by 60 degrees, which is as much as the beginnings of
Leo and Libra are distant from each other, Venus is said to have its
own face with respect to the Sun; or, (it is said) by the Arabs to be
in almugea1 with the Sun. But if (the Planet is) oriental or matutine
and is distant from the Moon by 60 degrees, which is as much as
the beginnings of Taurus and Cancer are distant from each other, it
is said to be in almugea with the Moon. And the reasoning is the
same with the rest (of the Planets).
Having stated these things in advance, I say first. This dignity
is not an essential one. For the essential dignities of the Planets are
immutable, and they do not pass from one part of the Zodiac to an-
other, as was shown above in connection with the domiciles, exal-
tations, and trigons; but this dignity can occur for a Planet in indi-
vidual Signs of the Zodiac, due to simple orientality or
occidentality with respect to the Sun and the Moon, therefore, it is
not an essential dignity.
I say secondly, that with this dignity in place, I have destroyed
the simple orientality of a Planet with respect to the Sun, when
however Ptolemy himself and all the astrologers deservedly attrib-
ute great powers to Planets oriental to the Sun. For, about Mars in
almugea with the Sun, that is occidental to the Sun, and with that
same Mars oriental to the Sun, which one would Ptolemy say
1 The Latin text has Almugara in error for Almugea. Almugea is the common
Latin form of the Arabic word al-muwdjaha 'facing', which is a translation of the
original Greek term idioprosopia 'own face' that appears in both Ptolemy's
Tetrabiblos and Vettius Valens's Anthology.
57

=== Page 250 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
would prevail or be inferior? Besides, why have Ptolemy and the
others not made the almugea of the Sun oriental and of the Moon
occidental? For that would also have seemed to be more reason-
able from Ptolemy's doctrine, which will have the Planets oriental
to the Sun and occidental to the Moon to be strengthened.
Finally, there is no mention of the powers or effects of this
dignity among the astrologers; and it is always with some aspect of
a lesser Planet with a light with which its own force certainly coin-
cides, so that it might be said to be from its own place; wherefore, I
suspect that it has been taken from some of the fictions of the
Arabs.1 And therefore I impose an end here to the simple dignities
of the Planets.
Chapter 11.
The Thrones, Seats, or Chariots of the Planets.
This dignity of the Planets is not simple, but mixed or com-
posite from many essential things; for in the place cited above,
Ptolemy, along with the rest of the astrologers, will have it that a
Planet is said to be in its own seat, which, in the Sign that it occu-
pies is allotted many essential dignities, and they think that rightly.
For the one that in any Sign has many essential dignities, that one
itself obtains the greatest authority in the Sign; whence, not with-
out reason when occupying that Sign it must be said to sit as it were
on its own seat. Moreover, since we only admit three essential dig-
nities, namely domicile, exaltation, and trigon, it is plain when and
where a Planet may be said to be on its own chariot. Indeed, it may
have dignities of that sort in any house of the figure, such as the
ASC, the MC, (the house) of the Sun, etc.; for if the ASC was in
Aries, the Sun in the ASC will be at the same time strong by
exaltation and trigon. And so with the rest.
And so, if the Sun is in Sagittarius it will simply be in its own
trigon; but if it is in Aries or Leo, it will be in its own seat, because
1 Not so! The Arabs got it from the Greeks, as Morin's citation from Ptolemy
proves. See the preceding note.
58

=== Page 251 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
in addition to (being in its) trigon, it has its domicile in Leo1 and its
exaltation in Aries; if Mars is in Capricorn, it will only be in its
own exaltation; but if it is in Scorpio or in Aries, it will be in its
own throne, and the reasoning is the same with the rest (of the
Planets).
Chapter 12.
The Joys of the Planets.
The joy of a Planet is not its particular essential dignity, and it
is neither a simple thing, nor a mixed one, and it is only proper for
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, each of which is allot-
ted two domiciles in the Zodiac, of which that one was called the
joy of the ruler that harmonized more with the ruler, either by rea-
son of its principal nature, or by reason of its sex, or by reason of
its more moderate effect or influx.
And indeed for the first mode, Saturn's joy will be Capricorn;
this is indeed a cold Sign and with that it more harmonizes with the
principal nature of Saturn, cold and dry (which is to it both ele-
mentarily and influentially, as was shown elsewhere), rather than
to a hot and moist Sign; and so with the rest (of the Planets). In the
second mode, Mars's joy will be Aries and not Scorpio, as astrolo-
gers have falsely supposed; for Mars is masculine in its sex, but
Scorpio is feminine. Finally, in the third (mode), Aquarius will be
the joy of Saturn, and Scorpio the joy of Mars, if indeed in Aquar-
ius there is blended the cold and dry influx of Saturn, more than in
Capricorn. And in Scorpio there is blended the hot and dry influx
of Mars, more than in Aries. But because the third mode was only
invented for our own sake, it is not natural to the Planets them-
selves, which the likeness of other physical causes, there they es-
pecially rejoice, where they find a greater similitude to nature, in
addition to that, everything rejoices with something similar; there-
fore, the joy of a Planet will be properly defined in accordance with
the two previous modes, which, where they agree in the same Sign,
' The Latin text has the symbol Q by error for the symbol &}.
59

=== Page 252 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
it will be the greatest joy of its ruler; otherwise, its nature as the
first will have to be preferred to its sex. Therefore, from these
causes the true joy of Saturn will be in Capricorn, of Jupiter in Sag-
ittarius, of Mars in Aries, of Venus in Libra, and of Mercury in
Virgo.
Chapter 13.
The Terms, Novenas, Decans, Dodecatemories, etc. of the Plan-
ets in the Individual Signs; Then, the Light and Smoky Degrees,
the Pits, the Vacant Degrees, and the Monomoiriae.
Hitherto whole Signs of the Zodiac have been distributed to
the Planets according to their commonly received essential digni-
ties; and there is both the division of the Zodiac into 12 equal parts;
then there is put above a natural distribution of these, or at least
one depending upon a natural foundation, as is seen in Books 14
and 17. But as for the terms, novenas, decans, etc., the individual
Signs are subdivided into diverse parts, which are again individu-
ally distributed to the individual Planets in accordance with the
minor dignities mentioned above, which they also will have to be
essential dignities that they have also introduced. But concerning
these, this is my opinion.
The Devil, the worst enemy of men, having introduced blind-
ness of mind into the human race through sin, little by little has di-
verted men from the true knowledge and worship of God, and he
finally cast down the greater part of them into the pit of idolatry, so
that not they not only paid the homage due to God alone to the Sun,
the Moon, and the rest of the celestial bodies, but also to the vilest
animals, and then to idols, the dead works of their own hands, and
indeed to Demons themselves. And lest man, desirous by nature of
knowing things, might recover the knowledge of the true God
through the sciences, either those received from the tradition of
Adam, or cultivated by the vivacity and inclination of intellect, but
especially the celestial sciences, which above all the others are at-
tested by God and His infinite goodness, wisdom, and providence;
60

=== Page 253 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
the very bad Demons, either by their own inspiration or by a dis-
torted natural light of men put under themselves polluted the celes-
tial sciences among them with very many falsities, inventions, and
superstitions—indeed, so that the truth, overwhelmed by their
falsehoods, was not capable (of leading) them to the necessary ac-
quaintance with God; but among some, overwhelmed by such de-
ceit, they fell into contempt and derision, (which was) also another
goal of the Devil.
From this situation, therefore, there came forth into astrology
the terms, the novenas, the bright and smoky degrees, the
monomoiriae,] etc., which are nothing more than the mere symbol
of ineptitude, stupidity, and insanity of men, who were ignorant of
the principles of this divine science, which the wiser astrologers
have perpetually neglected. Moreover, the haters of astrology have
made for themselves a very convenient opportunity to vilify, de-
fame, and destroy the science.
But what is each of these dignities; and by what reasoning are
the Signs divided among the individual Planets themselves; and it
is indeed not pleasing to expound here these crazy things that are
unworthy of our time; they may be left to stupid and ignorant peo-
ple. But I do say this in a general way against their worthlessness.
There is nothing occurring in the sublunary World about which
from the above said dignities there cannot be at the same time true
affirmation and denial; that is, there could be true (indications)
1 These subdivisions of the signs have different origins. The terms were devised
by the Alexandrians, but they left no explanation of the rationale behind their cre-
ation. The novenas or thirds of the decans are mentioned by Julius Firmicus
Matemus, Mathesis, ii. 4, and were evidently part of Greek astrology; they
passed to the Hindus and became an important part of their astrology; The bright
and smoky degrees were part of a medieval elaboration that goes back to
Firmicus, Mathesis, iv. 22, who called them empty and full degrees; They were
evidently based upon a catalogue (now lost) of the longitudes of the fixed stars
associated with the decans. The monomoiriae were a standard feature of Greek
astrology, mentioned by Vettius Valens, Anthology, iv. 26, and elaborately set
forth in tables by Paul of Alexandria, Introduction, Chapter 32; they were de-
vised to designate a specific planetary ruler for each degree of the zodiac
according to some arbitrary scheme.
61

=== Page 254 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
from the terms and false ones from the decans or the novenas, etc.,
on account of the fact that the various divisions of the Signs and
the distributions of the Planets are disagreeing with each other, as
is seen among the authors. Add to these, that those divisions of the
Signs and distributions of the Planets do not rest upon a natural
foundation, and they are only fictions. And this is plainly proved
because the division of each Sign into 30 degrees is not natural, but
only devised for the convenience of calculation;1 but the above
said dignities are founded upon the hypothesis of that division;
therefore, they are only fictitious. And this will be plainer from
those tables of dignities. For among the Arabs,Saturn has its terms
from 21 to 27 degrees in Taurus, its decan from 20 to 30 degrees,
its novena (from zero) to 6 2/3 degrees, and its dodecatemory from
7 V2 to 10 degrees; and so with the others.
Nevertheless, all modem astrologers till now will indeed ob-
ject to the novenas, decans, and all the rest being banished from
the true science of astrology. And that I have wrongly rejected the
terms, since they are universally approved and retained by Ptol-
emy and all astrologers.
But I reply that I not only marvel that philosophers, especially
Christian ones, make use of these trifles of novenas, decans,
monomoiriae, pitted degrees,2 etc.; and have made them principles
or foundations of their own judgments—thinking, with Julius
Firmicus Matemus that there are great powers in them and great
mysteries that must not be revealed to the multitude; but also that
up to the present time they have retained them, although from Ptol-
emy alone their worthlessness can be most evidently proved, even
though in Quadripartite, Book 3, Chapter 14, he will have the
1 This is true. The Babylonians counted numbers to the base 60. They observed
that there were 365 and a fraction days in a year, which was close to 6 X 60 = 360.
So, when they invented the signs of the zodiac, they assigned 360 parts (or de-
grees) to the whole zodiac; and dividing that by 12, the number of signs, they got
30 degrees for each sign. And Morin is right: they did that arbitrarily for its con-
venience in calculating the positions of the Sun, Moon, and planets in the zodiac.
2 Pitted degrees were a medieval term, perhaps an elaboration of the bright and
smoky degrees, for which see the previous note.
62

=== Page 255 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
anaereta not to kill when it runs to the apheta in directions if it is in
the terms of a benefic Planet; and so he attributes no small force to
the terms themselves.
For Ptolemy, in Book 1, chapters 18 & 19, expounds three
kinds of terms, or a triple partition of the individual Signs, by those
terms; that is, an Egyptian, Chaldean, and (one) of a certain old co-
dex; of which he rejected the first two and followed the latter, in
which Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury are distributed
to the individual Signs that are divided into 5 parts. For example,
in Aries Jupiter has the first 6 degrees of that Sign for its terms ac-
cording to the Chaldeans, Venus the 6 following, Mercury the 8
following, Mars the 5 following, and Saturn the last 5.' But in the
Ptolemaic mode, Jupiter has the first 6, Venus the 8 following,
Mercury 7, Mars 5, and Saturn the 4 last degrees; and so on for the
individual Signs, with the Sun and Moon excluded. Moreover,
Ptolemy offers some reasons for this diverse division and distribu-
tion, both for those modes that he rejected and for the one that he
follows, but those (reasons) are in the truth of the thing merely in-
ventions, equally lacking in a natural foundation like the novenas,
the decans, etc., which are similarly divided and established; so
that consequently Cardan frankly confessed in his Commentary
that he found a great confusion in these various modes of terms;
not content with which, he wanted also to devise an appropriate
method for himself, in which each Sign is distributed to 7 Planets;
and he gave both his reasons for it and a table in his Book on the
Judgments of Nativities. And I once, adding inventions to inven-
tions, thought up another mode of terms, also with more plausible
reasons than (those given by) Ptolemy and Cardan; but what are
they other than outstanding trifl es? And so, both the terms and the
rest (of these divisions) should be rejected from our astrology.2
1 All of these numbers are wrong; and the sequence of planetary rulers is also
wrong for the Terms According to the Chaldeans, for which Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos
i. 21, gives Jupiter 8 degrees, Venus 7, Saturn 6, Mercury 5, and Mars 4. Actu-
ally, Morin has given (correctly, but with the wrong name) the Terms According
to the Egyptians, for which see Tetrabiblos i. 20.
2 But Placidus found the terms to be effective, thus disagreeing with Morin.
63

=== Page 256 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Moreover, this reason is offered by us as to why the terms
have been used by Ptolemy and the rest of the astrologers hitherto.
Certainly, Ptolemy in Quadripartite, Book 3, Chapter 10, wanted
to have only 5 Significators to be directed in the natal figure for all
the accidents of the native; namely, the ASC for health and travel;
the Part of Fortune for finances; the Moon for the mind, morals,
and association; the Sun for dignity and glory; as well as the MC
for the rest of the actions of life and the procreation of children; but
since the bodies and aspects of the Planets coming to those
Significators would not satisfy all the accidents, either on account
of the small number of Significators or the lack of promittors com-
ing to them, they supposed that in addition to the bodies (of the
Planets) and the aspects, there are still other promittors in the na-
ture of things, and they could not conceive of any others than those
terms, which they invented; and by the introduction of which,
promittors were seldom lacking, from whose occurrence in the di-
rections some reason for the effects or the accidents of the native
might be found. And so, it is very frequent in Junctinus and the rest
of the astrologers for a man to pass away by even a violent death
from a direction of the ASC or of the apheta of a light to the terms
of Saturn or Mars, or for a great dignity to come from a direction of
the Sun to the terms of Jupiter or Venus, etc. But since it seemed
very absurd to me to ascribe so great effects to such slim and con-
troversial causes, which in the same way they were able to impute
to novenas, decans, and dodecatemoria\ finally, from a careful ex-
amination of directions and tireless study I have perceived those
terms to be fictitious causes, and not only Significators that are di-
rected, but also aspects that must be multiplied, from the nature of
the thing; and so to find the true causes of all the native's acci-
dents—but about these (we shall speak) more full in their own
place, namely when the subject of directions is discussed. And
about the essential dignities and debilities of the Planets, let what
has been said already suffice; and let it be noted that every Planet
that is located outside its own domicile, exaltation, or trigon is said
by us to be peregrine; and consequently, peregrination is two-
fold—a simple kind without essential debility, such as the Sun in
64

=== Page 257 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
Capricorn, but the other is mixed with an essential debility, such as
the Sun in Aquarius, and this is a worse kind.
Chapter 14.
The Friendships and Enmities of the Planets among Themselves.
Having explained the essential dignities of the Planets above,
and their elemental, influential, and analogical natures, it is an op-
portune time to add something here about their friendships and en-
mities among themselves; which, indeed, are handed down here
and there by astrologers, but with absolutely no logical reasoning
provided—indeed, occasionally contrary to reason, as when they
assert Satum to be a friend of the Sun and the Moon, which will be
perceived below to be manifestly false. Besides, even so as be-
tween the elements fire and air are said to be friends, as well as
earth and water, but fire and water are said to be enemies. So,
among the Planets some are found to be contrary or inimical to
others in their own effects. And it is no wonder that there are pri-
mary governors of the sublunar World differing among them-
selves in kind and powers of acting; which differences provide
friendship or enmity. Moreover, since this friendship consists uni-
versally of some benefic concourse in sublunar effects, but espe-
cially in the generation of man, which is the most outstanding ef-
fect of the stars, while enmity consists of a malefic concourse; for
that reason, it seems to us their friendship and enmity ought to be
chosen from many categories, as follows.
First, therefore, the Planets that are similar in their elemental and
vital qualities are mutual friends, such as the Sun and Jupiter in heat,
likewise Jupiter and Venus; and then Venus and the Moon in humor.
Second. The Planets that are similar in benefic influences are
mutual friends, such as the Sun and Jupiter for life and honors, Ju-
piter and Venus for good fortune, riches, children, and friends, and
Venus and the Moon for spouses and lovers.
Third. Planets that are in fact not similar in their influences,
but which by their mutual concourse produce a mixed benefice on
65

=== Page 258 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
something; these too are said to be friends in this (connection),
such as Jupiter and Saturn for prudence, seriousness, and aptitude
for doing great things; then, Saturn and Mercury for profundity of
intellect; Mars and Mercury for diligence and activity and fraud.
Fourth. Those whose domiciles are placed in benefic aspect,
such as Mars and the Sun, Jupiter and the Moon, and Saturn and
Mercury.
But the (Planetary) enemies are said to be:
First. Those who have opposed domiciles; and so Saturn is an
enemy of the Sun and the Moon; Jupiter is an enemy of Mercury;
and Mars is an enemy of Venus. Or, those whose domiciles are
square, such as the Sun and Mars; the Moon and Mars; and Saturn
and Mars.
Second. Those contrary in their elemental qualities and in-
tensely so, such as the Sun and Saturn in heat and cold; Saturn and
the Moon in moistness and dryness; then Saturn and Venus; and
also Mars and the Moon in active and passive qualities. For an in-
tense contrariety makes for a violent concourse.
Third. Those that are contrary in their influences. Thus, Ve-
nus, the cause of love, peace, and leisure, is inimical to Mars, the
cause of hate, wars, and hard labor; Saturn and Venus, for bodily
beauty; and likewise, Saturn and the Sun. for honors, dignity, and
fame, unless Saturn was determined in the figure to causing honors
and was well disposed.
Fourth. Those that are similar in their elemental qualities, but
with a ruinous excess, such as the Sun and Mars, on account of too
much heat and dryness from the two of them; Saturn and the
Moon, on account of the excessive cold from both; and Saturn and
Mars, on account of the excessive dryness.
Fifth. Those similar in influential qualities that are malefic,
such as Saturn and Mars, for dangers, depravity of morals, misfor-
tunes, and violent death; the Moon and Mercury for inconstancy;
Mars and Mercury, for fraud, impudence, and rashness; and the
Sun and Mars, for haughtiness and arrogance.
66

=== Page 259 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
From which it is plain that Saturn and Mars are enemies of the
Sun and the Moon in almost everything. And besides that, two
Planets can be said to be friends with respect to one (sort of) effect
and enemies with respect to another; and consequently, the friend-
ship and enmity of the Planets cannot be definitely declared in any
nativity, unless notice is first taken as to whether both of them are
determined to the same effect and with regard to what, such as life,
honors, children, etc., and what sort of propensity both of them
have for that effect, either by nature or by analogy.
It is also plain that Saturn is the worst of all the Planets, because
its domiciles are only connected by opposition to the domiciles of
the Sun and the Moon, and therefore it is most unfriendly to them.
Jupiter is the best of all, because its domiciles are only con-
nected by trine with the domiciles of the Sun and the Moon; and
consequently it is the most friendly to them.
Mars is partly a friend and partly an enemy both to the Sun
and to theMoon, because Aries is square Cancer, and Scorpio is
square1 Leo; but Aries is trine Leo, and Scorpio is trine Cancer.
Venus is partly a friend and partly unfriendly, because Taurus
is sextile Cancer and square Leo, and Libra is square Cancer and
sextile Leo.
Finally, Mercury is only a friend of the lights, because Gem-
ini is semi-sextile Cancer and sextile Leo; but Virgo is semi-sextile
Leo and sextile Cancer.
And so, Jupiter, Mars, and Venus in their own diurnal domi-
ciles are amicably joined to the domicile of the Sun, and in their
nocturnal domiciles to the domiciles of the Moon. And it must be
noted that the Planets that are rulers of the four cardinal Signs are
plainly contrary in their elemental natures—namely, Mars and the
Moon between themselves, and Venus and Saturn between
themselves.
End of the Fifteenth Book.
1 The Latin text has A by mistake for □.
67

=== Page 260 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
68

=== Page 261 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
Index of Persons
Adam, first man, 31,60
Alexandrians, astrologers, 43n. 1,61 n. 1
Arabs, 5,42-51,56-58,62
Babylonians, 36n.l,62n.l
Bandeyra de Mello, Felipe, soldier, 19,25
Baudry, G. publisher, 46n. 1
Bertier, Antoine, pM^/w/ier, 14n.l
Campanella, Tommaso, scholar, 9,11-13,16,36,71
Cardan, Jerome, physician, mathematician, astrologer, 8-11,16,
36,42,44,46,63,71
Chaldeans, astrologers, 63
Christ, 40
Christian philosophers, 62
Cortez, Francisco Gomes, soldier, 17,24
Demons, 60
Devil, 60
Dorotheus, astrologer, 43-44,71
Egyptians, 63
Firmicus Matemus, Julius, astrologer, 36n. 1,43,61n. 1,62,71
God, 31,34,41,60
Greeks, 42,43n. 1,44n. 1,57n. 1,58n. 1,61 n. 1
Hansberger, 34
Hephaestio of Thebes, astrologer, 43n.l
Hindus, astrologers, 61n.l
Kepler, Johann, astronomer, 2In. 1,24,72
King of Spain, monarch, 53
Lansberge, Philip van, astronomer, 35n.l
Mersenne, Father Marin, cleric, scholar, 46,72
Mirandola, Pico della, scholar, 36,73
Paul of Alexandria, astrologer, 6 In. 1,72
Pico della Mirandola, Count, scholar, 36,73
Placidus, Titus de, astrologer, 63n.2
Pliny the Elder, encylopedist, 37,73
69

=== Page 262 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Ptolemy, Claudius, astrologer, astronomer, 37n. 1,42-45,48-51,
56-58,62-64,73
Richelieu, Armand du Plessis de, Cardinal, 14
Robbins, F. E., editor and translator, 73
Roger, Eugene, Father, historian, 14n. 1,16,73
Schoner, Johann, astrologer, 44-45,49
Teubner, B. G., publisher, 43n. 1
Vettius Valens, astrologer, 57n.l,61n.l,73
Zaga-Christ,/jwice, 14,16
Note: the characterization given for each person is not neces-
sarily complete, but it represents the type of work that he did to
which reference is made in the Preface or in the Translation or the
footnotes
70

=== Page 263 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
Bibliography
Campanella, Tommaso
Astrologicarum libri VII.
Frankfurt, 1630.
Cardan, Jerome
Clavdii Ptolemaei Pelusiensis
Libri Quatuor
De Astrorum ludiciis cum expositione
Hieronymi Cardani. pp. 93-368
[Claudius Ptolemy of Pelusia's
Four Books on the Judgments of the Stars
with Jerome Cardan's Commentary]
Liber de ludiciis Geniturarum. pp. 433-457
[A Book on the Judgments of Nativities]
[both works in vol. 5 of the omnibus edition of Cardan's
works published at Lyons in 1663.]
New York and London: Johnson Reprint, 1967. 10 vols. facs.
reprint
Dorotheus Sidonius
Carmen astrologicum.
[Astrological Poem]
[Arabic, Greek, and Latin text, with
an English translation of the Arabic]
Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1976. xx,444 pp. diagrs.
Firmicus Matemus, Julius
Matheseos libri VIII.
ed. by Kroll, Skutsch, and K. Ziegler
[Latin text, intro. and notes]
Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1968. 2 vols. reprint of 1913 ed.
71

=== Page 264 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
Holden, James Herschel
A History of Horoscopic Astrology.
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 1996. paper xv,359 pp.
Tempe, Az.: A.F.A., Inc., 2006. paper xvii,375 pp.
Kepler, Johann
Tabulae RUDOLPHINAE...
[The Rudolphine Tables...]
[a complete set of tables of the motions
of the Sun, Moon, and Planets]
Ulm: Jonas Sauk, 1627.
Mersenne, Father Marin
Harmonicorum libri xii...
[Twelve Books of Harmonics...]
Paris: G. Baudry, 1648.
Morin, Jean Baptiste
Astrologia Gallica.
The Hague, Adrian Vlacq, 1661. folio xxxvi,784 pp.
Tabulae Rudolphinae ad meridianum
Uraniburgi supputatae a Joanne Baptita Morino...
[The Rudolphine Tables, Calculated by Jean
Baptiste Morin for the meridian of Uraniburg...]
Paris: J. LeBrun, 1650. 4to 117 pp. tables
Paul of Alexandria
Paulou Alexandreos Eisagogika.
[Paul of Alexandria's Introduction]
[Greek text with Latin and German notes]
Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1958. xxvi,181 pp. diagrs.
Introduction
trans, from the Greek by James Herschel Holden
circulated privately xvii,102 pp. diagrs. tables
72

=== Page 265 ===
Astrologia Gallica Book 15
Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni, Count
In Astrologiam libri XII,
[Twelve Books Against Astrology]
Bologna: Benedictus Hectoris, 1496.
Pliny the Elder
Natural History.
trans, by H. Rackham, W.H.S. Jones, and D.E. Eicholz
Loeb Classical Library
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, and
London: William Heinemann, 1962. 10 vols. repr.
Ptolemy, Claudius
Tetrabiblos.
ed. & trans, by F.E. Robbins
Loeb Classical Library
London: William Heinemann, Ltd.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, 1940. xxiv,466 pp.
diagrs. tables
Roger, Father Eugene
La Terre Saincte ou Description topographique...
des Saincts Lieux.,.et une relation veritable de
Zaga Christ, prince d'Ethyopie, qui mourut
a Ruel prez Paris.
[The Holy Land or a Topographical Description...
of the Holy Places., .and a True Account of
Zaga Christ, Prince of Ethiopia, who died at
Ruel, near Paris]
Paris: Antoine Bertier, 1646. 4to 440 pp.
Vettius Valens
Vetti Valentis Antiocheni Anthologiarum
Libri Novem./ edidit David Pingree
[Nine Books of Anthologies by Vettius
Valens of Antioch/ edited by David Pingree]
78

=== Page 266 ===
Jean-Baptiste Morin
[Greek and Latin text with Latin intro. and notes]
Leipzig: B. G. Teubner, 1986. xxi,583 pp.
74
