=== Page 1 ===
ASTROLOGIA
GALUCA
BOOK 18
Jean Baptiste Morin
De Villefranche
Astrologer, Physician, and Mathematician
(1583-1656)
Translated into Spanish by Pepita Sanchis Llacer,
copyright 2004.
Web site: http://www.geocities.com/sanchis_2000
Translated into English from the Spanish
with the permission of Pepita Sanchis Llacer
by Anthony Louis LaBruzza, copyright 2004.
Web site: www.hometown.aol.com/tonylouis/home

=== Page 2 ===
Translator's Preface and Acknowledgements
This book is a translation of Book XVIII of Morin's
Astrologia Gallica. The original text was translated from Morin's
scholarly Latin into modem Spanish by Pepita Sanchis Llacer. I
translated the Spanish text of Sanchis Llacer into English, looking
selectively at the Latin text along the way. My goal was to make
Morin's dense academic style comprehensible in English. Special
thanks go to Pepita Sanchis Llacer (P.S.L.) for her excellent Span-
ish translation of Morin's text and her many clarifications, to
James Holden (J.H.) who helped when I was stuck on Morin's
Latin, and to Robert M. Corre (R.M.C.) of the Forum on Astrology
for his understanding and explanation of the ideas of Morin and his
modem disciple Zoltan Mason. Their footnoted comments do
much to clarify Morin's text. Special thanks also go to John
Frawley' for his generous assistance in reviewing, editing, and re-
vising the translation. Although I have made every effort to render
Morin's ideas accurately, it is possible that I have misunderstood
some of Morin's original text written, as it is, in scholarly Latin in
a dense academic style, and I assume responsibility for any errors
or inaccuracies in the present translation.—A.L.L.
1 John Frawley's Web site is http://www.johnfrawley.com. He is the author of
The Real Astrology and The Real Astrology Applied, published by Apprentice
Books, London.
iii

=== Page 3 ===
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Translator's Preface and Acknowledgements in
Preface to Book XVIII of Astrologia Gallica ix
PARTI
CHAPTER 1 3
What is the Strength of the Planets and How Manifold is it?
CHAPTER II 7
Regarding the Intrinsic Strength of the Planets
CHAPTER III 13
Regarding the Extrinsic Strength of the Planets in General
CHAPTER IV 15
The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets arising from their Celestial
State, which depends on the Signs of the Zodiac in which they
are posited. First, how a planet acts in its own Domicile, Exalta-
tion, and Triplicity.
CHAPTER V 23
How and to what extent the planets are fortified by their Domi-
cile, Exaltation, or Triplicity, or weakened by the signs opposite
these.
CHAPTER VI 33
The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets arising from the Zodiacal
Signs in which they are posited with regard to the matter of the
Gender of the Planets.
v

=== Page 4 ===
CHAPTER VII 39
The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets arising from their Recep-
tion in the Signs of the Zodiac.
CHAPTER VIII 51
The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets arising from their Position
with Respect to the Sun and the Moon.
CHAPTER IX 59
The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets arising from their Motion.
CHAPTER X 61
The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets arising from their Eleva-
tion, that is, from the Greater Altitude of One Planet above the
Rest.
CHAPTER XI 67
The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets by reason of their Diurnal
or Nocturnal Condition.
PART II
CHAPTER XII 71
The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets by reason of their Mutual
Aspects
CHAPTER XIII 87
The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets arising from their Positions
on the same Major Circle as Another Planet or Prominent Fixed
Star.
CHAPTER XIV 91
The Intrinsic Strength and Quality of the Houses of the Horo-
scope. Also, the Strength accruing to the Planets through their
placement in the Houses.
vi

=== Page 5 ===
CHAPTER XV 103
What is the Most Powerful Point in any House and What Are the
Proper Limits of Influence of the Houses; a Question of Great
Import for Astrology.
CHAPTER XVI 119
How One Should Measure thee Final 5 Degrees Before the Cusp
or, in my view, the Semi-Diameter of the Orb of Influence of the
Planets. Also, that Cardan should be Criticized in that Regard.
CHAPTER XVII 125
How One Should Distribute the Inherent Strength of Each Space
[House] Among Its Parts [Degrees], or How One Should Find
the Strength of Any Planet by House.
Appendix 127
A. The Friends and Enemies of the Planets
B. Morin's Table of the Ratios of Primitive Qualities of the
Planets
C. The Planets Listed in Order of the Quantity of a Primitive
Quality
D. Morin's Conception of the Meanings of the Angles and the
Twelve Houses of the Horoscope
References 131
vii

=== Page 6 ===
Preface
This book deals with the strengths2 and weaknesses3 of the
planets, a topic of great importance and consequence for astrology.
In what follows the reader will see how poorly, and in what a con-
fused and inadequate manner, this topic was treated by ancient as-
trologers; and how in these matters, since we have had to elucidate
them with the same empirical methodology that we have devoted
to other topics, we have paid more attention to Nature and have
given preference to Nature above the texts of old, not only in the
present work but also in all our other writings.
2 Strength also is referred to as power, fortitude, dignity, potency, or force of the
planets.
3 Weaknesses also are referred to as the debilities of the planets.
ix

=== Page 7 ===
PARTI

=== Page 8 ===
CHAPTER I
What is the strength of the planets
and how manifold is it?
THE STRENGTH of a planet can be differentiated from its vir-
tue in that virtue, properly speaking, refers to a planet's essential or
influential nature, by means of which the planet itself acts,
whereas strength refers to the quantity of such virtue. Consider, for
example, two magnets of equal size, one of which can lift two
pounds and the other, twelve pounds. They are clearly identical in
virtue (essential nature or influence) because both magnets have
the same type of virtue, that is, the ability to attract iron. But the
two magnets differ in force or strength, because they have different
quantities of such virtue. Therefore the strength of a planet seems
correctly to be defined if one says that the strength of a planet is the
quantity of virtue with which the planet itself acts?
Planetary strength, however, may be of two types: intrinsic
and extrinsic. Intrinsic strength is a measure of the quantity of in-
trinsic virtue by which a given planet acts, in and of itself. For ex-
ample the intrinsic strength of the Sun indicates how much power
the Sun has by itself (considered according to the Sun's own light,
heat, and influence—which are the factors by means of which the
Sun acts perse). On the other hand, extrinsic strength is a measure
of the power of a planet determined by external factors, such as the
4 In other words, "virtue" refers to the planet's quality of action (the type of action
that stems from the essential nature of the planet), whereas "strength" is a mea-
sure of how powerfully (how much) the planet acts when it behaves according to
its nature.
3

=== Page 9 ===
planet's state in the heavens,5 its position with respect to the hori-
zon, and so on. In these circumstances, we do not say that the
planet acts according to its intrinsic nature, but rather that it acts
accidentally to the extent that such extrinsic circumstances them-
selves may help, hinder, or determine the action. Although both
types of strength can be considered in terms of their essential or
their influential nature, we have nonetheless decided to consider
only influential strength and to elucidate this matter further.
Furthermore, the ancient texts spoke of intrinsic strength gen-
erally—but with parsimony—when they said that the Sun and the
Moon were more powerful than the other planets, and that the su-
perior planets were (in general) more powerful than the inferior
ones; but, when defining the strength of each planet individually,
the ancients, because of their insufferable indolence, omitted in-
trinsic strength per se. For example, the ancients assign Jupiter 5
degrees of strength for his position in his own Domicile; another 5
degrees for his placement in the 10th House; and another 5 degrees
for his conjunction with the benefic planet Venus or with the fixed
star Spica. These criteria and others like them, however, take into
account only the extrinsic strength of Jupiter and ignore his intrin-
sic strength. According to this way of thinking, if one argues that
Jupiter, through his conjunction with Venus, is fortified by 5 de-
grees of strength, then if follows that Venus must possess an intrin-
sic strength of 5 degrees. I would now ask: why in this case do they
not grant Jupiter any intrinsic strength of his own? And further-
more: why, when deriving the strengths of Venus in a similar way,
do they mention nothing of the intrinsic strength of Venus? And fi-
nally why did they not determine beforehand the intrinsic
strengths of each of the planets individually, as it would be of no
small interest to know in advance how much intrinsic strength
each planet possessed so that it would be clear to what extent that
planet's intrinsic strength was fortified (accidentally) by its union
or aspect with another planet?
5 The planet's celestial or cosmic state is referred to as status cosmicus in Morin's
original text.
4

=== Page 10 ===
In addition, when the ancients maintained that any planet is
fortified by 5 degrees of strength through its conjunction with Ju-
piter, Venus, or a benefic fixed star of first magnitude, they were,
to say the least, assigning to Jupiter, Venus and that fixed star iden-
tical intrinsic strengths, even though no fixed star should be com-
pared in terms of its intrinsic strength to any of the seven planets,
which are the principal regents of this world.
Moreover, regarding extrinsic strength, the ancients have
handed down this topic to us in a completely conftising and imper-
fect manner; and so it appears that in both cases (intrinsic and ex-
trinsic strength) we are obliged to reconstruct astrology.
5

=== Page 11 ===
CHAPTER II
Regarding the Intrinsic Strength of the Planets
THE INTRINSIC strength of the planets (or the quantity of in-
fluential virtue of the planets) cannot be precisely measured or
defined by human beings, but only conjectured. Furthermore,
strength should not be defined or measured in terms of the appar-
ent size of a planet because, if such were the case, the strength of
the Sun or the Moon would so outweigh the strength of all the
other planets combined that the strength of any planet, in compar-
ison of that of the Lights, would be null or minimal; and this
would be so despite the fact that most of the time Saturn in the
same House or zodiacal sign as the Sun is stronger than the Sun in
virtue and effectiveness, as attested to by the effects of each of
them: for whenever the Sun is conjunct, opposite, or square to
Saturn, the Sun is extremely disturbed in its effects—something
that would not happen if the intrinsic strength of the Sun and Sat-
urn were proportionate to their respective sizes apparent to us
here on Earth.
It is clear from our perspective on Earth that the Sun surpasses
the other celestial bodies in heat and light, both because of its obvi-
ous magnitude and because of the difference between direct and
reflected light—which could be said of the other planets, above all
of the Moon which, in its apparent mass, is equal to the Sun and,
lacking its own light, reflects the light of the Sun as does our Earth,
but [the Moon with its greater reflected light] does not surpass [the
planets] in influence. And the same consideration must apply to
the Moon herself with regard to Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and
7

=== Page 12 ===
Mercury, which, just like the Moon, reflect the light of the Sun to-
ward the sublunar world.
Nor should the quantity of influential virtue of the planets be
defined in terms of the magnitude or intensity of their light. If such
were the case, then just as the Sun's light obscures the brightness
of all other celestial bodies, so too would the Sun's influence ob-
scure or dampen the influence of all the other heavenly bodies.
Even combust planets, however, clearly manifest their influence
on the sublunar world, as our experience demonstrates and as was
shown in Chapter 3, Section 3, of Book 16 oiAstrologia Gallica.
Thus, in my opinion, we would be correct in saying that the
intrinsic strength of each planet should be determined according to
the radius6 of its sphere of virtue [orb of influence]. As was ex-
plained in Chapter 13 of the first section of Book 16 of Astrologia
Gallica, the influence of a heavenly body is effective only within
its orb7 and not outside that orb, except for the influence cast by a
planet through its aspects.
[The following note and the graphic below
are by Pepita Sanchis Llacer: "Here it would be
useful to explain Morin's reasoning about how a
planet can have influence outside its orb. Accord-
ing to Morin, the half-orb of Jupiter is 8 degrees
and the half-orb of Venus is 13 degrees. If both
planets are only 7 degrees distant, they are
platically conjunct (a complete platic conjunc-
tion), but if they are 12 degrees apart, they are in-
completely platically conjunct because Jupiter is
6 William Lilly in his Christian Astrology (1647) used the term moiety to refer to
halfthe diameter (the radius) of the orb of influence. The orb is a sphere of influ-
ence with the planet at its center. The radius, or semi-orb, is the farthest distance
from the planet at the center at which that planet has an effect by conjunction or
aspect. What modem astrologers refer to as "orb" is technically the semi-orb or
moiety of the planet's influence.
7 The "orb" is literally a globe-shaped sphere of influence surrounding a planet.
8

=== Page 13 ===
within the half-orb of Venus (13 degrees) and
conjoined to her, but Venus is not within the
half-orb of Jupiter (8 degrees). Below are graphic
representations of a complete partile conjunction,
a complete platic conjunction and an incomplete
platic conjunction."—Pepita Sanchis Llacer]
Conjunctions—partile conjunction, platic complete, and
platic incomplete (from top down).
9

=== Page 14 ===
If we wish to determine or measure the intrinsic or extrinsic
strength of a planet in degrees, we can say that the Sun has for itself
18 degrees of intrinsic strength; the Moon, 12 degrees; Saturn, 7
degrees; Jupiter, 8 degrees; Mars, 6.5 degrees; Venus, 13 degrees;
Mercury, 8 degrees; the fixed stars of first magnitude, 6 degrees;
those of second magnitude, 5 degrees; those of third magnitude, 4
degrees; those of fourth magnitude, 3 degrees; those of fifth mag-
nitude, 2 degrees; those of sixth magnitude, 1 degree, in accord
with the radius of the orb of each individual planet.8
Translator's Table of Morin's Degrees of the
Orbs of Influence of the Planets
Celestial Body Diameter of Orb
in Degrees
Moiety (Vz Orb)
Semi-diameter
Sun 36 18
Moon 24 12
Mercury 16 8
Venus 26 13
Mars 13 6.5
Jupiter 16 8
8 Translator's Note: Morin is equating orb with intrinsic strength. In this case,
Mars = 6.5 refers to degrees of semi-orb. In Book 16, Morin explains how he
measures the semi-orbs of the planets. He argues that it is not possible to see the
first stars at night until the Sun has descended 18 degrees from the horizon. Thus
the semi-orb of the Sun is 18 degrees [because the light of the fixed stars can be
seen only when they are at least 18 degrees from the body of the Sun], The
semi-orbs of the other planets are measured in a similar manner. The semi-orb of
Venus is 13 degrees because Venus can been seen only when it is at least 5 de-
grees from the body of the Sun, that is, when the Sun is 5 degrees below the hori-
zon (18-5=13), etc.—Pepita Sanchis Llacer
10

=== Page 15 ===
Saturn 14 7
Fixed Stars:
1st Magnitude 12 6
2nd Magnitude 10 5
3rd Magnitude 8 4
4th Magnitude 6 3
5th Magnitude 4 2
6th Magnitude 2 1
One might object that, according to the above argument, Sat-
urn, Jupiter and Mars have an influential force less than that of Ve-
nus and Mercury, which seems patently absurd, since under equiv-
alent conditions, Saturn, Jupiter and Mars demonstrate much
greater effects than Venus or Mercury; although if these latter
planets are strengthened by extrinsic factors and the former ones
are debilitated, the opposite can occur.
I would respond as follows: certainly the influential force of
Mercury as regards its extension9 is greater than that of Saturn or
Mars because Mercury has a wider orb of virtue. Intensity [of in-
fluence], however, does not refer to the size of the planet's orb. We
know that Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars act more forcefully and in-
tensely within their orbs of virtue than do Venus and Mercury in
theirs; and thus the latter two (Venus and Mercury) produce lesser
effects. For this reason, since here we must articulate the strength
of a planet according to the intensity of that force, it does not seem
unreasonable that the influential force [strength] of the Sun inten-
sively is 18 degrees; that of the Moon, 15 degrees; that of Saturn
9 Extension refers to a planet's orb, that is, its range or area of influence.
11

=== Page 16 ===
and Mars, 12 degrees; and that of Venus and Mercury, 8 degrees.10
In reality, no mortal can determine the influential force of a planet
with precision. Once we have made this distinction, there is no lon-
ger any absurdity, because one planet can be stronger than another
extensively but not intensively because extensive and intensive
strength are not mutually exclusive, as has been said of Venus,
which is extensively stronger than Jupiter but not intensively
stronger.
In addition, strength depends upon the nature and quality of a
celestial body so that the strength of a planet that is malefic per se
serves to harm, and the strength of a planet that is inherently
benefic serves to benefit, except when the celestial state of the
planet and its determination by House accidentally convert an in-
herently malefic planet into a benefic as, for example, if Saturn
were in Aquarius and in trine to Mercury in Gemini in the Ascen-
dant, which refers to ingenuity; or to convert a planet benefic per
se into one that becomes accidentally malefic, as, for example, Ve-
nus in Scorpio in the 5th House, afflicted by a square from Saturn
in Aquarius in the 8th House, in matters regarding the untoward
consequences of pleasures.
10 Morin appears to have omitted Jupiter from this paragraph. Elsewhere he attrib-
utes to Jupiter 8 degrees of influential strength.
12

=== Page 17 ===
CHAPTER III
Regarding the Extrinsic Strength
of the Planets in General
AS DISCUSSED in Chapter I, the extrinsic strength of a planet
is determined by its celestial state and its position with respect to
the horizon. These are the two most important wellsprings of ex-
trinsic strength, which then separate into diverse streams, since the
celestial state of a planet is complex because of the various circum-
stances that can occur and the many possibilities for a planet's po-
sition with respect to the horizon. In addition to these two factors
[celestial state and position with respect to the horizon], there are
other factors of moderate" importance, such as when the planet is
in apogee or perigee; diurnal in a day chart, nocturnal in a night
chart, [in both cases] above the Earth; and so on. We will deal with
these factors individually; but first we must examine the quality
and strength of each so that we can more easily determine to what
extent a planet is fortified to work constructively or destructively.
Planets that are in good celestial state and located in fortunate
Houses of the chart, diurnal during the day and nocturnal during
the night [in both cases] above the Earth,12 are beneficial, even if
they are malefic by nature. In the opposite situation, their virtue is
degraded; and as a result they have noxious effects even though
n The Latin reads "alius qilidam medius" but "medius" may be a typographical er-
ror for "modus," which would render the meaning "there is also another sort of
mode of its state ..."
12 Note by Pepita Sanchis Llacer: [What Morin is referring to is more or less the
concept of "haiz" of the Arabs (limiting the conditions), that is to say: a diurnal
13

=== Page 18 ===
they may be benefic by nature, corresponding to the way in which
the good and bad states of the planet are proportioned. When a
planet is in a good state, we commonly say that it is fortified, and
when in a bad state, that it is debilitated. As planets do not suffer
any intrinsic weakness but can suffer only extrinsic debility, any-
thing said later of a planet's extrinsic strength is to be understood
equally of its extrinsic weakness, in accordance with the chart at
the end of this book. But here one must note that when we say a
planet is strengthened or weakened, or that it is rendered either
beneficial or unfortunate, this is not to be understood of the planet
per se, but only of its action, which will be greater or lesser, more
fortunate or more unfortunate. For example, if Jupiter were alone
in Cancer it would act powerfully and favorably, corporally13 and
by its trine aspect; but if Jupiter were in Cancer joined to the Moon,
it would consequently act even more strongly and fortunately. On
the other hand, if Jupiter were in Cancer and joined to Saturn, the
effects of Jupiter would be weaker and more unfortunate because
Saturn, which now participates in Jupiter's effects, is clearly ma-
lefic by nature and is posited in Cancer, the sign of its exile or det-
riment. A similar analysis could be made of the other planets.
planet (Sun, Saturn and Jupiter) is by day better (more dignified) above the Earth;
while at night the nocturnal planets (Moon, Venus, Mars) are better (more digni-
fied) above the Earth. Therefore Mars above the Earth has dignity in a night chart,
but not in a day one. The definition ofhaiz according to the Arabs is more compli-
cated: "a masculine planet in a masculine quarter and in a masculine sign by day
above the Earth; or a feminine planet, in a feminine quarter and in a feminine sign
at night above the Earth".]
The opposite condition is what Robert Hand calls "ex conditio" (or in the original
Latin "ex conditione"). James Holden, however, objects to the term "ex
conditio." Holden notes: [The Greek word is 'hairesis', which means 'sect',
'school', 'faction', or 'party'. 'Sect' is the best English rendering. A planet can be
"of the sect" or "out of sect." The Arabs translated 'hairesis' by the word
'al-hayyiz', which means 'field' or 'domain'; the 12th century translators translit-
erated it as 'hays' or 'hayz' or something similar. Firmicus translated the Greek
'hairesis' as 'conditio', which means 'situation' or 'condition'. But I think that
"in sect" or "out of sect" would be a better English rendering. The word 'sect' im-
plies a distinct group, while 'condition' is rather vague.]
13 The Latin reads "... foeliciter aget corpore ..." meaning "corporally" or "by body".
14

=== Page 19 ===
CHAPTER IV
The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets arising
from their Celestial State, which depends
on the Signs of the Zodiac in which they are
posited. First, how a planet acts in its own
Domicile, Exaltation, and Triplicity.
BECAUSE THE cosmic or celestial state of the planets, in order
and importance, comes before their terrestrial state,14 we must deal
first with the celestial state of the planets. The celestial state of the
planets depends on three considerations, corresponding to the
three circumstances in which the planets may find themselves,
namely:
• the zodiacal signs in which the planets are posited
• the respective configurations or aspects among the planets
• whether the planet is oriental or occidental of the Sun or the
Moon.
Let us begin with the first consideration: cosmic state depend-
ing on the signs of the zodiac.
As each sign of the zodiac is determined from the beginning
of Creation by the nature of some planet and acts in accordance
with that planet's nature, and each planet, wherever it may be pos-
14 Translator's note: Morin refers to the state of the planets with reference to the
Earth as their "terrestrial state" (status terrestris in Latin). He also uses the Latin
phrase determinatio localis (local determination), referring to the planet's relation-
ship to the Houses of the horoscope, as a synonym for terrestrial state—A.L.L.
15

=== Page 20 ===
ited, always functions according to its own nature, it follows that
we must constantly keep in mind the nature of both the zodiacal
sign and the planet to arrive at an understanding of which type of
mixture of natures will emerge from their combination, and of how
much the planet will be fortified or weakened by it.
In addition, a planet may be posited in its Domicile, Exalta-
tion, or only its Triplicity; or in the signs opposite these, where the
planet is said to be in its Detriment [opposite its Domicile] or in its
Fall [opposite its Exaltation]; or it may be Peregrine [that is, sim-
ply posited in an unrelated sign15]. Furthermore, it is said that
when a planet is posited in its Domicile, that planet acts only ac-
cording to its own elemental nature but with twice its influential
virtue, because both the sign and the planet are working together
and are simultaneously of the same influential nature. The planet
also acts with twice its elemental nature because the elemental na-
ture of the sign would be the same as the planet's intrinsic or ex-
trinsic elemental nature, which may be either occult [hidden] or
manifest [apparent], a topic that we discussed in Book 15, Section
1, Chapters 2 and 3 of Astrologia Gallica. Given, however, that
five of the planets have two corresponding Domiciles, one which
is of the same elemental nature as the planet—called its Principal
Home or Domicile—and the other of a contrary nature because of
the hidden [occult] elemental nature of the same planet, no doubt
the planet will work more powerfully, according to its ownbenefic
or malefic nature, when it is posited in its principal Domicile, be-
cause within its principal home the planet's influential and ele-
mental virtue are doubled. Furthermore, a planet in its Domicile
will act forcefully and continuously, at least with regard to the en-
during themes of the natal chart, such as the native's character, in-
telligence, temperament,16 and so on.
15 Like a pilgrim in a foreign country.
16 Traditional astrologers often used the word temperature when referring to the
temperament of an individual. Pepita Sanchis Llacer notes that this refers to the
Hippocratic temperaments; sanguine, choleric, phlegmatic, and melancholic.
Morin, as a physician, gives much importance to that question.
16

=== Page 21 ===
When a planet lies outside its own Domicile, however, it is
said to act in accordance with the nature and state of its ruler, that
is, its dispositor—the planet that governs the sign in which the
planet outside its Domicile is posited. This circumstance is to be
understood as follows: the planet does not change its own nature
or intrinsic mode of behavior, but always acts by itself and in its
own way, that is, according to its own pure and unadulterated na-
ture [without mixture]. Nor does the planet receive a new
strength from the sign in which it is posited or from its ruler; oth-
erwise, when passing from one sign to another, it would be sub-
jected to continual alterations and thus be alienated from its own
nature. Nor does it work through the sign, or through the sign's
ruler, because these are not subordinate to the planet in its perfor-
mance.
On the other hand, one can ask whether the sign in which
the planet is posited acts per se. If the zodiacal signs did not act
by themselves as signs, that is, as parts of the Heavens deter-
mined by the natures of the planets, it would follow that, be-
cause the signs had no virtue of their own—and thus either were
not determined to function, or were determined to work so inef-
fectively, in accord with the nature of the planets that govern
them—such rulership would be a fiction, but this conclusion
runs contrary to experience. Therefore the signs must act by
themselves as signs, or as Domiciles of the planets, or, if one
prefers, as parts of the Heavens that stand in for the seven plan-
ets, which are the Rectors of this World. But the zodiacal signs
act in accord with their rulers' nature and cosmic state, which
they reproduce through determination. For example, if Aries
were on the Ascendant and its ruler, Mars, were well disposed in
the 10th House, then the native would be bellicose and ambi-
tious for military honors. This is so not because the zodiacal
sign and its active force undergoes some change on account of
its ruler or the various states of that ruler, but rather because the
influential nature of the sign lies primarily, directly, and for-
mally in its ruling planet, and only secondarily and through de-
17

=== Page 22 ===
termination in the sign itself.17 Nonetheless, in the sublunar world,
which is subjected to the signs and planets, the effect is received
from the sign and its ruler, through the essential dependency of the
sign on its planetary ruler by reason of its determination.
Someone may argue that at any given moment the state of Ju-
piter with respect to the Heavens and the Earth is the same, and
therefore both Sagittarius and Pisces will act in the same way and
do the same things, even though we say that Sagittarius is a Fire
sign and its influence involves heat, while Pisces, on the other
hand, is a Water sign.
The response, however, is that both natures exist within Jupi-
ter; that is, Jupiter has a fiery nature, which is formal and manifest,
and also a watery nature, which is hidden and deep. One of these
natures is never in the same state as the other, depending on the
sign through which Jupiter is passing: for when Jupiter resides in
Aries, it favors Sagittarius; when in Cancer, it favors Pisces.
Therefore Sagittarius and Pisces will never act in the same way be-
cause of the dual nature of Jupiter.18
17 Robert M. Corre understands this to mean that the person acts in such a manner
by virtue of Aries being determined toward the 1st House, which has a signifi-
cance relating to the character or personality of the native.—R.M.C. According to
Pepita Sanchis Llacer, Morin says that when one thinks of Aries, one is thinking
of Mars. According to this system of thought, the signs have very little agency by
themselves: their characteristics of being masculine/feminine, cardinal/fixed/mu-
table, Fire/Earth/Air/Water are all that is characteristic of a sign. The other char-
acteristics of Aries come from the planets that govern it [in its various dignities]
and, to a lesser extent, from the planets in Fall or in Detriment there. Aries is
therefore a masculine, cardinal space, of Fire, whose nature is basically that of
Mars, which in this case is expressed through the masculine, cardinal and Fire
sign Aries, while in Scorpio it is expressed through the feminine, fixed and Water
sign. Aries is also the sign of Exaltation of the Sun, so that when we define Aries
we should think of the combination of Mars and the Sun.
18 Note by Pepita Sanchis Llacer: [Morin begins from the principle that planets
with two homes [domiciles] have two elementary natures: a home that is evident
and apparent, or a primary (first) domicile (what the ancients called a "day
home") and another hidden (occult) or secondary (second) domicile (what the an-
18

=== Page 23 ===
We must add here that a planet outside its Domicile acts in co-
operation with the sign it occupies and with the ruler of that sign, in
accord with the state of that ruler: if the Sun lies in Sagittarius, the
Sun will work according to its solar nature, Sagittarius according
to its Sagittarian nature, and Jupiter, the ruler of Sagittarius, ac-
cording to Jupiter's own nature and state, in all those matters to-
ward which the Sun is determined by its position in the natal chart.
Therefore the native receives the quality of Jupiter not only
through Sagittarius—a part of the Primum Mobile—but also
through Jupiter, in accord with its own state. In this case, one
would say that the Sun acts with Sagittarius, which in turn acts
with Jupiter, which in turn acts with the sign in which Jupiter is
posited, and that sign acts with its own rulers, and so on. We
should keep in mind that the more proximate causes and connec-
tions are more effective than remote ones.19
cients called a "night home"). For example, Morin regarded Jupiter as temperate
(warm) and dry (the ancients differed with him about this, considering Jupiter
moist), therefore being warm and dry is Jupiter's manifest elementary nature, and
for that reason Sagittarius is its primary or first home. The hidden (occult) nature
of Jupiter is cold and moist, and for that reason Pisces is its second home. Second,
the signs, except for their nature as masculine/feminine, etc., have little agency in
themselves, but rather act always more or less, with greater or smaller force, ac-
cording to thestate of their ruling planet. Now, let us suppose that in an astrologi-
cal chart there is a planet in Sagittarius and another in Pisces, and that the two
planets are in square aspect. Which of these two planets is stronger? To determine
their strength, we must look to their dispositor, which for both planets is Jupiter.
But since Jupiter is the ruler of both Sagittarius and Pisces, can it benefit one
planet more than the other? If Jupiter is in a Fire sign, the planet in Sagittarius will
have more force than the one in Pisces. If Jupiter is in one of the water signs Scor-
pio or Cancer, with regard to the two planets in that square from Sagittarius to Pis-
ces, under equal conditions, Jupiter will favor the planet in the water sign Pisces,
so that planet will have more strength. If we were trying to forecast the weather,
for example, this would be important, because in the first case dryness would pre-
vail and in the second, wetness would predominate. The same aspect would thus
indicate drought in one case and rain in the other, according to whether the
dispositor (Jupiter) were in a dry or wet sign, so lending more potency to the
planet in the dry sign of Sagittarius or that in the humid sign of Pisces.]
19 Note by Pepita Sanchis Llacer: [According to Morin, in judging a chart one
does not take into account the second dispositor of a planet: For example, if the
19

=== Page 24 ===
By this consideration one always clearly knows which planet
or planets at any given moment are the most powerful in the heav-
ens or in the whole world—because the planets that are located in
their own Domiciles are dispositors [planetary rulers] of the other
planets; and if two planets are in their respective Domiciles and are
the dispositors of the rest, they will also be very powerful. On the
other hand, when all the planets are in their own Domiciles, they
are as a result equally powerful. Finally if all the planets were lo-
cated outside their Domiciles and Exaltations, they would all be
weak, both in the Heavens and on Earth; but they would be weaker
still if they were to occupy the signs of their Detriments or Falls.
From these circumstances are derived some notable mysteries of
astrology, which will be explained in due course.
Furthermore, a planet outside its Domicile may be found in its
Exaltation and then must be considered in two ways: first, with re-
gard to the extent to which it is subject to the rulership [or is at the
disposition] of another planet, as has been previously mentioned;
and second, with regard to the extent that the planet lies in its Exalta-
tion, for there it acts upon the sublunar world more intensely and ef-
fectively than if it were in its own Domicile because of the position
that it occupies in the zodiac—its Exaltation being the location most
proportionate to its virtue and where it contains the most powerful
virtue. A planet in Exaltation typically produces tremendous and
sudden effects—sometimes good; at other times, adverse—accord-
ing to its own nature and state as well as the state and nature of its
dispositor, and also depending on its location in the natal chart, that
is, the House of the chart which the planet occupies, because in that
House the exalted planet acts forcefully and almost aggressively.
In addition, a planet outside its Domicile or Exaltation can be
posited in its Triplicity, to which the ancients, especially the Arabs,
Sun is in Sagittarius being disposed by Jupiter in Virgo, one takes into account the
Sun in Sagittarius and Jupiter in Virgo, but one does not give weight to Mercury
as secondary dispositor of the Sun through Jupiter being in Virgo (ruled by Mer-
cury), unless Mercury is the final dispositor of the whole chart.]
20

=== Page 25 ===
ascribed such strength that they attributed the vast majority of
events to the rulers of the Triplicities (despite the fact that they had
located them erroneously, as we demonstrated in Book 15, Chapter
6 of Astrologia Gallic a). As for the other considerations, planetary
strength, when judged solely on the basis of Triplicity, is weaker
than the other dignities and consists of the following: a planet pos-
ited only in its Triplicity is at least in a sign of the same manifest or
occult elemental nature as itself, and also in trine to its own elemen-
tal Domicile [home sign], which thereby reinforces it.20
Finally, just as Triplicities of zodiacal signs are based on iden-
tity of elemental natures, so too are the strengths of the Triplicities
based on the dominion of the planets over the signs of those
Triplicities. From this it follows that whenever a planet is posited
in its Domicile, it must also be in its Triplicity, but the converse is
not necessarily true. Thus a planet in its Domicile would [already]
possess some of the strength that it could contain by virtue of [be-
ing in] its Triplicity, much better than in another place, because the
planet certainly occupies the sign through which it has some enti-
tlement to the entire Triplicity.21
20 According to Pepita Sanchis Llacer, the classic triplicities according to the
Arabs are:
FIRE: Sun, Jupiter, Saturn
EARTH: Venus, Moon, Mars
AIR: Saturn, Mercury, Jupiter
WATER; Venus, Mars, Moon
Morin does not agree with the Arabic assignment, but instead says that the first
ruler of the triplicity (the day ruler) is the planet that has two dignities in that ele-
ment; the second ruler (the nocturnal) is that of the cardinal sign of the element,
and the third ruler is the remaining one. The result according to Morin is:
FIRE: Sun, Mars, Jupiter
EARTH: Mercury, Saturn, Venus
AIR: Saturn, Venus, Mercury
WATER; Jupiter, Moon, Mars.
21 Morin is arguing that because the Domicile of a planet is always part of the
Triplicity, the additional strength conferred on a planet posited in its Domicile is
in part due to the fact that the Domicile is part of the Triplicity of signs where the
planet is dignified.
21

=== Page 26 ===
CHAPTER V
How and to what extent the planets are fortified
by their Domicile, Exaltation, or Triplicity, or
weakened by the signs opposite these.
A PLANET posited in its Domicile, Exaltation, or Triplicity
occupies a sign of the same nature as itself or a sign befitting its
virtue—as a result, neither the planet's nature nor its virtue suffer
any impediment or contrariety but instead enjoy powerful support
and a congment union. Because of these circumstances, any planet
will be well disposed in such places, and thus one would say that
the planet is strengthened or made fortunate. A planet so placed is
certainly fortified for the reasons just explained; it is not, however,
strengthened in itself, but rather with respect to [its action upon]
sublunar affairs, because for every planet that is inherently benefic
by nature, the more well disposed the planet, the more forcefully
and perfectly it works according to its own nature, to the extent that
we have explained previously. Typically one says that the planet is
more fortunate and benefic for sublunar matters because, mani-
festly, it would more effectively produce and promote the signifi-
cations of the good Houses of the figure that are subordinate to it
and would in turn either entirely eliminate, or at least diminish,
much of the misfortune associated with the bad Houses.
But with regard to the malefics, Saturn and Mars, many ques-
tions can be raised. Why do the malefics not also appear to double
their malevolent force when located in their own Domiciles?22
22 Note by Robert M. Corre: [Morin makes an interesting point here. For example.
23

=== Page 27 ===
And further, if the malefics [in their Domiciles] are posited in bad
Houses of the horoscope, why do they not afflict us even more ma-
liciously; and, on the other hand, if posited in good Houses, why
do the malefics not more forcefully impede or obviate the good? It
would seem logical that if the benefic strength of the benefic plan-
ets is doubled when they occupy their Domiciles, then the malefic
strength of the malefic planets should also double under similar
conditions. Experience, however, clearly demonstrates that when
malefics occupy their Domiciles, they typically produce beneficial
results in good Houses and are less damaging in the bad Houses.
We must therefore say that the strength of the malefics is indeed
doubled, but their nature as such is not entirely malefic; instead
their nature can only be mostly or primarily malefic. Thus, when
the entire force of a malefic planet is doubled, it follows that any
benefic nature the planet possesses necessarily must also be dou-
bled. In addition, evil is produced in the sublunar world not only
because of the malefic nature of the planet by itself but also be-
cause of the debility and degradation of its influential virtue, which
is a function of its position in zodiacal signs contrary to its nature,
namely, Detriment, Fall, or other states in which it is called Pere-
grine. Therefore, when the malefics transit their own signs—Do-
micile or Exaltation—their virtue flows without being corrupted or
weakened; on the contrary, their virtue is perfected and fortified.
he implies that Saturn's malevolent force is not doubled when Saturn is posited in
Capricorn. Zoltan Mason, however, argued against this idea from the viewpoint
of exaggeration].
According to Pepita Sanchis Llacer, this is a controversial point. Morin, in other
works, comments that one must differentiate the elementary nature from the in-
fluential nature of a planet. For example, Saturn's elementary nature is cold and
dry, and the sign Capricorn is also cold and dry. Therefore, if Saturn is in Capri-
corn, in winter, it will produce, in cold countries, an extremely icy and intense
cold. On the other hand, in the warm countries or in summer, Saturn would re-
fresh and alleviate the heat. But the influential nature of Saturn indeed improves
when it occupies its own domicile, because, although it doesn't cease to confer
part of its negative qualities, it also gives what good that it possesses. Neverthe-
less, planets are better [more fortunate] in that domicile where they are tempered
and where their elementary nature is not reinforced [exaggerated] too much. For
that reason Saturn is better in Aquarius than in Capricorn.
24

=== Page 28 ===
Cardinal Ricl Mole Chart |?| Sep 9 1585NS 931.01 an LMT Paris. FR te-NSO1 oo3*ezo' Gecctrtrr Trcprce/ Rfgtomemanus Tn/f JVC dp
Thus the benefic nature, which malefic planets formally possess, is
more easily actualized. As a result, most of the time the malefics,
Saturn and Mars, also afford significant benefit when posited in
their Domiciles or Exaltations, if they occupy Houses congruent to
the issue (such as the 10th in matters of honor, or the 1st in ques-
tions of strength of purpose) or if they rule those Houses (and
above all, if they receive favorable aspects from benefic planets
and especially from the Sun or the Moon).
It is difficult, however, for the malefics to confer their bene-
fits without also, at some time, posing great dangers and difficul-
ties—for even more notably do they avail themselves of benefits
through conquest—or at least by ways and means that are igno-
minious or perverse, as can clearly be seen in the natal charts of
23 This is a modern computer approximation of the chart of Richelieu found on
page 173 of Aslrosynthesis.
08* *1* $
26* p vx;
fIF 376' /I3*/ ri'z o is-a tf 16* 10* 25' W tW io
ny
 0 03* ® I T
•4V ' fl06' ^ \ - K- ? t J. 17 T08' 3 E / •- 23 T rrb\ 19' u
02*
^ K '13* / 26*
V?
Chart of Cardinal Richelieu used by Morin
25

=== Page 29 ===
many who have garnered great riches or achieved the highest hon-
ors through evil cunning.24 In addition, however well disposed a
malefic may be, it is always the nature of malefic planets to do evil,
which is what they do primarily, whether it be through their innate
malevolence, because they occupy or rule bad Houses of the chart,
because they afflict the principal significators of the good things
by their position, rulership, analogy, or with adverse aspects; or
because they are elevated above the significators of the good, as
will be explained in more detail further on. Thus every planet in its
own Domicile or Exaltation can act in a noticeably beneficial or
harmful manner through its conjunction or aspects, according to
the nature of the planet and of the aspects.
At this juncture we should add to what was explained earlier,
namely, that each planet in its own Domicile is strengthened ex-
trinsically by 5 degrees of strength for being in its home sign or
Domicile, by 4 degrees for being in its Exaltation, and by 3 degrees
for being in its Triplicity. These figures are in accord with the tra-
dition of the ancients and appear reasonable to me. For reasons
given at the end of Chapter 4,1 disagree with the practice of the an-
cients to assign an additional 3 degrees for Triplicity to a planet
also located in its Domicile where it has already received 5 points.
We are discussing here the essential strengths of the planets via
their signs because they [dignities by sign] originate in the similar-
ity and proportionality of the signs with the formal virtue of the
planets, as has been previously discussed.
When a planet does not occupy its Domicile, Exaltation, or
Triplicity, it must necessarily lie in its Detriment, Fall, or a sign
with which it has neither affinity nor incompatibility and where it
24 Morin is probably thinking here of Cardinal Richelieu who has Mars in Scorpio
closely conjunct the Ascendant and ruling the 2nd House of riches. It is astrologi-
cally noteworthy that Mars, the red planet, rules the metal iron, and Richelieu,
chief minister to King Louis XIII of France from 1624 to 1642, was variously
called the Iron Cardinal and the Red Eminence (in French, L 'eminence Rouge).
Pluto, the modem ruler of Scorpio, exactly trines the MC and reflects the major
role he played in French history.
26

=== Page 30 ===
is said to be peregrine. In the case of a planet in its Detriment, by
the malignant combination and mixture of the influxes of the zodi-
acal sign and the planet, the influence of each is so corrupted be-
cause of their incompatibility that one can expect only a perverse
effect. Thus a planet in its Detriment acts according to its own na-
ture and that of its dispositor, but in a depraved manner—much
more so if its dispositor also occupies its own Detriment or Fall, or
is an enemy of the planet which it receives. Nonetheless, a benefic
planet in its Detriment can bestow some good [to another planet or
House cusp] by its conjunction, rulership, or favorable aspect, be-
cause of its benefic nature and because the planet prevails over the
zodiacal sign, but this will be much less and with more difficulty
than if it were not in that bad state. And if a benefic were in its Det-
riment in a sign ruled by a malefic planet, then because of the evil
influence of its malefic dispositor, the influx of the benefic planet
would deteriorate even more in the mixture of the two, above all
through the Detriment of the benefic.25
A planet in its Fall is quite weakened in its efforts to act ac-
cording to its own nature for exactly the opposite reasons that it is
strengthened in its Exaltation. One cannot expect a significant
[beneficial] effect of the nature of an inherently benefic planet in
its Fall to occur in fortunate Houses of the horoscope; for, obvi-
ously, that planet receives support only with extreme difficulty and
from some other place, as, for example, through a good aspect
from its dispositor, or from a planet that occupies the Domicile or
Exaltation of that planet or its dispositor. In bad Houses, however,
it [a planet in Fall] certainly does harm. If a planet in its Fall is by
nature malefic and also occupies the Domicile of a malefic, as does
25 Note by Pepita Sanchis Llacer; [Morin introduces a notable variation to the tra-
ditional theory: it is not the same thing to be exiled in the home of a benefic planet
as in the home of a malefic planet. For example: Mercury is exiled (that is, in Det-
riment) in Sagittarius and the Moon, in Capricorn. According to Morin, the Detri-
ment or Exile of the Moon is much worse because Sagittarius doesn't cease being
a sign governed by a fortunate planet (Jupiter), whereas the Moon in Capricorn, in
addition to being exiled there, lies within the home of an Infortune (Saturn). This
is an important nuance that is not usually found in other authors.]
27

=== Page 31 ===
Saturn in Aries, then it will be much worse and more powerful in
acting harmfully, especially in unfortunate Houses of the horo-
scope. Therefore any planet in its Fall will act in accord with its
own debilitated nature, the sign that it occupies, and the dispositor
to which it is subordinated.
Finally, a planet that is only peregrine [that is, posited in an
unrelated sign] is not corrupted, as it would be in its Detriment, and
is not debilitated as it would be in its Fall, but becomes only some-
what weaker.26 This condition occurs solely because of the
planet's lack of natural compatibility or affinity with the sign.
Hence, common astrologers were mistaken in assigning to
peregrinity a total of 5 points of weakness or debility, as they
would to a planet in Detriment. Thus in this case [of peregrinity]
one must attend only to whether the planet lies in the sign of a
friend or an enemy,27 a topic that we treated in Book 15, Chapter
14 of this volume. A peregrine planet in the home of a friend suf-
fers hardly any diminution in its power to act according to its own
nature and, most of the time, even receives some assistance; for ex-
ample, Saturn in the domicile of Jupiter often indicates riches. On
the other hand, if the planet occupies the home of an enemy, it be-
comes frustrated and malicious, as, for example, Mercury in Scor-
pio, or Mars in Gemini, which indicate a quarrelsome, fraudulent,
or mendacious mentality. When, however, we say that a planet is
26 Note by Robert M. Corre; [Zoltan Mason would say that a peregrine planet
shows a given indifference toward the nature of the sign in which it is posited. The
planet does not care for the sign or for its ruler. Mason considered this a weak-
ness.]
27 Morin is referring to a list of friends and enemies of each planet from his Book
15. In Christian Astrology William Lilly (1647) gives the following list: The
friends of Saturn are Jupiter, Sun, and Mercury; Saturn's enemies are Mars and
Venus. All the planets except Mars are friends of Jupiter. Venus is the only friend
of Mars, and all the other planets are his enemies. All the planets except Saturn are
friends of the Sun, and Saturn is his enemy. All the planets except Saturn are
friends of Venus. The friends of Mercury are Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn; all the
other planets are his enemies. Mars and Saturn are enemies of the Moon. Accord-
ing to Pepita Sanchis Llacer (see appendix), Morin does not follow the same crite-
ria as William Lilly for friends and enemies of planets.
28

=== Page 32 ===
frustrated, corrupted, or afflicted by a bad aspect, this and similar
statements should be understood not of the planet per se but rather
of its effects on sublunar affairs because of an unfortunate conflu-
ence of factors. The same should be understood of the opposite sit-
uation, where we say that a planet is fortified, dignified or strength-
ened
Having given the above explanation, we are now in a position
to say that a benefic planet in its Detriment is weakened by 5 de-
grees and that its influence is thereby rendered harmful. In its Fall,
aplanetis weakened by 4 degrees. If peregrine, a planet may lose 3
degrees of strength,29 especially if it occupies the Domicile of an
enemy or if the planet is malefic by nature. In summary, any
planet, even a benefic one, if badly disposed by celestial state, as-
sumes a malefic nature, and this is especially so if the planet is in
Detriment or Fall. The aspects made by a planet in a bad celestial
state will confer no benefit, and even if the planet is a benefic, its
aspects will be only slightly helpful or will benefit in an imperfect
manner. A malefic in its Detriment becomes 5 degrees worse in its
ability to do harm and confers no benefit whatsoever through its
conjunction, aspects, orrulership, as, for example, Saturn in Leo or
Cancer [the signs of Saturn's Detriment], which in many nativities
is the cause of a violent and shameful demise. Saturn in its Fall
[Aries] would be made worse [more malefic] by 4 degrees, be-
cause of the excessive dryness of Saturn and Mars as well as [be-
cause of] Saturn occupying the domain of the malefic Mars. On the
other hand, Mars in Cancer [its Fall] would not be made more ma-
28 Note by Robert M. Corre; [This is a very important point. Nothing in the sky,
meaningthe zodiac and the planets, is ever bad. The idea behind the zodiacal state
or quality of the influence is based on the receiver, that is, how the person uses the
influence. The bad means the misuse, the good means the person uses the proper
ways and means, but the stress is always on the receiver, the Houses, and not the
sky. Nothing in the sky is bad or, in other words, nothing in use is bad; rather, it is
a person's inclination through the good or bad zodiacal sate to use or abuse the in-
fluences of the various planets.]
29 See Morin's explanation of the potential loss of strength due to peregrinity in
the previous paragraph.
89

=== Page 33 ===
lefic but would only be rendered weaker in its action by 4 degrees,
as can be seen in my own nativity where Aries is on the Ascendant
and Mars is in Cancer, which makes me quick to anger but also
makes it easy for me to restrain myself.30 In addition, I become re-
miss at times when 1 should avenge myself, except when matters of
honor bestir my spirit. In a similar fashion, the Sun in Libra [its
Fall] is only weakened [in its action], but the Moon in Scorpio [its
Fall] becomes worse [more harmful] because of the excess of wet-
ness [humidity] and because of the malevolence of its dispositor
Mars, which is an enemy of the Moon.31 One can apply the same
reasoning to the remaining planets. Finally, a malefic that is pere-
grine will sometimes be 3 degrees worse [more harmful] and
sometimes only 3 degrees weaker according to the nature of the
sign and of its ruler, as has been explained previously.
Hence, we must keep in mind our own experience when we
30 Aries rising gives Morin a Mars-like temperament, making him quick to anger;
but Mars in Cancer (its Fall) weakens the action of Mars, so he can easily restrain
himself when he gets angry. In other words, he starts to act in a Martian manner
but, because Mars is in its Fall, he does not have sufficient strength to persist in his
Mars-ruled activities.
31 Morin seems to be saying that a planet in its Fall is weakened but that its action
for good or evil depends on other factors such as (1) an excess of a quality in the
combination of sign and planet (Moon in Scorpio has too much wetness), or (2)
whether the ruler of the sign of the planet's Fall is a friend or enemy of that planet.
32 Note by Pepita Sanchis Llacer: [I would add a comment about the supposed
weakness of Mars in Cancer (in Morin's chart, in the 3rd House). Morin speaks of
himself, but he doesn't say here that, of his six siblings, all died before he did
(even the youngest)—a fact that seems to contradict his statement that Mars in
Cancer is only weakened. On the other hand, Morin comments later that his sib-
lings feared and obeyed him in everything, which suggests that his attitude toward
them was overbearing. In this case Morin seems to commit a sin of excessive par-
tiality when he is judging himself. If one applies Morin's own norms, a fortunate
planet in Fall in the home of a fortune (as the Sun in Libra) is only weakened, but
an unfortunate planet in Fall (as Mars in Cancer), or a planet in Fall in the home of
an infortune (as the Moon in Scorpio, or Jupiter in Capricorn) won't simply be
weakened, but rather will be rendered harmful,]
33 Morin uses the term "common astrologers" to refer to unthinking astrologers
who accept the teachings of the ancients without subjecting them to critical rea-
30

=== Page 34 ===
reflect upon the extrinsic strengths and weaknesses of the planets
by virtue of the signs that they occupy, and we must not believe in-
discriminately, as do common astrologers,33 for example, that any
planet in its Exaltation is strengthened by 4 degrees and in its Fall
is weakened by that amount, and [we must not believe] that the
same consideration applies to all the other planets, namely, [it is
not true that] they are strengthened or made fortunate, or weakened
or made harmful in their effects, regardless of which House of the
figure the planet occupies.
Finally, it is important to mention Cardan's observations
that planets in their own Domiciles are more representative of the
native's life, body, customary behavior, and mentality; planets in
their Exaltations are more strongly connected with honors, dig-
nity, actions, and changes of fortune; and planets in their
Triplicities are more powerfully effective with regard to friend-
ships and dialogues with others. To these observations we are
completely justified in adding the following stipulation: the plan-
ets themselves are determined toward such matters only in a par-
ticular chart. It is absurd to believe that a planet, residing in the
8th House and not ruling the 1st, even if it occupies its own Do-
micile, would signify anything regarding the native's life and in-
telligence, when, quite the contrary [being posited in the 8th] it
represents the native's death.
In another place Cardan (more correctly) writes that a
planet, which occupies its throne34 or its own Domicile and is
also ruler of the Ascendant or of the natal chart, confers upon
the native great authority, a happy and tranquil life, both among
his own and with strangers, and allows him easily to acquire the
soning. Presumably readers of his books aspire to become sophisticated astrolo-
gers like Morin himself.
34 Morin does not define this term here. According to DeVore's Encyclopedia of
Astrology, "throne" can refer to a planet "in a Sign of which it is the Ruler" or to
"a planet posited in that part of a Sign wherein it had more than one Dignity".
35 He is speaking of positions of midrange power and dignity.
31

=== Page 35 ===
good things in life. According to Cardan, a planet in its Exalta-
tion acts suddenly and grants greater and more significant
honors35 but with moderate difficulty and subject to frequent
changes. Thus a planet in Exaltation heralds an eminent and illus-
trious status, which most of the time is also tumultuous, especially
(this is my own observation) if the planet receives adverse aspects
from Mars or Saturn. Finally, a planet in its Triplicity will make
the native fortunate only through his advice, supplications, recom-
mendations, and negotiations with others, who will be strongly in-
clined to pay serious heed to his counsel.
32

=== Page 36 ===
CHAPTER VI
The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets arising from
the Zodiacal Signs in which they are posited with
regard to the matter of the Gender of the Planets.
COMMON ASTROLOGERS believe that any planet formally and
intrinsically of masculine gender is fortified in a masculine sign
and any planet intrinsically feminine is strengthened in a feminine
sign. They also believe that planets residing in signs of the sex op-
posite their own are debilitated or rendered unfortunate. They ap-
ply these rules indiscriminately and in an apparently contradictory
manner.
First, to each planet in its own Domicile, such astrologers
grant 5 degrees of strength; to each planet in Detriment, they as-
sign 5 degrees of debility. The Domicile of the Moon [Cancer] and
its Detriment [Capricorn], however, are feminine, and the Moon
herself is feminine both formally and by her own nature. Thus it
would seem that we should attribute more than 5 degrees of
strength for the Moon in Cancer and less than 5 degrees of debility
for the Moon in Capricorn, yet those [common] astrologers main-
tain that the Moon is strengthened in Cancer by an amount equal
but opposite to that of it debilitation in Capricorn. They would ap-
ply the same argument to the Sun, a masculine planet, residing in
Leo or Aquarius, both masculine signs, or to Mars occupying
Aries or Libra, and so on.
Moreover, as explained in Chapter 3 of Book 15 ofAstrologia
Gallica, the planets Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury are
33

=== Page 37 ===
each assigned two Domiciles, one masculine and the other femi-
nine; it is said that a planet is fortified by 5 degrees of strength in
either of its two Domiciles [regardless of gender]. Evidently, it is
believed that a planet is stronger in its principal Domicile, with
which that planet has an affinity due to shared elemental qualities,
despite the fact that Saturn, for example, is formally masculine but
its principal Domicile is Capricorn, a feminine sign.
Finally, in Chapter 19 of his Book 3, Ptolemy36 discusses dis-
orders of the soul37 and blames them on Venus being posited in
feminine signs in the male nativities, and on Mars occupying mas-
culine signs in female births, since such placements produce incli-
nations and desires that run contrary to nature, if their local deter-
minations in the chart are related to the native's habits or to the 5th 'lo t m m
House by the planet's placement, rulership, or opposition. At
least in the case presented by Ptolemy, we see that having the same
gender as the sign it occupies does not necessarily fortify or benefit
a planet.
To eliminate these conceptual difficulties, I must again clarify
that it is one thing to say that a planet is strengthened and quite an-
other to say that a planet is rendered fortunate in its effects on the
sublunar world. These two concepts [strengthening versus render-
ing beneficial] must always be carefully differentiated. For in-
stance, if the Sun were posited in the masculine sign Aries, its pro-
duction of heat would be strengthened; if it were at the same time
conjoined with Mars, the Sun would produce heat even more
forceftilly but not in a helpful way, because the heat would become
excessive. Similarly, if the Sun were posited in Aquarius [a mascu-
line sign] and Saturn [a masculine planet] were to occupy Leo [a
36 It is not clear from the text which version of Ptolemy Morin is citing, and his
references may not match modem editions of Ptolemy's classic.
37 Here Morin is referring to homosexuality as a disorder of the soul. Ptolemy also
included disorders such as epilepsy and possession in this category.
38 Morin apparently regards one's preferred type of sexual gratification as a 5th
House matter.
34

=== Page 38 ===
masculine sign], then the opposition between the Sun and Saturn
would produce a noxious effect, whose harmfulness would be
even greater if Mars were posited in Taurus and in square to both.
Such a configuration would be extremely powerful and not at all
beneficial, but instead would be quite harmful. It is clear that bad
configurations also have strength and that some are stronger than
others. Thus the positions cited by Ptolemy above for Mars and
Venus in the nativities of women and men, in truth, induce a pow-
erful but deviant sexual appetite.
In the second place, I assert that, in general, any planet exerts
its influence more powerfully and joyfully from a sign with which
it is formally compatible as regards gender, and even more so if
one of its main dignities (Domicile or Exaltation) reinforces the
planet in that sign. For example, Saturn exerts its influence more
effectively and benignly from Aquarius than from Capricorn, even
though from Capricorn Saturn emits its elemental qualities more
effectively, because of the existing elemental compatibility be-
tween planet and zodiacal sign. But from Libra, a masculine sign
and Saturn's Exaltation, Saturn's influence will be much more op-
erative. Another example is that of Venus (formally feminine in it-
self), which exerts her influence more effectively and joyfully
from the feminine sign Taurus, even though Libra (a masculine
sign) produces much more humidity.39 This situation occurs be-
cause the gender of the planets has a significantly more profound
influence than their formal or active elemental qualities.40 And
these latter factors are not causes of the formal gender of a planet,
although the planet's gender is recognized through them. When a
planet resides in its same-sex Domicile, one can properly assert
that the planet occupies what is called its joy, that is, the sign in
39 Note by Pepita Sanchis Llacer: [Morin is discussing the difference between a
planet's elemental action versus its influential action. For example, Venus is one
of the most influential planets in regard to rain, and for that reason Venus confers
more humidity when in the sign of Libra, because Air signs are warm and humid,
and Venus is also warm and humid.]
40 Polarity takes precedence over all other considerations.
35

=== Page 39 ===
which it appears to enjoy itself most, as, for example, Venus in
Taurus, Mars in Aries, or Jupiter in Sagittarius, for the reasons
cited previously.41 These observations have been demonstrated
amply and repeatedly in the practice of astrology.
From the above we see that certainly Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
Venus, and Mercury always act more effectively in an elemental
manner from their own principal Domiciles, but not with regard to
their influence, if the planet and the sign are of different genders. If
a planet has the misfortune of occupying a sign of its Detriment or
Fall but is congruent in gender with that sign, it will at least have
some beneficial influence;42 but if the planet and sign are of oppo-
site genders, the planet will act in a more harmful manner. Thus
Saturn is more beneficial in [masculine] Leo than in [feminine]
Cancer, Jupiter more beneficial in [masculine] Gemini than in
[feminine] Virgo, Mars more beneficial in [masculine] Libra than
in [feminine] Taurus, and Venus more beneficial in [feminine]
Scorpio than in [masculine] Aries. Finally, if the planet is only
peregrine in a sign, one can at least always predict a more benefi-
cial influence if there is a sexual congruence between planet and
sign, although the elemental qualities may cause it to turn out in
another way, as is clearly seen when the combination of the sign
and the planet produces an excess of some elemental quality. For
example, such elemental excesses occur with Venus in Cancer,
which gives in too much humidity, or with Mars in Virgo, which
gives too much dryness, and so on.
41 Note by Pepita Sanchis Llacer: [Here Morin makes two errors:
1—He confuses "joy" with "throne". "Throne" is when the planet is in the home
of the same sexual characteristic as itself, as Venus in Taurus and Jupiter in Sagit-
tarius. "Joy" is a question of Houses: a planet is in its joy when it occupies a kin-
dred House: Mercury in I, Moon in III, Venus in V, Sun in IX, Saturn in the XII,
Jupiter in the XI, and Mars in VI.
2—Mars is a night planet, therefore, although it is considered that Aries is its pri-
mary home or day home, there is a point of obscurity here.]
42 Pepita Sanchis Llacer believes that Morin expressed himself badly here, and
that what he means to say is that a planet in Detriment or Fall will have less poten-
tial for harm if its gender is congruent with the sign where it is posited.
36

=== Page 40 ===
In the third place, I assert that unless one simultaneously takes
into account the gender of the person whose nativity is being stud-
ied, one must never speak about the happiness or unhappiness of a
planet's influence by reason of the congruence in gender between
the planet and the sign it occupies. This would include considering
the ruler of the sign, in order to determine whether that ruler is a
friend or enemy of the planet under consideration, or whether it is
inherently benefic or malefic. Clearly, in the nativity of a woman,
it is bad if all the masculine planets occupy masculine signs, for
then she will be like a man. In a similar way, it is harmful if Venus
resides in the Domiciles of Saturn or Mars, for such placements
give rise to pernicious and shameful proclivities that make one
prone to lustful behavior unless they are corrected by other fac-
tors, such as rational free will.43
43 Note by Pepita Sanchis Llacer; [I have tested this theory about homosexuality
in some 400 natal charts and have not found any greater tendency toward homo-
sexuality in those charts whose planets lie primarily in signs of the gender con-
trary to that of native.]
37

=== Page 41 ===
CHAPTER VII
The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets arising from
their Reception in the Signs of the Zodiac.
WE SAY that any planet posited outside its own Domicile is re-
ceived by another planet, obviously, through Domicile, Exaltation, or
Triplicity. For example, if Jupiter resides in Libra, we would say that
Jupiter is received through Domicile by Venus; through Exaltation by
Saturn; and through Triplicity by Venus, Saturn, and Mercury.
Reception may occur by presence and by absence. Reception by
presence means that the receiving planet lies in the same sign as the
planet being received—for example, Venus and Jupiter both posited
in Libra.44 Reception by absence means that the receiving planet and
the planet being received occupy different signs. In either case, it is
important to note especially whether a friend or an enemy receives the
planet, and whether it is received in signs that are compatible with it
by Exaltation or Triplicity, or their opposites. For instance, if the
Moon in Cancer were to receive by presence the Moon's friend Jupi-
ter, exalted in Cancer, it would be an excellent and quite effective re-
ception. If Mars in Scorpio [the Detriment of Venus] were to receive
Venus [by presence], however, it would be such a bad reception that it
would sorely corrupt the influence of Venus.
In addition, reception by absence is either mutual or not. Re-
ception is mutual, for example, if Jupiter, being posited in one of
its own dignities, receives Venus, and she in turn receives Jupiter,
which can happen in one of two ways:
44 In this example Venus receives Jupiter and both occupy the same sign, Libra.
39

=== Page 42 ===
• First: if they receive one another mutually in similar
dignities, as when they occupy each other's respective
Domiciles, or each other's respective Exaltations—for
example, if Jupiter lies in Libra [ruled by Venus] and Venus
in Sagittarius [ruled by Jupiter]. Such a reception is the
most powerful of all, per se, either to confer benefit or to do
harm. It will most assuredly be beneficial if none of the
planets is afflicted by Detriment or Fall in the sign that the
planet occupies, but instead at least one of them is dignified
by being posited in its Domicile or Exaltation. For example,
if Mars were in Leo and the Sun in Aries, where the Sun is
exalted, then Mars would become very powerful through
such a reception [i.e., Mars being received by an exalted
Sun]; or if the Moon were in Pisces and Jupiter in Cancer,
where Jupiter is exalted.45 But it would be quite damaging if
both planets were afflicted by [being in] Detriment or Fall
in the signs that they occupy. Such would be the case, for
example, if the Sun were in Aquarius and Saturn in Leo, or
the Sun were in Libra and Saturn in Aries, or Mars in
Cancer and Jupiter in Capricorn.46 Among those mutual
receptions, one can easily distinguish some of great power
and others of moderate power (clearly those in which no
planet is either dignified or afflicted in the sign that it
occupies, or only one of the pair satisfies this last
condition).
• In the second place, there may be mutual reception if the
planets receive one another mutually from different
dignities,47 for example, if Jupiter were to receive Venus by
45 In this example the Moon would be very powerful through its reception by an
exalted Jupiter.
46 Mutual reception among planets is beneficial in those cases where the aspect
between them is harmonious. The examples he cites are particularly difficult, as
the receiving planets are aspecting one another disharmoniously.
47 These are sometimes called "mixed" mutual receptions because the planets are
not in corresponding dignities.
40

=== Page 43 ===
Domicile but Venus were to receive Jupiter by Exaltation or
Triplicity. Such [mixed] receptions are much weaker than
the receptions described above [in which the planets share
corresponding dignities]. In addition, these receptions will
be beneficial or harmful to the extent that both of the
received planets, or at least one of them, is well or badly
posited by Domicile, Exaltation, or in the signs opposite to
these dignities.
• Finally, between the planets involved in every reception by
absence, there may be a benign aspect, an adverse aspect, or
no aspect at all. If there is a favorable aspect, the reception
is benefic; if there is an unfavorable aspect, the reception is
malefic; if the planets are without aspect, neither of these
conditions applies. Thus, for example, the Sun posited in
Aries and Mars in Leo—or the Moon in Pisces and Jupiter
in Cancer—with the two planets in reception forming a
trine aspect, will result in a most excellent and beneficial
reception. However, the Sun posited in Aquarius and Saturn
in Leo—or Mars in Cancer and Jupiter in Capricorn—with
the two planets in reception forming an aspect of
opposition, will be a most ill-fated and wretched reception.
Someone might argue that in the case of Saturn in Leo oppos-
ing the Sun in Aquarius, when combining its influence with re-
spect to us with the opposition of the Sun (and taking into account
that the Sun is dignified in Leo), the state of the Sun would be less
debilitated than if Saturn were in Cancer and the Sun in Capricorn.
For this reason one might be tempted to think that the former oppo-
sition [between Sun in Aquarius, Saturn's domicile, and Saturn in
Leo, the Sun's domicile] reduces the harshness of the opposition
aspect because [it makes possible] the mutual reception.48 And one
48 Morin is pointing out that Saturn in Leo opposite the Sun in Aquarius involves
the Sun receiving Saturn in Saturn's domicile, Aquarius, and Saturn receiving the
Sun in the Sun's home sign Leo. Some would argue that in this case the opposi-
tion makes this mutual reception by domicile possible, and so has a beneficial or
at least a less harmful effect. Morin takes issue, arguing that planets do not act on
41

=== Page 44 ===
could arguably apply the same reasoning to the opposition aspect
between the Sun in Libra and Saturn in Aries, or to the square aspect
between Mars in Cancer and the Moon in Aries. My response would
be, however, that Saturn does not act against the Sun but, on the con-
trary, acts against us49 and the influence of Saturn in Leo is terrible
for us, as is the influence of the Sun in Aquarius; and to these [inde-
pendently] woeful influences one may add further the opposition
aspect50 that exists between the Sun and Satum (an aspect which is
also bad for us), for it increases rather than diminishes the malice of
the influence. On the other hand, Mercury posited in Pisces and Ju-
piter in Gemini, forming a square aspect, will be a reception of me-
dium virtue and unhappiness,51 but Mars posited in Taurus and the
Moon in Capricorn, forming a trine aspect,52 will result in a recep-
tion of medium virtue and happiness. Following the line of reason-
ing given in these examples, it is easy to judge other receptions and
to distinguish which planet being received has more power to confer
benefits or to do harm. Truly, in understanding these concepts re-
sides no small part of the science of astrological judgment.
Some will say that this idea53 is contrary to the teachings of
each other but send their influence or have their effect on us in the world below.
Hence, the Sun is Detriment is bad for us, Satum in Detriment is bad for us, and
the opposition of the Sun to Satum is bad for us all in all a sad state of affairs for
those of us on the true receiving end of this opposition.
49 Note by Robert M. Corre: [Morin appears to be saying that nothing in the heav-
ens is bad, only the way in which the individual receives it.]
50 Zoltan Mason, following Morin, maintained that a bad aspect between two
planets in mutual reception destroys the value of the reception, especially if the
maleflcs or the lights were involved.
51 On page 156 of Astrosynthesis Morin states, "cooperation will be destructive
between two Planets whose Domiciles are in mutual opposition or square ..."
52 On page 156 of Astrosynthesis Morin states, "cooperation will be constmctive
between two Planets whose Domiciles are in mutually favorable aspect..."
53 Morin appears to be referring to his idea that the bad celestial state of two plan-
ets in mutual reception will damage any benefit that would otherwise accme from
that reception.
42

=== Page 45 ===
our astrological forebears, who were certainly of the opinion that
all receptions—or at least those by Domicile or Exaltation—are
invariably beneficial;54 so this idea will be tested with several
charts, including that of the illustrious Francis de Bonne, the
Constable of France, who had Mars in Taurus as the dispositor of
the Sun, and Venus in Aries as the dispositor of the Pars Fortuna.
Constable de Bonne was always very fortunate in war, and he
gradually achieved the highest military honors—a fact that com-
mon astrologers would have attributed to the [unfortunate] mutual
reception by Domicile between Mars in Taurus and Venus in
Aries, even though each of these planets is in its Detriment and
each is devoid of any aspect from its dispositor.
It is not, however, that the doctrine we have expounded is less
accurate, but rather that the commonly held doctrine is clearly
false. Our proposal finds no contradiction in the example nativity
[of Francis de Bonne55]; instead the good fortune of Constable de
Bonne in matters of war and his promotion to the highest military
honors56 had causes other than the mutual reception between Mars
and Venus [both in Detriment].57
54 That is, regardless of the celestial state of the two planets or the aspect that ex-
isted between them.
55 Checking an ephemeris for the 16th century, it appears that the chart of
Francois de Bonne has approximately the following data: April 1,1543 O.S., 9:03
a.m., LMT, Saint-Bonnet, Hautes-Alpes, France, 44N40, 6E05 (birthplace sup-
plied by James Holden).—A.L.L.
56 Frangois de Bonne became Constable of France in 1622.
57 Note by Pepita Sanchis Llacer: [To understand the comments that follow in the
text, it will help the reader to keep in mind the following facts about Framjois de
Bonne's natal chart: The 1st House has a late Gemini Cusp and contains part of
the sign Cancer. The 7th House has a late Sagittarius Cusp andcontains part of the
sign Capricorn. The 10th House has a Pisces Cusp. The Sun and Venus are in
Aries, the Moon is in Pisces, Mars and Mercury are in Taurus, Jupiter is in Libra,
and Satum is in Scorpio.]
43

=== Page 46 ===
NitimMFrancifcldcHooiic CormrfVubiKi GtHia
m
* m ?■ -F
Ma«a
D, K. M-
|l. AO, sk. T.A.
VfA* 44, 40.
#
*
Morin's Chart of Francois de Bonne
Frar>cois d© Bonn© Mole Oiort (4) Ac' 1543 OS 9:59 41 on 1^-0:2420 Sainl-BorneL Hoirtes. FR ^■N-IT 0116*E05'
Tfopic# Rmgwnaa**** rweNode
oi-
io
^ 08 ^o- rT
25
m. 22'
or 9?
04- — '
Natal Chart of Francois de Bonne
44

=== Page 47 ===
First, the Ascendant-ruler Mercury, posited in Taurus, is lo-
cated between Venus [in Aries] and Mars [in Taurus], which signi-
fies a fortunate inclination toward weaponry, especially since
Mars, by Exaltation, governs the 7th House58 and thereby signifies
not only extraordinary good judgment in matters of war but also
military honors, because Mars is the dispositor of the Sun in Aries.
Second, the Sun is exalted in the 11th House where it conjoins Ve-
nus, thus indicating regal friends and benefactors. Third, the
Moon, which also rules the 1st House,59 is posited in the 10th
House under the dominion of Jupiter, which rules the cusp of the
7th House of wars; and the Pisces Moon applies mutually to, and
almost forms a partile trine with, Saturn, which is also a ruler of the
7th House and occupies Scorpio, the Domicile of Mars. These con-
ditions presage the birth of an individual who will be elevated to
high military honors because of battles, and also foretell the fortu-
nate success of his warlike efforts on account of Jupiter, ruler of
both the 7th and 10th Houses, occupying the Domicile of Venus
[Libra] and with a partile opposition to Venus, which rules the
Midheaven by Exaltation and conjoins the Sun, which itself is ex-
alted in the 11th House. Such are the authentic, valid, and numer-
ous causes of the singular fortune that this native achieved.
But the mutual reception between Venus [in Aries] and Mars
[in Taurus] (rulers of the 5th and 11th Houses, respectively), both
posited in the 11th House with Mercury (ruler of the Ascendant),
and Mars opposing Saturn as well as Venus opposing Jupiter (Sat-
urn and Jupiter being rulers of the 7th House, which also refers to
58 Mars is exalted in Capricorn. With a very late degree of Sagittarius on the 7th
cusp, Capricorn is almost the sign on that cusp, and much of the sign Capricorn
lies in the 7th House. Hence Morin is attributing co-rulership of the 7th House to
Capricorn even though 29 degrees of Sagittarius occupies the 7th cusp. Pepita
Sanchis Llacer notes that if two signs even partially occupy a House, Morin al-
ways takes into account two rulers of a House, unless the second sign has only
very few degrees within that House.
59 The Ascendant is in the final degree of Gemini and Cancer is almost rising.
Also, more than two thirds of the sign Cancer lies in the 1 st House. Morin thus
takes Cancer to co-rule the 1st House.
45

=== Page 48 ===
the spouse) was a powerful determination of his overindulgence in
sexual pleasures and his several marriages, because both planets
are in Detriment and because Jupiter and Saturn occupy the Domi-
ciles of Venus and Mars in the 5th House. These matters became
very well-known and publicly visible because the Sun conjoining
Venus lies in opposition to Jupiter. Thus those unfortunate mutual
receptions must be distinguished from the true causes of good for-
tune, with which unfortunate receptions are often mixed, so that
one does not attribute to them good things to which they do not
correspond.
The validity of the doctrine that we are expounding is seen in
the greatest imaginable number of natal charts. For example, of
three noblewomen whom I know, in the chart of the first of them,
the Sun and the Moon are rulers of the 1st House,60 and the Moon is
posited in Taurus with Mars in the 11th House. The Sun in this
chart lies in Scorpio in the 5th House with Venus. Words cannot
express how much her appetite for luxury consumes her, on ac-
count of the mutual reception between Venus and Mars in signs
where each is in Detriment, in those particular Houses of the chart,
and with the luminaries ruling the 1st House.61 In the chart of the
second woman, Jupiter is found in the 7th House in Gemini, and
Mercury lies in the 3rd House in Pisces. This second woman has
had two unhappy marriages, each characterized by frequent dis-
putes.62 In the chart of the third woman, Venus is the ruler of the
Ascendant and resides in Aries in the 12th House, while Mars rules
her 12th House and is posited in Taurus in the 1st House, a config-
uration that has resulted in numerous illnesses. Who would label
60 Judging from the example of de Bonne above, the natal chart of this woman
probably has late Cancer rising, with much or all of Leo in the 1st House, The Sun
and Venus are in Scorpio in the 5th, and the Moon and Mars are in Taurus in the
11th.
61 This configuration appears to be a marker of conspicuous consumption imbued
into the very fabric of the personality.
62 The original Latin word used here by Morin can refer to either quarrels or law-
suits.
46

=== Page 49 ===
DeRlspe MQIb Chort (SI Apr 4 1607 NS 1:20pm LMT-0 0920 Paris, FR 48W 002*E;?D,
TrcpfCt/ Ppg&mcorm/H Tn/fNode
17*
; -«• T
rT
s 19* 3 /
s\<
(Tf » ... 11 W V 12* fTF
\' n
02-
Natal Chart of De Rispe
such receptions benefic?
In the case of the nobleman Joan de Giam D. De Rispe, his
Venus, ruler of the Midheaven, resides in Aries with the Sun,
which is the ruler of his Ascendant. Mars lies in Taurus in sextile
with both the Moon and Jupiter and also in partile trine with Saturn
(ruler of the 7 th House of wars). Thus, according to common astro-
logical practice, this gentleman should certainly be fortunate in
war-related actions and enterprises. But, on the contrary, he was
most unlucky in war and ended his days by dying miserably in
combat from a wound to the head caused by a flaming projectile
that killed him instantly. In his chart, Mars conjoins the malefic
fixed star Caput Algol and casts a partile square to the Ascendant.
In addition, Saturn (ruler of the 7th) opposes the Moon and also
squares the Sun (ruler of the Ascendant). These chart factors pro-
duce no benefit whatsoever, not even the placement of Jupiter in
Pisces in the 8th House [of death].
For yet another example, consider the chart of De Hayes, in
47

=== Page 50 ===
cte Hayes Mfllw Chan |K) Febl2T598NS 17 4554Dni LMT *0 00 Part FP nO?,E20' (f*l*CPo*r rnvx-ca/ Rmgomonranu* TnPNock np' 22*\ *r
A A ^ 24-
JHT n«* . D o 07*
rrif
r :t20" ^
b 1 T 19 g
BT
a" ^ ? 22*
19
iYora/ Chart of de Hayes
which Jupiter is located in the 7th degree of Gemini and in the 8th
House with Mars (ruler of the Ascendant), but Mercury lies in Pis-
ces in the 4th House. The Moon resides in the 7th House with the
fixed stars Caput Algol [Medusa's Head] and the Pleiades and
forms a square aspect with the Sun (ruler of the 10th House and in
Detriment in the 4th). De Hayes was decapitated by order of the
king and was not protected from this fate by the mutual reception
between Mercury and Jupiter in the 8th because both planets are in
Detriment and are connected by a mutual square aspect.
Many more examples are not necessary. The attentive reader
will find such examples everywhere. The reason comes from the
doctrine that we have expounded, for Venus in Aries has a malign
influence, as does Mars in Taurus, and both Venus in Scorpio and
Mars in Taurus are of evil import, with the additional noxious ef-
fect of the aspect of opposition. Thus, when all the influences are
631 could find no biographical material on de Hayes, so I searched the ephemeris
for the conditions specified by Morin and set the chart for Paris, France.—A.L.L.
48

=== Page 51 ===
taken together, it is simply not possible for the total combined ef-
fect [of several independently harmful influences] to be beneficial
for the native who receives it. One might argue, perhaps, that the
same would be true if Mars were posited in Aries or Scorpio and
Venus were in Taurus, but such an argument would be false be-
cause, according to the principles of astrology (abundantly veri-
fied for us by experience), Venus has one effect when posited in
Taurus and quite a different effect when posited in Aries or Scor-
pio, and the same is true of Mars. When the Midheaven is directed
to Venus in Taurus, the result is quite distinct from the direction of
the Midheaven to Venus in Scorpio, for this latter direction will
produce good only with much difficulty, whereas the former pro-
duces manifold benefits, as astrological experience demonstrates.
Hence, when judging the effects of mutual receptions between the
planets, one must carefully take into account the doctrine we have
explained above.
49

=== Page 52 ===
CHAPTER VIII
The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets arising from
their Position with Respect to the Sun and the
Moon.
THROUGHOUT HIS writings Ptolemy, in his judgments of the
stars, gives tremendous, even key, importance to the Sun and
Moon, and to the position of the other planets in relation to the lu-
minaries. Ptolemy apparently believes that the Sun and Moon are
universal causes of all sublunar effects. Thus Ptolemy says at the
beginning of Chapter 7 of his second book: "the Sun and the Moon
are the regents of all the other celestial bodies and are the principal
causes of things; they reign over the domains of the other heavenly
bodies and they validate or weaken the forces of those rulers."
Ptolemy makes such statements not without reason; for certainly,
64 Morin is taking an Earth-centered view here, namely, that by empirical obser-
vation astrologers can see that the Sun and Moon appear to travel in their orbits
around the Earth but all the other planets appear to have orbits around the Sun,
which accounts for the periodic retrograde motion of those planets when viewed
from Earth.
65 By heat, Morin appears to be referring to the four primary qualities and the four
elements. The primary quality "heat" is related to the vital force of all matter.
66 The four "elements" of ancient philosophy—Fire, Air, Earth, and Water are
made up of various combinations of four primary qualities, namely, heat, cold,
dryness, and humidity. Morin is saying that the Sun is the source of the primary
quality of heat and the Moon is the source of the primary quality of humidity. All
living things require heat and humidity for their survival. Pepita Sanchis Llacer
points out that in reality, there are only two qualities: heat (the solar principle) and
humidity (the lunar principle), because cold and dryness are not qualities per
51

=== Page 53 ===
of all the planets, only the Sun and the Moon are ordained to orbit
around the Earth, whereas the other planets have their orbits
around the Sun,64 which is the only orbit that they observe in their
movements; and the same argument holds true of the Moon. When
the Sun reaches its annual zenith, for purposes of regeneration it
incites and stimulates the innate heat65 of every seed—animal,
vegetable, or mineral—as can be seen clearly in plants and animals
during the springtime. For these reasons, the Sun, which is the
source of heat, and the Moon, which is the source of humidity,66
are called respectively by many the "father" and the "mother" of
everything that is born in this sublunar world.
Ptolemy, however, did not explain why he believed the Sun
and the Moon to be governors of all the other planets and rulers of
their domains, nor did Cardan do so in his commentaries on Ptol-
emy's works. And I do not think that it can be explained except if
one were to say that the Sun, which is the central point of the sys-
tem of the other five planets,67 through its own movement around
the Earth [on the ecliptic] guides those five planets through the • • • • AR signs of the zodiac, which lie along the path of the Sun. In the
course of the Sun's movement along the ecliptic with its five orbit-
ing planets in tow, it is possible for any of those planets to precede
and travel ahead of the Sun, which is called being oriental69 of the
but are the negation of the previous ones (heat and humidity), their polar oppo-
sites.
67 Morin viewed the Sun and the Moon as orbiting the Earth, but he regarded five
planets Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn as orbiting the Sun and
tagging along with the sun in its orbit around the Earth.
68 It seems that Morin cannot give up the geocentric approach, yet he acknowl-
edges the then emerging popularity of heliocentric system: it appears that he's
trying to reconcile one with the other.
69 On page 114 of Christian Astrology, William Lilly gave a British contemporary
definition of oriental as follows: "Saturn, Jupiter and Mars are Oriental of the Sun
from the time of their conjunction with him [the Sun] until they come to his oppo-
sition; from whence until again they come to conjunction, they are said to be Oc-
cidental; to be Oriental is no other thing than to rise before the Sun, to be
Occidental is to be seen above the Horizon, or to set after the Sun is down; Mer
52

=== Page 54 ===
Sun, or to succeed and travel behind the Sun, which is called being
occidental of the Sun.70,71 These planets may also travel direct, ret-
rograde, or stationary in their movement with respect to us. Such
factors will weaken, intensify, or otherwise modify the active vir-
tue of the planets with respect to us on Earth. The same comments
about the [five] planets' positions also apply with reference to the
Moon, for it is possible that Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mer-
cury can be found oriental or occidental of the Moon.72
The Sun and the Moon are the most powerful of the celestial
bodies (as least with respect to the Earth) and they are ordained to
travel free and unencumbered73 in their orbits around the Earth,
which is the only reference point of their orbits; however, the other
planets—Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury—are bound
[in their orbits] to the Sun and travel around it, like servants and
satellites of the Sun. The very nature of this reality cautions us in
every nativity to pay close attention, above all else, to the celestial
state of the Sun and the Moon, and to the relation of the other plan-
ets to the Sun, who is their leader (or better still, their king), by
cury and Venus can make no sextile, square, trine, or opposition to the Sun; their
Orientality is when they are in fewer degrees of the sign the Sun is [in], or in the
sign preceding; their Occidentality [is] when they are in more degrees of the sign
the Sun is in, or in the next subsequent [sign]..."
70 Viewed from the Earth, the Sun rises in the East and sets in the West. Any
planet traveling ahead of the Sun would rise in the East before the Sun, hence the
term oriental, referring to being in the East before Sunrise. Any planet behind the
Sun would be set in the West after the Sun, hence the term occidental, referring to
being in the West after Sunset.
71 Per Ptolemy, Loeb edition. Harvard University Press, p. 241: ".. .whether they
are oriental or occidental to the Sun and the horoscope; for the quadrants which
precede each of them and those which are diametrically opposite, and the others,
which follow, are occidental."
72 That is, rising in the East before the Moon rises, or setting in the West after the
Moon sets.
73 The Sun and the Moon travel freely in their orbits around the Earth. The other
planets cannot travel freely but are constrained to follow the Sun as it travels
through the zodiac signs along the ecliptic around the Earth.
53

=== Page 55 ===
their position, rulership, and connection to the Sun by conjunction
or aspect. We must also attend to the relation of the other planets to
the Moon, who is the consort of the Sun and his vicar in the
sublunar world. Such factors can certainly cause the influences of
the five non-luminary planets to be weaker or more efficacious,
harsher or more beneficial.
Our sole purpose here, however, has been to explain the effect
of the a planet's position with respect to the Sun and to consider
what measure of strength or debility the planet will receive on ac-
count of that [position with respect to the Sun]. Cardan (in his
Commentary on text 14, Chapter 3 of Book 2 of the
Quadripartite1*) is of the opinion that because an oriental planet
has so different a valence [value] than when that same planet is oc-
cidental, it behaves as if it were not a single planet but rather [acts]
like two completely different planets. Such a proposition is false
because in both states [oriental or occidental] the planet acts ac-
cording to its own inner nature, albeit in a different mode. The na-
ture of a planet is unique and immutable, but its modes or states are
varied. We shall see below how much strength a planet gains ac-
cording to its position with respect to the Sun.
Furthermore, we can investigate this matter according to the
elemental nature of the planets or according to their influence [i.e.,
their influential nature]. We have already dealt with the elemental
nature of the planets in Book 3, Section 1, Chapter 3, of Astrologia
Gallica15 As regards the influential nature of the planets, we must
74 Morin is referring to the Commentary by Cardan on the Quadripartite (or
Tetrabiblos) of Ptolemy, which was available in Latin translation. F.E. Robbins
divides the Latin version of the Quadripartite into chapters in a different fashion
than the Loeb translation of the Tetrabiblos.
75 On pages 154-155 of Astrosynthesis Morin summarizes some of his ideas on el-
emental nature. He says that planets harmonize with one another when they share
one of the vital primitive or elemental qualities (hot and wet). Examples of such
harmony are the Sun and Jupiter (both hot), Venus and Jupiter (both hot), and Ve-
nus and the Moon (both wet). On the other hand, planets do not harmonize when
they contain antagonistic qualities (hot versus cold, or dry versus wet). There is
54

=== Page 56 ===
consider what Ptolemy says in his Book 3, Chapter 16. When dis-
cussing the form of the human body, Ptolemy writes that all of the
planets, when oriental of the Sun, produce a [human] form that is
nobler and more perfect than when the planets are occidental. If we
were to apply this concept generally to other good things that be-
fall a nativity, we would conclude that all planets oriental of the
Sun make matters more illustrious and noticeable than when those
planets are occidental, especially when the planets come out from
under the rays of the Sun.76
But then Ptolemy, making more specific distinctions about
the same topic,77 comments that in general the planets make the
human body large78 when they precede the Sun, becoming visible
in the morning before sunrise (that is, during their matutine rising).
At their first station, the planets produce a body that is robust and
powerful. When they turn retrograde, the planets indicate a human
form that is improperly proportioned. At their second stations, the
planets produce bodies that are weaker; when planets fall under the
rays of the Sun, they produce human forms that are lacking in dig-
nity and full of defects, that is, bodies that are unsightly and de-
formed.
thus an antagonism between the Sun and Saturn (hot & dry vs. cold & dry), Saturn
and the Moon (dry & cold vs. wet & cold), Saturn and Venus (cold & dry vs. hot &
wet), and Mars and the Moon (hot & dry versus cold & wet). Finally, the combi-
nation of certain planets can produce a harmful excess of an elemental quality
such as the Sun with Mars (too hot and too dry), Saturn with the Moon (too cold),
or Saturn with Mars (too dry). See Appendix B for Morin's table of the ratio of
primitive qualities of the planets.
76 Note by Pepita Sanchis Llacer: [The above is correct for the superior planets,
which travel in the zodiac more slowly than the Sun. The Sun overtakes them, and
on those days they are visible at daybreak. There they have their maximum force
at the moment when they are first seen, according to the ancients. For the inferior
planets, their first appearance at daybreak occurs after their inferior conjunction,
when they are retrograde: they pass from vespertine light to matutine.]
77 The topic being the effect of the planets on the human body.
78 Ptolemy's discussion of planetary effects on the form of the human body can be
found on page 313 of the Loeb edition of the Tetrabiblos, translated by F.E. Rob-
bins.
55

=== Page 57 ===
On the other hand, in his Chapter 18, when Ptolemy discusses
the qualities of the soul, he says that the positions of planets orien-
tal of the Sun (that is, during their matutine79 rising), especially if
in the Ascendant [1st House80], signify a temperament that is lib-
eral, unaffected, pleasant, strong, ingenious, quick thinking, and
open. He adds that a planet at its first or matutine station, when
found in the Midheaven [10th House], makes natives magnani-
mous, firm, robust, persevering, trustworthy in their endeavors, re-
flective, prudent, wise, and difficult to deceive. Ptolemy further as-
serts that the vespertine81 rising of the planets, especially those
posited in the 7th House, signifies a temperament that is unstable,
weak, intolerant of work, prone to sudden affections, litigious, and
troubled in marriage. Finally, he says that the vespertine or second
stations of the planets, especially those posited in the I.C. [4th
House], and in the case of Mercury and Venus, when they are ves-
pertine in day charts but matutine in night charts,82 signify temper-
aments that are ingenious, capable of hard work, and able to dis-
cern arcane matters, such as are seen in the nativities of magicians,
prestidigitators, dream interpreters, and so on.
Toward the end of his Chapter 19, when discussing the infir-
mities of the soul, Ptolemy demonstrates which positions of the
79 Matutine refers to planets— usually the Moon, Venus, or Mercury- when they
appear in the morning and rise in the East before the Sun.
80 According to Ptolemy, the 1st House begins 5 degrees before the Ascendant
and ends 5 degrees before the cusp of the 2nd House.
81 Vespertine refers to planets that set in the West after the Sun.
82 Robbins in the Loeb edition, page 337, translates Ptolemy as follows: "Evening
stations and positions at mid-heaven beneath the Earth, and furthermore, in the
case of Mercury and Venus, by day evening settings and by night morning set-
tings, produce souls noble and wise, but with mediocre memory, not painstaking
nor fond of labour, but investigators of hidden things and seekers after the un-
known, as for example magicians, adepts in the mysteries, meteorologists,..."
83 On page 371 of the Loeb edition, Robbins translates Ptolemy as follows: "And
the rising and morning positions of both Mars and Venus have a contributory ef-
fect, to make them more virile and notorious, while setting and evening positions
increase femininity and sedateness."
56

=== Page 58 ===
planets with respect to the Sun are most congruent with some of
the defects of the soul, when he says that the positions of Venus
and Mars, oriental of the Sun and matutine, contribute to a bold
and shameless pursuit of carnal pleasure,83 which would lead us to
understand that Venus or Mars must be posited in, or must rule, the
1 st, 5th, or 11th Houses. Surely, such positions would not serve to
obscure but would rather promote the matters and effects of the
planets, whereas their vespertine settings would have the opposite
effect.
Astrologers, for their part, add 2 degrees of strength for plan-
ets oriental of the Sun and subtract 2 degrees for the debility of
planets occidental of the Sun. They use an opposite procedure for
the Moon. This has always been understood as conferring benefit
or harm, according to the nature of the planet and the remainder of
its state. From this it is clear how, to what extent, and in what the
planets are extrinsically fortified by reason of their position with
respect to the Sun or the Moon, and that the oriental state of the
malefics and not that of the benefics is always fortunate.
As for the remaining planets, any lesser planet that precedes,
orrises before, the Sun and is located no more than six signs [180
degrees] ahead of the Sun is called oriental of the Sun. Any planet
that follows, or rises after, the Sun and is no more than six signs
[180 degrees] behind the Sun is called occidental of the Sun. Of the
Moon I give the opposite of its position oriental or occidental to the
Sun.85
84 John Frawley notes that this depends on which planet is under consideration.
85 Note byPepita Sanchis Llacer; [Now that I have translated other texts ofMorin,
I have verified that he uses words "oriental" and "matutine" as synonyms. In this
case, the final paragraphs of Chapter VIII may be made clearer if replace the
words "matutine" or "vespertine" with "oriental" and "occidental" respectively.]
57

=== Page 59 ===
CHAPTER IX
The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets
arising from their Motion.
ALL THE planets, as they travel in their orbits, may proceed
with fast, slow, or average speed. In addition, Saturn, Jupiter,
Mars, Venus, and Mercury may travel with direct or retrograde
motion. When swift in motion, they indicate the quickness of the
habits, actions, or effects of any of the significators; when slow in
motion, their sluggishness; when of average motion, an intermedi-
ate state. Furthermore, when direct, they foretell the continuance
and progression of the effects; when retrograde, their interruption
or lack of completion; when stationary, their slowness but also
their stability and durability. The reasons for these matters must be
sought only by means of analogy. From it also derive the greater or
lesser strength and felicity of the planets, or their contraries. Thus a
planet, benefic by nature or signification, if in rapid and direct mo-
tion, would become that much more forceful and fortunate; but if
slow and retrograde, it will become that much weaker and less pro-
pitious. A planet, malefic by nature and signification, will behave
in the opposite manner. Furthermore, one must pay attention to
planets that are stationary and consider whether such planets are
about to become retrograde in motion, as after the first station, or
[about to become] direct in motion, as after the second station.
It is important to note routinely both the nature and quality of
the planet and the effect signified, for one must never make a pro-
86 That is, a malefic in bad zodiacal state and retrograde becomes more virulent
and more unfortunate.
59

=== Page 60 ===
nouncement [about the effect of a planet] without careful consider-
ation of these conditions.
60

=== Page 61 ===
CHAPTERX
The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets arising
from their Elevation, that is, from the Greater
Altitude of One Planet above the Rest.
IN COMPARING two planets, the ancients were fond of saying
that one planet would be more powerftil than another because of its
greater altitude or elevation above another planet. There are sev-
eral ways to consider the issue of elevation, namely:
• First, elevation with respect to the center of the Earth, or the
center of the sublunar world.87 When the planets in their
orbits arrived at either their apogee [greatest distance away
from the center of the Earth] or at their perigee [closest
proximity to the center of the Earth], the ancient astrologers
believed that a planet at its apogee, or ascending toward its
apogee by greater than its average distance from the Earth,
surpassed [in strength] a planet that was at, or descending
toward, its perigee. Thus the more elevated planet had a
superior strength, as Ptolemy asserted (in aphorism 63 of
the Centiloquy) and therefore the effect of the conjunction
of two such planets had to be interpreted in terms of the
nature of the more elevated [and thus more powerful]
planet. One can adduce two explanations for why Ptolemy
would prefer a planet that is more elevated in its orbit to one
that is superior by position. First, by analogy, the situation
is similar to the case of those members of a royal court who
87 Morin apparently believed that the Earth was the center of the universe.
61

=== Page 62 ===
are in the highest favor of the king and, for that reason, have
become more powerful than the old magnates of the court
and often more powerful than the princes of royal lineage;
in this way the planets increase their strength when they
travel [in their orbits] toward the Primum Mobile, which is
the first physical cause to which they are subordinated in
their action. Second, the influential virtue of the planets,
which is celestial88 and inherent in the celestial substance
from which they are made, then becomes closer to the vault
of Heaven. Therefore, at least, their influential strength is
fortified and intensified, surpassing even the strength of a
planet that is superior by position, on account of the
distance from the Primum Mobile, which is commensurate
with the position of each one by nature. On the contrary,
their influential strength diminishes when they return to
their perigee.
• Second, elevation with respect to the vertex or zenith. Thus
we say of a planet situated in the Midheaven, above the
horizon, or ascending toward the Midheaven from the
Ascendant, that such a planet is more prominent than a
planet that resides in the Imum Coeli, or [supercedes one]
that descends toward the I.C., especially at sunset. And if
the distance of either one from the meridian above the Earth
[the MC] is the same, then preference is given to the one
that is more elevated above the horizon, at least by reason of
what we are referred to as elemental strengths, in order to
define the prevailing temperature of the air or
[temperament] of the native, because, obviously, above
88 Morin is giving reasons for the strength by use of analogy. The higher you are in
the sky, the closer you are to the vault of heaven.
89 Traditional astrologers took the humoral temperature of a native from the birth
chart. For example, in Gadbury's booklet on the nativity of King Charles (1658),
he states: "All which Testimonies, do Astrologically demonstrate the temperature
of this native to be Sanguine Cholerique; which humors prevailing, argued him to
be of disposition and behavior courteous, and affable, yet Princelike, magnani-
mous and imperious." According to Hippocrates there are four temperaments
62

=== Page 63 ===
the horizon the elemental forces spread themselves via their
more upright [vertical] rays. But if both are equally elevated
[above the horizon], then [the one ascending from the]
Ascendant will prevail over [the one descending from the
MC toward] the Descendant. By reason of what pertains to
the influences, however, this argument runs into a small
problem: planets below the Earth can have a stronger
influence, as has been stated elsewhere. For example,
although very inclined toward us from their Domiciles in
the Ascendant [1st House], Saturn and Jupiter influence us
more powerfully according to their own nature than they do
from the signs opposite,90 even though they would be more
elevated91 [in the 7th House]. Furthermore, any planet on
the horizon has a much more effectual influence over the
body and soul of the native than that does same planet if
posited in the Midheaven, since the strength of the
influence is not measured by the perpendicularity of the
rays, as we have said elsewhere.
• Third, elevation with respect to declination. Of two planets
in the northern hemisphere, the one that has the more
northemly declination is regarded as more elevated than
one that is less northemly. If both planets have equally
northemly declination, then the planet that is heading north
(temperatures) that characterize the personality, metabolism, and course of illness
of a native. Air signs are sanguine (humid & hot) and ftin-loving; fire signs are
choleric (hot & dry) and energetic/impulsive; Earth signs are melancholic (dry &
cold) and glum; and water signs are phlegmatic (cold & humid) and slow to act.
90 If the Domiciles of Jupiter or Saturn are in the first House, then the signs of their
Detriment occupy the opposing 7th House and are above the horizon.
91 Note by Robert M. Corre; [Zoltan Mason considered the influence of "above
the horizon" to extend to 25 degrees BELOW the Ascendant. Thus, if a person
had 15 Aries on the Ascendant, a planet's position could extend to 10 Taurus and
still be considered "above the horizon". James Holden notes that Morin would not
have agreed with this position.]
92 John Frawley notes that north latitude is usually regarded as strengthening a
planet.
63

=== Page 64 ===
takes preference over one that is heading south. But if both
are traveling on a northern course in the northern
hemisphere, then the faster planet takes precedence over the
slower one, at least as regards the elemental qualities.
• Fourth, elevation with respect to latitude. In general, the
closer a planet is to the ecliptic, the more it increases in
strength and exceeds in virtue another planet that is more
distant [from the ecliptic] through what is referred to as
influence, since the ecliptic (which is the path of the Sun,
the prince of all the planets) is certainly the most effectual
great circle of the entire Primum Mobile.92
• Fifth, elevation with respect to the signs of the zodiac. A
planet in its own Domicile or Exaltation is more powerful
than another planet posited in its Detriment or Fall and also
surpasses one that is peregrine. Thus Saturn in Aquarius
stands [in power] above Jupiter posited in Virgo or Taurus.
If we consider Jupiter in Capricorn, then Saturn in that sign
would clearly gain much more strength [than Jupiter],
because Saturn would rule over Jupiter and because Jupiter
is in its Fall in Capricorn. Every planet in its own Domicile
or Exaltation is elevated above another planet that it
disposes. It is clear that, regarding every planet that is more
powerful than another and exercises rulership over the
position of the other, we say that the former planet [the one
that rules the position of the other] stands in force above the
latter. This manner [of surpassing another planet] is the
most potent of all.
• Sixth, elevation through its aspects, because one planet
surpasses another in strength when it casts its square aspect
or its antiscion to the other planet and also lies to the right of
that planet, or when it governs the other planet.
• Seventh and last, elevation through the Houses of the
astrological chart. In this way a planet posited in an angle is
more powerful than one located in a succedent or cadent
House. Also, a planet located in a nobler angle has the
advantage over one placed in a less noble angle. Again, of
64

=== Page 65 ===
two planets located in the same House, the planet closest to
the House cusp will act more effectively, under similar
conditions, in the essential matters of that House. We will
deal with these topics in more detail further on.
Finally, the greater the number of the above testimonies that
apply to a given planet, the more we may regard that planet as sur-
passing another [in strength]. We must consider the increase of vir-
tue in a planet under consideration with respect to another not only
relatively, but also in an absolute way, so that it becomes clear how
much strength a planet has by reason of similar extrinsic causes.
65

=== Page 66 ===
CHAPTER XI
The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets bg reason
of their Diurnal or Nocturnal Condition.
AS THE planets are of a dual nature, masculine or feminine
(clearly, formally or intrinsically on the one hand, and accidentally
or extrinsically on the other), they are also by their dual nature di-
urnal or nocturnal, that is, intrinsically and extrinsically. Here the
question before us is the extrinsic or accidental nature of a planet
deriving from its position above or below the horizon, of the day or
of the night. In Book 13 of Astrologia Gallica we dealt in detail
with how a planet is fortified by that condition, so we refer the
reader to our earlier writings.
67

=== Page 67 ===
PART TWO

=== Page 68 ===
CHAPTER XII
The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets by reason of
their Mutual Aspects
IN THE previous chapters we have explained how and to
what extent the planets are fortified extrinsically through their
celestial state, but in so doing we have treated the planets as if
they were feral93 or solitary, that is, without connections among
themselves by conjunction or aspect. Such connections, how-
ever, frequently exist among planets, giving rise to great variabil-
ity in their manner of action. As we said in Chapter 10 of Book 16
of Astrologia Gallica, some aspects are beneficial and others
harmful, thus reinforcing or weakening the influence of the plan-
ets that are related by aspect and thus altering their ability to con-
fer benefit or cause harm. It is now incumbent upon us to consider
how and to what extent planets that are connected by aspects
among themselves thereby acquire strength or debility. In so do-
ing, we may come to understand the final factor affecting their
overall celestial state, as much as the human intellect can know it,
for it is not possible to define everything with total accuracy but a
great deal becomes clear in so a sublime a science [as astrology]
if one speaks in accord with experience and reason. Until now the
strength conferred by aspects has been understood by astrologers
in a confusing manner and by none with clarity, as can be seen in
the vulgar tables of strengths [of aspects] put forth by authors
93 "Feral" is an adjective that is applied to wild or undomesticated animals, to
unaspected planets, and to the Moon when it is void of course, i.e., traveling in an
aspect vacuum. Feral planets run around like wild animals, unconnected by any
aspect to one another.
71

=== Page 69 ===
such as Origanus,94 who in the third part of his Introduction, p.
140, assigns 5 degrees of malefic influence [debility] to the partile
conjunction of Mars and Saturn, 4 degrees to their partile opposi-
tion, and 3 degrees to their partile square. He, in turn, gives 5 de-
grees of benefic influence [fortitude] to the partile conjunction of
Venus and Jupiter, 4 degrees to their partile trine, and 3 degrees to
their partile sextile. He assigns these values indiscriminately, with-
out regard for the benefic or malefic states of the planets involved,
and offers no reason for his attribution of these values. It thus falls
to us, by necessity, to clarify these matters, which are of utmost im-
portance to astrology, in a more specific way, and we must do so
with the aid of physical reasons, as will be explained below.
First, before making a judgment about any partile orplatic as-
pect—whether and to what measure that aspect extrinsically
strengthens or weakens—one must consider, according to Chapter
14 of Book 1695'96 of Astrologia Gallica, whether in truth a con-
94 David Origanus of Amsterdam (1558-1628), best known for his book
Astrologia Natural is.
95 In Chapter 14 of Book 16 of Astrologia Gallica, Morin writes; "Thus the partile
conjunction of two planets occurs when their positions on the Primum Mobile
[vault of heaven] are, on the smallest circle whose circumference connects the
centers of the two planets, no more distant than the sum of the apparent semi-di-
ameters (radii) of the bodies of two planets [as viewed from Earth]. The apparent
semi-diameters ofthe planets, according to Philip van Lansberge (1561-1632) in
Uranometria, are: 17 minutes of arc for the body of the Sun, 15 minutes for the
body ofthe Moon, 1 minute for Mercury, 1 minute 30 seconds for Venus, 45 sec-
onds of arc for Mars, 1 minute 15 seconds for Jupiter, and 50 seconds of arc for
Saturn. Thus, for example, if the Sun and the Moon were on the ecliptic and [the
centers of their bodies] were separated by less than 32 minutes of arc, then be-
cause the sum of the semi-diameters (radii) of the bodies of the two lights as
viewed from Earth is 17 minutes plus 15 minutes = 32 minutes of arc, one would
say that the two lights were in partile conjunction. Porphyry and the Arabs called
such a [partile] conjunction a "union" or an "agglutination" [adhesion] of the
planets involved. The same method is used to determine partile conjunctions of
the remaining planets with the lights or with each other.
But, when the distance is greater than the sum of the apparent semi-diameters of
the bodies of the two planets, but less than the sum of the semi-diameters of the
orbs of influence of the two planets, as previously defined, then one would say
72

=== Page 70 ===
junction or aspect, be it partile or platic, exists between two plan-
ets, or whether the planets are without any aspect at all. Obviously,
we do not want to attribute strength or weakness to a planet errone-
ously or superfluously.
Second, one must be aware that in general the conjunction is
indifferent in and of itself. Clearly, the conjunction of a benefic
planet is benefic per se, and the conjunction of a malefic planet is
malefic. On the other hand, the trine, sextile, and semi-sextile are
inherently benefic, while the opposition, square, and quincunx are
malefic. Furthermore, the opposition and the square of an inher-
ently benefic planet will do no harm unless solely by accident (as
when the benefic planet is extrinsically debilitated and made un-
fortunate). Similarly, the trine, sextile, or semi-sextile of a malefic
will not be helpful by itself but only by accident (obviously, if the
malefic is extrinsically made fortunate). Thus good aspects per se
confer no evil, and bad aspects by themselves confer no good. If
things happen to the contrary, it will be because of the nature of the
planet, or because of its cosmic state, or because of a combination
of the two.
Third, when considering any aspect, apart from the nature of
the aspect, one must carefully assess the importance of the six con-
ditions that follow:
1) The nature of the planet casting the aspect, for the trine of
an inherently benefic planet is more fortunate than the trine of a
malefic. The square of a malefic is more harmful than that of a
benefic.
2) The sign in which the planet casting the aspect resides. The
benefic aspects of a planet posited in its own Domicile or Exalta-
that the two planets are conjunct only platically."
96 Rob Hand, in a personal communication about the meaning of "partile" states:
"the original word in Greek was moirikos and in Latin is partiliter. Both words
mean 'being in the same degree.' We should call exact aspects 'exact' and reserve
the word partile for aspects in the same degree."
73

=== Page 71 ===
tion are the most fortunate, and the bad aspects of a planet in its
Detriment or Fall are the most unfortunate.
3) The House of the chart in which the planet casting the as-
pect is posited, for an aspect from an angular House is more power-
ful, for better or worse, according to the nature of the aspect. And
from a bad House, such as the 12th or the 8th, an aspect is more
harmful, especially if it is the malefic itself per se.
4) The sign into which the aspect falls.97 A square, for exam-
ple, cast by Saturn into Leo, the Detriment of Saturn, is worse than
one cast by Saturn into Taurus; on the other hand, a trine cast by
Jupiter into Cancer is more beneficial than a trine cast by Jupiter
into Scorpio.
5) Whether the planet casting the aspect conjoins another
planet. If it is conjunct a benefic, that planet will have a more fa-
vorable influence with its good aspects; if conjunct a malefic, it
will have a more harmful influence with its bad aspects. In this way
[by conjunction with a benefic or malefic] a planet casting an as-
pect is aided in its favorable or harmful influence. The same holds
true of the conjunction of an aspecting planet with a fixed star.
6) Which Houses of the chart are ruled by the aspecting
planet. For example, the ruler of the Ascendant,98 when conjunct,
square, or opposite a planet that is considered malefic, either inher-
ently or [accidentally] by its celestial or terrestrial state, foreshad-
ows harm to the life of the native. The ruler of the Midheaven" in
its Detriment or Fall, when combust the Sun, afflicts the native's
actions and honor. The same reasoning applies to the rest.
Finally, note that if a planet is in a mixed benefic and malefic
97 The sign that receives the aspect sent by a planet.
98 The Ascendant rules the native's body, life force, and vitality.
99 The Midheaven rules the native's honors, preferment, profession, and actions
in the wider society.
74

=== Page 72 ===
state, or equally fortunate and unfortunate—clearly by its nature
and its state—then the more afflicted the planet, the less good it
will produce, or its beneficence will be tainted with impurity and
difficulty to the extent that the planet is afflicted. Similarly, the
more benefic the planet, the less harm will its square inflict. Thus it
happens frequently that the trine aspect of planets that are malefic,
either inherently or by celestial state and determination—as for ex-
ample, the trine cast by Saturn posited in Leo in the 8th
House100—would cause tremendous difficulty more often than
not. The square aspects of benefic planets, however, would confer
even notable benefits without any harm. If a benefic planet does
not suffer any affliction, it will not cause harm with any of its as-
pects, but rather will confer benefit with all of them. If a malefic
planet, however, is afflicted in any way, none of its aspects will be
beneficial; instead, all its aspects will be harmful, according to the
law of opposites. One must attend straight away to these and simi-
lar circumstances, if one wishes to estimate at first glance and with
minimal confusion the quantity of strength, in both the benefit and
harm, of a given aspect.
Having explained the previous matter, we can deduce the for-
titude or debility, both intrinsic and extrinsic, of any planet in ac-
cordance with the preceding chapters, without taking into account
any of the aspects. For example, the total strength or beneficial in-
fluence of Jupiter would be 12 degrees, but its extrinsic debility or
harmfulness (since Jupiter is not intrinsically evil) would be 8 de-
grees, and this would occur, for example, if Jupiter were in Capri-
corn and conjunct Mars (whose total badness is 10 degrees but
whose extrinsic goodness or strength is 7 degrees).
One must realize that Jupiter strengthens Mars extrinsi-
cally,101 not with his entire strength or beneficence, but only with
100 Leo is Saturn's Detriment. The 8th is a bad House. The trine cast from Saturn
posited in Leo in the 8th House is thus rendered quite harmful.
101 Morin is referring to the above example of Jupiter conjoining Mars in Capri-
corn.
75

=== Page 73 ===
his intrinsic strength, which, as we saw is Chapter 2, is 8 degrees.
This occurs because, whatever may be the extrinsic condition of
Jupiter (through location by sign, by position with respect to the
Sun, etc.), the same conditions will theoretically apply to Mars
[because Mars conjoins Jupiter] and these extrinsic factors should
not be counted twice for Mars,102 especially because their position
in Capricorn means affliction for Jupiter but good fortune for
Mars, but Mars cannot suffer any harm by that [placement in Cap-
ricorn] on account of Jupiter; in other words, it is impossible for
Mars to be made simultaneously fortunate and unfortunate by the
same circumstance. For the same reason, the affliction of Jupiter
by its conjunction with Mars is not transferred back to Mars
through Jupiter: on the contrary, Mars becomes more fortunate
through that conjunction. In addition, Mars harms Jupiter only
with its intrinsic malefic strength, which, as I explained previously
in Chapter 2, consists of 6.5 degrees. Thus the total strength or
goodness of Jupiter will be 12 degrees, and its total extrinsic bad-
ness because of a conjunction with Mars will be 14.5 degrees.103
The total strength of Mars will be 19 degrees,104 and its total bad-
ness, 10 degrees.
The above comments must be understood as pertaining only
to the partile conjunction. Assuming this to be the case, its location
on the Primum Mobile will be affected, not for-
mally—clearly—but only determinatively,105 by the total strength
or debility of one or the other planet, or its goodness or badness, as
the nature of one or the other planet is affected, as will be ex-
plained elsewhere in more detail. If the conjunction of Jupiter and
102 That is, counted once for Mars alone and counted again through its transfer
from Jupiter, which conjoins Mars and shares the same extrinsic circumstances as
Mars.
103 Jupiter starts with 8 degrees of intrinsic strength to which Mars adds 6.5 de-
grees of malefic strength = 14.5 degrees.
104 Presumably because Mars has an extrinsic goodness of 7 degrees to which Ju-
piter adds its 12 degrees of total strength through its conjunction with Mars.
105 That is, through determination in the natal chart.
76

=== Page 74 ===
Mars, however, is platic, then Mars will share in those 12 degrees
of Jupiter's intrinsic strength only in a manner that is proportional
to the distance Mars lies from Jupiter, in accordance with the
semi-diameter of Jupiter's orb, which is 8 degrees as we saw in
Chapter 13 of Book 16 of Astrologia Gallica.106 Thus if Mars lies 5
degrees distant from Jupiter, according to the law of proportionality,
we should figure as follows: 8 degrees [of Jupiter's] semi-diameter
[of orb] is to 12 degrees [of Mars' semi-diameter of orb] as 5 de-
grees [of Jupiter's orb] is to how many [degrees of Mars' orb]? The
answer is, of course, 7.5 degrees107 of extrinsic force for Mars, al-
ways with the understanding that the strength of Jupiter decreases
inversely with the distance from the center toward the periphery of
Jupiter's orb. The same holds true for the remaining planets.
As for the remaining aspects properly speaking, considered in
themselves, one must also understand that any planet, which by its
nature and extrinsic condition is simultaneously both benefic and
malefic (such as Jupiter in Gemini with both the Eye of the Bull
and Mars in the 8th House, or Saturn with Mercury in Aquarius in
the 1 st House), with any of its benefic aspects transmits the en-
tirety of its internal and external goodness, including any received
by conjunction with another planet in proportion to the allotment
of strength of that aspect. This means that it will be proportional to
the arc of the circle that corresponds to the aspect—or, with the
conjunction, proportional to the semicircle that is apportioned to
the conjunction proper, as discussed in Chapter 4 of Book 16 of
Astrologia Gallica. It will certainly be clear to everyone that be-
cause the [conjoining] planet is physically present, the conjunction
is more powerful than the trine. Thus, as was shown earlier, the to-
tal strength of Mars in its conjunction with Jupiter is 19 degrees.
106 In that book Morin argues that the intrinsic strength of a planet can be mea-
sured in degrees of the semi-diameter of the orb of influence of the planet.
107 Note by Robert M. Corre: [Zoltan Mason would measure the conjunction as
follows: To Jupiter Mason assigned an orb of 9 degrees and to Mars, 8 degrees.
Add the two for a total of 17 degrees and take Vi the value. The result is S'/z de-
grees.]
77

=== Page 75 ===
We also saw that the conjunction corresponds to the semicircle or
to 6 zodiacal signs; the trine corresponds to 4 signs; the sextile, to 2
signs, and the semi-sextile to one sign. If we were to perform the cal-
culation beginning with the conjunction according to the law of pro-
portions, we would ask: if 6 signs equals 19 degrees, how many de-
grees of strength correspond to 4 signs by trine, to 2 signs by sextile,
or to 1 sign by semi-sextile? The results are as follows: 12 degrees 40
minutes of strength is allotted to the trine, 5 degrees 20 minutes to the
sextile, and 3 degrees 10 minutes to the semi-sextile. The reason that
the planet transmits its internal and external goodness with its benefic
aspects is the following: the trine of a benefic planet is clearly benefic
in itself by the ratio of the trine [4 signs] to the conjunction [6 signs],
even though the planet may not be extrinsically fortunate. Hence it
will be much more benefic if the planet is extrinsically dignified,
since for that very reason the trine of an accidentally malefic planet
becomes benefic, as has been noted earlier. Clearly any planet,
through both its conjunction and its aspects, acts in accord with its
own nature, state, and the rays or quality of the aspects. Consequently,
a benefic aspect will convey both types of goodness [intrinsic and ex-
trinsic] of the planet. This analysis of the benefic aspects can also be
applied to the malefic aspects by which a planet will also confer the
entirety of its intrinsic and extrinsic badness, that is, its own malefic
nature and any cormption added through its sign placement, position
with respect to the Sun, conjunction with another planet, bad determi-
nation by House location, and so on.
Table of the Strength of the Good Aspects between Mars
and Jupiter, based on Morin's Text
Aspect between Mars
and Jupiter
Conjunction
Trine
Strength of the Aspect
12 degrees 40 minutes
19 degrees
78

=== Page 76 ===
Sextile 5 degrees 20 minutes
Semi-sextile 3 degrees 10 minutes
Thus the most powerful malefic aspect is the opposition,
which Cardan (in his Commentary on text 45 of Book 3 of Ptol-
emy's Quadripartite) considers even more potent with regard to
killing than the conjunction, and next [in potency] are the conjunc-
tion and then the square (of malefics and Anaretas). Cardan does
not assert this opinion without reason, for the conjunction and the
opposition lie on the same diametrical line, which per se makes
them equal to one another in power to do harm. The conjunction,
however, confers the good that it possesses together with the bad,
whereas the opposition confers the bad pure and simple, and from
this fact it follows that the opposition is more harmful than the con-
junction. For this reason, as a minimum it does not confer a lesser
quantity of malefic influx than the conjunction itself. Conse-
quently, given that the conjunction of Jupiter with Mars, as shown
above, was malicious with a measure of 14 degrees 30 minutes,
their opposition will have equally as many degree of badness.
Given that both the conjunction and the opposition are associated
with the semicircle or with 6 zodiacal signs; the square with 3
signs, and the quincunx with 1 sign, if one does the calculation be-
ginning with the opposition, according to the law of proportional-
ity, one will find as before: 7 degrees 15 minutes of badness for the
square and 2 degrees 25 minutes of badness for the quincunx. The
same applies to all the rest. Furthermore, one must understand that
the above calculations apply only to partile aspects, because in the
case of platic aspects, if one wishes to be exact in these matters,
one perform do the same calculations as were demonstrated previ-
ously for the conjunction, which to my mind, however, does not
seem necessary.
79

=== Page 77 ===
Table of the Malefic Strength of the Bad Aspects between
Mars and Jupiter, based on Morin's Text
Aspect between Mars and Jupiter Strength of the Aspect
Conjunction 14 degrees 30 minutes
Opposition 14 degrees 30 minutes
Square
Quincunx
7 degrees 15 minutes
2 degrees 25 minutes
Finally, we must here point out that applying planetary con-
junctions and aspects are more powerful than separating ones.
Also, sinister aspects are more forceful than dexter ones, at least
between planets, since sinister aspects follow the sequence of the
signs, according to the movement of the planets proper, but dexter
aspects precede them, according to the primary movement, which
is not proper to the planets except perhaps accidentally in the case
of retrograde planets. One must, however, state the opposite with
regard to the aspects of planets to the House cusps toward which
the planets are carried by their primary movement. One must also
keep in mind what we explained in Chapters 2 and 3, Section 2, of
Book 16 of Astrologia Gallica, so that, based on what was written
there, one judiciously adds to or reduces the strength of the aspects
that we encounter by what was said previously. In addition to ev-
erything that has been said above regarding what is necessary to
measure and determine the strength of the aspects, it appears nec-
essary to add the following:
• First: through their aspects, benefic planets confer good
things. Clearly they do so easily and amply with good
108 Morin regarded the 8th and 12th Houses as bad because they signify harmful
conditions for the native. He considered the 7th House as partially bad because, in
addition to marriage, it is the House of wars, lawsuits, and open enemies.
80

=== Page 78 ===
aspects if the planet is well disposed and in a good House of
the figure; but with the bad aspects, they confer good only
with difficulty. With bad aspects, however, even a good
planet will be harmful when it is in a bad celestial state or
when it occupies a bad House108 of the chart. Thus the
benefic nature of a planet can be superceded by the
malignity of the aspect and by the planet's bad celestial or
terrestrial state, but more so when both states [celestial and
terrestrial] are bad. One must make the opposite judgment of
inherently malefic planets. Clearly a planet that is entirely
benefic by its nature, celestial state, and location by House in
the chart promises remarkable good fortune by its
conjunction or aspects, especially by its good aspects; but a
planet that is entirely malefic by its nature, celestial state, and
House location in the figure portends appreciable evil by its
conjunction or aspects, especially by its bad aspects. When a
planet is simultaneously both dignified and afflicted, it
confers both good and evil, or difficulties and mixtures of
fortune, according to the tenor of the aspects, by dint of their
being fortunate or unfortunate. The reason that an entirely
fortunate planet causes good by its opposition is the
following: suppose the Midheaven is directed to the
opposition of Jupiter, which happens to be entirely fortunate
[by nature, celestial state, and House position, etc.], then this
direction will not be without an effect on account of the
strength of the promittor and the significator. Such an effect
will not be bad, both because of the nature of Jupiter and
because Jupiter is very dignified. Consequently, the effect
[of that direction] will be good but will not be without some
difficulty because of the badness of the [opposition] aspect.
One must think the opposite of a direction of the Midheaven
to the trine109 of a very afflicted Mars.
109 Note by Robert M. Corre; [Morin seems to contradict himself here: I agree
with the difficulty introduced by the opposition aspect of a benefic in good zodia-
cal state to the MC, but the contradiction lies in how a planet is received. For ex-
ample, if Jupiter is in Sagittarius and by primary motion comes to the opposition,
81

=== Page 79 ===
• Second: a benefic planet or aspect coming after a benefic
one will make it even more beneficial, especially if the
aspect falls in an appropriate place of the figure and
proceeds from a planet posited in an equally adequate
location. A malefic planet or aspect, however, coming after
a malefic one will make it more unfortunate, especially if
the aspect falls into a place of the same [malefic] caliber in
the figure and proceeds from a planet posited in a position
that is equally unfortunate.110
• Third: as regards mutual aspects of the planets, one must
above all observe their determinations, since the ruler of the
Ascendant posited in trine to the ruler of the 10th House is
greatly fortified by it, especially if the latter is benefic and
strong. If, however, [the ruler of the Ascendant is] posited
in square to the ruler of the 12th or 8th House, [especially if
the latter is] malefic by nature and badly disposed, it will be
extremely unfortunate.
• Fourth: a planet connected by conjunction or by the same
aspect to two other planets has more influence over the
the opposition will take place in Gemini, a sign in which Jupiter is in Detriment.
Jupiter is received in Detriment. This is an issue 1 discuss in a Quarter 2 lesson of
the Forum on Astrology course on Morin.See page Chapter VIII, page 70 ff. in
Astrosynthesis.]
Pepita Sanchis Llacer, however, feels there is no contradiction because what has
moved is the cusp and not Jupiter. Note by Pepita Sanchis Llacer: [Let us sup-
pose, for example, a natal Jupiter at 15 of Sagittarius and a natal MC at 15 of Can-
cer. About 30 years more or less by primary directions, the directed MC will have
moved to the 15th degree of Gemini and thus be in opposition to natal Jupiter.
This opposition suggests a fortunate event related to one's home and worldly po-
sition, but with some difficulty.]
110 Note by Pepita Sanchis Llacer: [For example, suppose that the Ascendant lies
at a 0 degrees Aries with Saturn at 2 degrees of Libra (Saturn in opposition to the
Ascendant) and Jupiter at 3 degrees of Sagittarius (Jupiter trine the Ascendant).
Then a malefic (Saturn) adversely affects the native's body (as signified by the
Ascendant), but the individual recovers because of Jupiter. If Jupiter, on the other
hand, were at 2 degrees of Sagittarius with Saturn at 3 degrees of Libra, the situa-
tion would be worse, because matters begin well (Jupiter trine Ascendant), but
shortly thereafter things deteriorate without hope (Saturn opposite Ascendant).]
82

=== Page 80 ===
closer of the two [aspected planets], unless the aspect [to the
closer planet] is separating; but if the distance to each planet
is equal, it [the aspecting planet] has more influence over
the planet to which it is applying. If both are joined in a
partile manner, one must consider which of them would
predominate over the location of the aspected planet or
which is more in harmony with its significance, for that one
will take precedence.
• Fifth: the more powerful a planet is to produce good or evil,
the more forceful its aspects will be.
• Sixth: the aspects concur with the antiscions111 when the
planets are at the very beginning, middle, or end of the
signs; because of that the aspects [from those positions at
the very beginning, middle, or ends of signs] are more
powerful, as, for example, a square and an antiscion from
the middle of Leo to the middle of Taurus.112
111 Antiscions are the fourth way that the Houses determine the planetary influ-
ences. On page 25 of Astrosynthesis, Morin writes; "The planetary influxes are
determined towards certain categories of effects by the Houses. Four determining
factors are here evident: 1) the position in a House; 2) the essential Dignities; 3)
the aspect; 4) the antiscions."
112 By definition, an antiscion is the reflection of a point on the zodiac circle in the
solsticial, or Capricorn/Cancer axis. Thus Aries is reflected or has its antiscion in
Virgo, Taurus in Leo, Gemini in Cancer, Libra in Pisces, Scorpio in Aquarius, and
Sagittarius in Capricorn. In Morin's example, a planet at 15 Taurus has its
antiscion at 15 Leo and is also square that point in Leo. Hence a planet at 15 Leo
will be both in square and in antiscion connection to the one at 15 Taurus, a dou-
ble influence.
Regarding planets at the very beginning and very end of signs, consider the exam-
ple of a planet at the beginning of Taurus, which has its antiscion at the end of
Leo. For example, the antiscion (or reflection) of 1st degree (0-1 degrees) of
Taurus is in the last or 30th degree (29-30 degrees) of Leo. Planets occupying
these two points will be connected by antiscion and will also be in trine aspect,
since the 30th or last degree of Leo within one degree of the 1st degree of Virgo,
which is in partile trine to the 1 st degree of Taurus. Thus two planets, one in the
first degree of Taurus and the other in the last degree of Leo will be connected by
both antiscion and trine aspect.
83

=== Page 81 ===
• Seventh: on the oblique sphere,113 the same House of the
figure can receive two aspects from the same planet. In this
case, look to the one closer to the cusp and to the one more
inherently powerful (for example, the square is stronger
than the sextile) and also look to the one that is more
congruent in meaning with the House, and judge the tenor
of it.
• Eighth: not only efficacious are the conjunctions between
planets and first magnitude fixed stars, but also effective are
the aspects between them, at least the major and most
partile ones, since the fixed stars have their own movement
through the signs of the zodiac as do the planets. This is true
not only of the fixed stars that lie near the Ecliptic, but also
of those that are more distant [from the Ecliptic]. If,
according to Ptolemy, one says that the Sun is joined to a
fixed star when they both occupy the same degree of
[zodiacal] longitude or the same circle of latitude [above or
below the ecliptic], then even if they are separated by 60
degrees [of latitude], at that distance they would be in a
sextile relationship, and thus they would be conjunct
[zodiacally] and sextile [in latitude] at the same time.
• Ninth: according to the Cardan's Commentary (Chapter 4,
Book 4, p. 306), the planets, when aspecting each other
from their respective Domiciles or Exaltations, have a
pronounced effect, which will be obviously fortunate with
good aspects and unfortunate with bad ones. If only one of
the planets occupies its Domicile or Exaltation, then that
planet will prevail over the other. On the other hand, if both
planets are posited in their respective Detriment or Fall,
they will be quite potent in producing a pernicious effect,
especially by a bad aspect, and will be incapable of
113 Morin appears to be saying that aspects can be measured in Right Ascension
along the Celestial Equator and in Oblique Ascension along the Ecliptic or path of
the Sun. Because of the obliquity of the Ecliptic, being about 23/2 degrees from
the Equator, it is possible that a sextile along the Equator, when projected onto the
Ecliptic, will look like a square.
84

=== Page 82 ===
producing any good, even by a good aspect. If only one of
the planets is located in its Detriment or Fall, that
[debilitated] planet would impede the effect of the other. If
both planets are received in their respective dignities, there
will certainly be a noticeable effect for good or evil,
according to whether the reception is good or bad and
whether the aspect between the planets is harmonious or
unfortunate. If only one planet is received by the other, that
planet will be dominated by the influx of the planet
receiving it, for clearly the [receiving] planet governs and
prevails over it. If both planets are received in their
respective debilities, they will produce an effect only with
extreme difficulty—at least, any happy and complete
effect—as they are alienated from their respective dignities
and thus become contrary and loathe to do anything. If only
one planet is received in the debility of the other, the former
planet is impeded by the latter. Planets that aspect one
another from their own triplicities signify accord and
consensus, but from triplicities other than their own, signify
discord and contrariety on account of that."4 If only one
planet occupies its own triplicity, the matter signified will
falter. Both planets being peregrine will signify a weakness
of performance and an impoverishment of the means to
accomplish the ends. Furthermore, every planet that
enhances or afflicts by its conjunction or aspect does so by
means of the things and persons that the planet represents
by its own nature (according to our table of the rulerships of
the planets"5) and by its determinations in the celestial
figure. In this fact resides a great part of the science of
astrological judgment.
114 Note by Robert M. Corre: [Morin is pointing out that the complementary ele-
ment is in opposition and the other two elements produce a square.]
115 Morin's table of planetary rulerships can be found in James Holden's transla-
tion of Morin's Book 22 on Directions, pages 209-223, published by the Ameri-
can Federation of Astrologers.
85

=== Page 83 ===
Furthermore, the celestial strength of any planet consists in
what was said previously and because of that is universal and com-
mon to the entire sublunar world. The more power a planet has be-
cause of this, the more effectively it acts upon sublunar affairs both
in general and in particular, to the extent that the latter is deter-
mined by its position or rulership over the Houses of the figure.
One must caution that, given the fact that strength united is stron-
ger than strength dispersed, for the honors of the native it is better
to have Sun in Aries in the Midheaven and in trine with Jupiter
from the Ascendant, than to have the Midheaven and its ruler sepa-
rately dignified. A planet that is entirely fortunate by its nature and
its celestial and terrestrial state confers only the good, easily and in
abundance; but if a planet is entirely unfortunate, then the contrary
holds true.
86

=== Page 84 ===
CHAPTER XIII
The Extrinsic Strength of the Planets arising from
their Positions on the same Major Circle as
Another Planet or Prominent Fixed Star.
THE MAJOR circles are understood here to be those of lati-
tude,1 16 declination,117 position, and parallel. When two planets, or
a planet and a prominent fixed star, are located together on one of
these circles, we say that they acquire an extrinsic strength, but
they do so especially when they are either on the same parallel [of
declination] or on the same circle of [zodiacal] position.
The reason for each of these matters is as follows: inasmuch
as two planets lying on the same circle of latitude have the same
degree of longitude on the Ecliptic, whatever their northerly or
southerly latitude might be, because of that the Sun and the other
planets, when traversing the zodiac by their own motion, as they
pass through that degree with its longitude, will be conjunct, at
least in longitude, with the positions of the cited planets, which
will be stimulated by that toward their own effects.
Planets located on the same circle of northerly or southerly
116 The Earth's Equator is a great circle known as a parallel of terrestrial latitude
corresponding to the latitude 0 degrees. Terrestrial maps use a coordinate system
of parallels of terrestrial latitude and meridians of terrestrial longitude to locate
places on the surface of the Earth. Celestial latitude, on the other hand, is the an-
gular distance of a planet north or south of the Sun's path, i.e., the Ecliptic.
117 Declination refers to the angular position of a planet north or south of the Ce-
lestial Equator.
87

=== Page 85 ===
declination [above or below the Celestial Equator] have the same
right ascension.118 Because of that, the Midheaven will be directed
to both planets simultaneously. In such a direction [of the MC], if
the two bodies are mutually compatible, one reinforces the effects
of the other, as, for example, Jupiter and Venus or Spica of Virgo,
and through that [compatibility] has a bearing upon the dignity and
good fortune of the actions; in contrast, for Mars in Taurus with
Caput Algol, danger and lethal action. If, however, the two bodies
are of contrary meaning, they will block, degrade, or obliterate
what was signified.
Planets on the same circle of position have the same oblique
ascension119 on it; thus they are directed simultaneously to any
other significators. One must consider them as we did above in
what we described as consensus or divergence.
Finally, planets on the same parallel are in their respective
antiscions.120 Because of that, another planet being directed to one
of them is simultaneously directed to the antiscion of the other.
The two planets mutually strengthen each other thereby, or [there
118 Right ascension of a heavenly body is its distance eastward from the first point
of Aries to the point where the great circle through both the Pole and the body in-
tersects the Equator. It is so called because in a right sphere the meridian passing
through the object will coincide with the horizon when the object is rising (as-
cending) or setting.
119 The oblique ascension is the arc of the equator between the first point of Aries
and the point of the equator which rises with a heavenly body, reckoned forwards
according to the order of the signs.
120 Antiscions are reflections across the Cancer/Capricorn or solsticial axis. Thus,
by definition, the degrees of the Ecliptic that are antiscions of one another are
those points on the Ecliptic where the Sun has the same declination. For example,
the Sun crosses the Equator with 0 degrees declination at 0 Aries and travels north
for about 11 V2 degrees of declination before entering Taurus. In August, the Sun
enters Virgo at 11 V2 degrees of north declination and descends toward the Equa-
tor at 0 degrees declination at 0 Libra. Thus the antiscion degrees of Aries lie in
Virgo but in the reverse order, i.e., the antiscion of 1 Aries is 29 Virgo, of 2 Aries
is 28 Virgo, etc., because at the corresponding antiscion points of Aries and Virgo
the Sun has the same declination.
88

=== Page 86 ===
is a mutual fortification between] a planet and a prominent fixed
star, whose antiscion is no less relevant than that of a planet, at
least if its parallel follows the ecliptic.
Having sufficiently detailed the extrinsic fortification of plan-
ets by their celestial state, we will next turn our attention to the
strength that arises from their terrestrial state, that is, from their po-
sition in the Houses of the figure.
89

=== Page 87 ===
CHAPTER XIV
The Intrinsic Strength and Quality of the Houses of
the Horoscope. Also, the Strength accruing to the
Planets through their placement in the Houses.
IN THIS chapter we will discuss the intrinsic strength of each
House of the celestial figure (a topic about which the ancient as-
trologers left us a great deal of confusing and contradictory infor-
mation), and clearly our intent is to record the quantity of strength
of the planets that arises from the Houses themselves, for any
planet will be said to be extrinsically fortified by a House to what-
ever extent that House possesses strength. Those Houses in which
planets act more powerfully and noticeably are considered more
powerful than the other Houses.
Ptolemy (in the last chapter of Book 1 of the Quadripartite),
when discussing the general form of the Houses and spaces, wrote
that planets in the Midheaven or in the House succedent to
it—namely, the 11th House—are more effective; followed by
those [planets] on the horizon and in their succedent Houses—the
2nd and the 8th—but especially the one on the eastern horizon [the
Ascendant] and its succedent House, the 2nd; much less so in the
Imum Coeli and its succedent House, the 5th. Outside these places
[Ptolemy said] the planets are completely weak and without force.
Thus, according to Ptolemy, planets have the most strength in the
angles of the figure, less in the succedent Houses, and in the cadent
Houses they are completely depleted [of strength]—a claim, how-
ever, that is contrary to experience because planets in the 9th, 12th,
and even the 6th House do produce noticeable effects, in accord
91

=== Page 88 ===
with the nature of the House, as is demonstrated in the daily prac-
tice [of astrology]; and it [Ptolemy's claim] conflicts even with
reason, for, according to the Elementary Principles, Saturn, badly
disposed in the 12th House, should very effectively signify sick-
nesses, hidden enemies, and imprisonment.
Cardan, in his Commentary, misled by this false opinion,
which we have rejected elsewhere—that the planets do not act on
this sublunar world with a quality other than light—perverted this
doctrine of Ptolemy, selecting the 11 th House as of primary
strength and preferring the 9th to the 8th [in strength], and in addi-
tion ranking the 4th [in strength] after the cadent 6th House. His
principal reason is that when posited in the 11th, 9th, and 6th
Houses, the Sun illuminates and warms [the Earth] more effec-
tively.121
At the end of his Commentary (Chapter 12, Book 1), however,
Cardan says otherwise— and with so little congruity with his own
earlier statements that he assumes the stars act via their light and
then arranges the Houses according to their strength as follows: 10,
1,7, 11,9, etc.122 Cardan further states that there is no doubt about
this fact, even though he later contradicts himself, or at least ties a
knot of confusion, when he dismisses his argument about the light
[of the stars] and puts the 1 st House ahead of the 10th [in strength]
121 Note by Robert M. Corre: [So we have the issue of theory and reason versus
life experience. My experience supports Zoltan Mason's comments in regard to
giving precedence to the angles with regard to the issue of strength, but there is a
caveat: the 4th represents childhood but also the 2nd half of life, so we may say
that planets in the 4th gain quantitative value with advancing age.]
122 Note by Robert M. Corre: [Perhaps Cardan's argument is that we can reason
that the 1 Oth House is stronger using the metaphor of the daily cycle. The Sun is
most intense when it is overhead at local noon when it is conjunct the MC in con-
trast to its lesser intensity when rising, viz: conjunct the Ascendant. On the other
hand, we can argue that the 1 st has greater value as it represents physical life and
by its strength or weakness, the person will either move ahead in life or become
servile. As a consequence, the direct value of the strength of the other Houses for
the person has less importance.]
92

=== Page 89 ===
because the 1 st House refers to the life, spirit, and body [of the na-
tive] and is more suitable [as being stronger]. Continuing, Cardan
places the 12th House ahead of the 8th because the 12th House is
rising,123 he leaves the 2nd House below the 8th [in strength] be-
cause it is in the matutine [morning] twilight, after this he places
the 6th, because it is respectively in twilight. He sets aside Houses
3, 4, and 5 as clearly devoid of light; thus the 4th House, even
though cardinal,124 would be the lowest of all in both position and
in strength.125 These are things that Cardan asserts at the end of his
Book 1, when he says that the 4th House signifies nothing by itself,
i.e., that it does not confer any strength, but that only a planet,
when posited there, acquires significant strengths, This last asser-
tion is again contradictory because, if the 4th House were signifi-
cantly weaker than the other Houses and had no strength per se,
then from whence would the planet in the 4th House acquire those
great strengths? And why would it not receive them [the strengths]
equally or even more so in the 5th House, which, considered in its
totality, participates no less in the vespertine [evening] twilight
than the 2nd House does in the matutine [morning] twilight, and
which is ftirthermore in trine to the 1 st House? Other astrologers
have philosophized in another way about this matter, but also in a
confusing manner and with no fundamental coherence, as one can
see in the writings of Julius Firmicus Matemus, Chapters 19 & 20,
and in Origanus, Part 3, p. 433, when he attributes 4 degrees of
strength to the 5th House, but 2 degrees to the 9th, and, on the other
hand, 4 degrees of strength to the 6th House. All these arguments
are completely devoid of reason. I have wanted to explain these
matters briefly so that those who come after may also know how
123 Ptolemy points out that the weakness of the 12th is due to the "mist or vapors"
that arise from the Earth, thereby blocking the influence of the Sun and the plan-
ets.
124 Morin appears to be making an analogy between the angular 4th House and the
cardinal sign Cancer.
125 Note by Robert M. Corre: [The distinction of weakest House cannot go to an
angular House. Zoltan Mason said that the 3rd is the weakest House, as it is below
the horizon and cadent from the horizon.]
93

=== Page 90 ===
incomplete astrology has been regarding this topic.
Hence, in my opinion, the strengths proper of the Houses de-
pend on the following points:
First: the four angular Houses (1, 10, 7, and 4) are inherently
more powerful than the other Houses, even according to the expe-
rience of Juan Franco Ofusio—a person who hated astrology, cited
by us both in Chapter 2 of our Book 16 and in the second section of
Chapter 1 of our Book 17—and not without reason, since the divi-
sion of mundane space into the Houses of the celestial figure is
performed by first dividing [the celestial figure] at the horizon and
at the meridian, which cuts the ecliptic or the equator into four
quadrants; second, the circles of position traced by the respective
sections of the horizon and the meridian also divide the ecliptic or
the equator. Thus the points of the sections of the horizon and the
meridian are of primary and principal importance, as much by na-
ture as by force. They are commonly called "cardinal" but I call
them the "first of their triplicity" according to Chapter 5, Section 1
of my Book 17. The remaining Houses, as much by nature as by
force, are of only secondary and lesser importance. Therefore for
any planet one must consider in which triplicity126 of the celestial
figure it lies, that is, in the triplicity of life, actions, union, or pas-
sion, for if it were in a cardinal House of that triplicity, it would
also be much more powerful in that triplicity by House.
Second: If the angles of the celestial figure are compared with
regard to strength, it is absolutely certain that the cardinal angle or
point of the east [the Ascendant] is the most powerful of all. The
most compelling reason for this is that the most active effect of the
126 In 1659 George Wharton translated Morin's 1629 paper entitled The Cabal of
the Twelve Houses Astrological into English. In this paper Morin argues that there
are four grand trines in the chart, each beginning with an angle and proceeding in
clockwise order. The grand trine (or triplicity) of life consists of the 1 st, 9th, and
5th Houses, the grand trine of actions consists of Houses 10, 6, and 2; the grand
trine of union consists of Houses 7, 3 and 11; and the grand trine of passion con-
sists of Houses 4, 12, and 8. (Thanks to Tom Callahan for this reference.)
94

=== Page 91 ===
heavens comes from the Ascendant, namely, the production or the
emergence on this world's horizon'27 of a thing or a person, ac-
cording to Chapter 2, Section 1 of my Book 17. One can further
state that the strength [of the Ascendant] is never thwarted in its ef-
fect, that the rising degree always produces offspring and never
fails to exert its effect until the death or destruction of the thing. On
the other hand, for many individuals the force of the other angles
(such as the Midheaven for enterprises, honors, or mastery; or that
of the Occident [the Descendant] for marriage, etc.) may never
manifest, to the extent that they may spend their entire lives pursu-
ing leisure, being inactive, not distinguishing themselves, or re-
maining celibate; or at the very least these things may manifest for
only a period of time and not endure for the life of the native. Next
in strength to the Ascendant comes the Midheaven, then the De-
scendant, and finally the Imum Coeli.
Third; a given House has the most power over those matters
that it essentially represents. Given that actions and honors are es-
sential meanings of the 10th House, then that House will be the
strongest of all when referring to actions and reputation. Similarly,
because sickness, imprisonment, and [secret] enemies are essential
meanings of the 12th House, then that House will be the most pow-
erful of all with regard to illnesses, prisons, and [hidden] enemies.
The same principle applies to the remaining Houses: clearly, the
first House, or the Ascendant, [will be most powerful] in questions
of life, habits, character; the 2nd House for riches, etc. This is true
is because any signification for man is assigned first and per se to
127 Note by Robert M. Corre, emphasis (italics) also added by RMC; [This is THE
FUNDAMENTAL CONSIDERATION. Refer to page 22 in Astrosynthesis
where Morin says: 'The extent of its action is determined first by the constitution
of the subject upon which it acts, and second, by the subject's capacity to receive
and to react to the impression. The direction of the action is determined by the rel-
ative positions held by the different parts of the sky in the Natal Figure...." This
point is my fundamental drumbeat that I want people to take away after finishing
the Forum On Astrology course. Nothing but nothing supercedes this consider-
ation and this is why I go back to a discussion of this again and again, but each
time from a different vantage point.]
95

=== Page 92 ===
some space [of the celestial figure], which depends for its realiza-
tion on the sign or the planet that occupies that space or House, on
the planet that rules that House, and on the planets that are con-
nected with the House ruler or that aspect that House [cusp], in
each of which a primary reference to that House always manifests
for us. The House itself is configured in this way by those things
that it essentially represents, and therefore, in such affairs, it will
be the most powerful of all. It does not matter that in the figure
there are four triplicities of Houses of the same nature, such as
Houses 1, 9, and 5 in the triplicity of life, for although Houses 1,9,
and 5 are of the same generic nature, nonetheless they differ in
their specific and proper nature. Obviously the 1st House is the
House of life of the native in himself; the 9th, the life of the native
in the Divinity; and the 5th, the life of the native in his children.
Whichever of these Houses is referred to in its essential signifi-
cance will stand out as more powerful than the others. The same
applies to the rest.
Fourth: for the remaining spaces [of the celestial figure] one
must pay attention to the division of the circle into two hemi-
spheres,128 one ascending and encompassing the spaces or Houses
numbered 3, 2,1, 12,11, and 10; and the other, descending and en-
compassing the remaining Houses (9, 8, 7, 6, 5, and 4). One must
also keep in mind that, both for the succedent and the cadent
Houses, if we compare them with one another on the same hemi-
sphere, a House that is above the Earth is stronger than one that is
below the Earth. Thus, regarding the succedent Houses, the 11th
House stands in strength above the 2nd and the 8th House stands
above the 5th;129 and regarding the cadent Houses, the 12th is
128 Morin is referring to a division of the natal chart into eastern and western hemi-
spheres, divided at the meridian.
129 Note by Robert M. Corre: [Yes, of itself and relative to the 5th. On the other
hand, the 5th is part of the 1-5-9 triplicity of life that represents the person him-
self, while the 8th is inconjunct with regard to the Ascendant. When planets are
found in honor in the 5th or the 9th from the 1 st, they become very important in re-
gard to a person's behavior.]
96

=== Page 93 ===
stronger than the 3rd, and the 9th is more powerful than the 6th.
There is no room for doubt about these facts, for, by common
agreement among astrologers and by the very truth of the matter
the subterranean Houses, in equal conditions, are weaker than
the Houses above the Earth130. Nor can there be any doubt about
the 1st House, whose cusp marks the dawn and the ascent of the
Sun.
In the different hemispheres of the chart, however, with re-
gard to the succedent and cadent Houses above the Earth, the
House whose cusp is more elevated above the lower one takes pre-
cedence. Thus, of the succedent Houses, the 11th is superior to the
8th, and the 2nd to the 5th, because the cusp of the 11th is higher
than that of the 8th, and the cusp of the 2nd is higher than that of the
5th. For the same reason, of the cadent Houses, the 9th surpasses
the 12th, and the 6th outstrips the 3rd. Thus the earlier opinion of
Ptolemy is perfectly confirmed, namely that the angular Houses
take precedence [in strength] over the succedent ones, and these in
turn over the cadent Houses. These arguments demonstrate defini-
tively the truth of that coherent doctrine in totality.
With these premises, given that we have said that the angle
of the east [the Ascendant] is the most powerful, followed by
the Midheaven, then the Descendant and finally the Imum
Coeli, and we have distinguished the twelve Houses, different
by their gender, by the triplicity of the same generic nature,
therefore [we can state]: to the 1st House is given 6 degrees of
strength; to the 2nd House, 3 degrees; to the 3rd House, 0.5 de-
grees; to the 4th House, 4.5 degrees; to the 5th House, 2.5 de-
grees; to the 6th House, 1 degree; to the 7th House, 5 degrees; to
the 8th House, 3.5 degrees; to the 9th House, 2 degrees; to the
10th House, 5.5 degrees; to the 11th House, 4 degrees; and to
the 12th House 1.5 degrees, as can be seen in the accompanying
130 There is probably an erratum in the original Latin text in which Morin writes
that the subterranean Houses are weaker than the subterranean Houses. He must
mean that they are weaker than the houses above the horizon.
97

=== Page 94 ===
figure.131 The distribution of strength will be according to what
was said earlier. The triplicity of life, the basis of the rest, is one
degree more powerful than each of the rest.132 Nonetheless,
Hermes133 in aphorism 47, agrees with us about the angles, but re-
garding the rest, ranks the Houses in order of strength as the 11th,
2nd, 5th, 9th, 3rd, 8th, with the 6th and the 12th as the worst. This
arrangement, however, is in error, as is clear from what was said
above.
Table of the Strengths of the Houses according to Morin
House Strength in decimals (e.g.,
1.5 = J deg 30 min)
1st 6
2nd 3
3rd 0.5
4th 4.5
5th 2.5
131 Note by Robert M. Corre; [Here again Morin is using numbers to suggest
something. The implication here is that by his attempt to quantify quality, he
hopes to convey a "feeling" to the reader of the weigh or potency of a planet in one
of the angles relative to the other Houses, and so on.]
132 The triplicity of life accounts for the very existence and life of the native, hence
it is given more strength.
133 The name Hermes was illegible in the Spanish translator's copy. Note by
James Holden; [The illegible name is 'Hermes'. The 47th aphorism of his
'Centiloquy' reads, "The first of the Angles is the Ascendant: the second, the
M.C., the third, the seventh House; the fourth Imum Coeli. But of the rest of the
places, the eleventh is first, then the second; after that, the fifth; then the ninth, and
third; but the sixth, eighth, and twelfth, are accounted the worst." (Henry Coley's
translation in his Clavis Astrologiae Elimala, London: Ben Tooke & Thos.
Sawbridge, 1676, pp. 333-334.]
98

=== Page 95 ===
6th 1
7th 5
8th 3.5
9th 2
10th 5.5
Uth 4
12th 1.5
Ho
6
\
Sio
fbrcl-
riiinrt non ponutw
tur pcnci Utmco v«l
quafiratc« clrtnmta-
In* Pl4f>etM cffaQ* (
fcdpmfca cwihbvsa
influeoii.
T . -Xn
T
4'3o
Morin's original illustration of the relative strengths of the Houses ^Jhe
Latin text in Morin's diagram reads: "These strengths of the Houses are not
put with the light or the elemental qualities produced by the Planets, but with
their force of influencing" (translation by James Holden).
99

=== Page 96 ===
In addition, these degrees of strength are understood to be ei-
ther for good or for bad, according to the specific nature of the
House. Two Houses are essentially malefic in themselves:134
namely the 12th, which is the House of sicknesses, imprisonment,
enemies, etc., and the 8th, which is the House of death. The re-
maining Houses are benefic, that is, representative of desirable
goods and matters, although by accident, the 6th House of servants
and the 2nd of wealth135 may often be malefic on account of their
opposition to the 12th and the 8th respectively. This is not illogi-
cal, since it is not uncommon that a servant is also a secret enemy
and that riches are the cause of death; but in such cases one must
have malefic planets posited in the 6th or 2nd Houses, or the rulers
of these Houses must be in bad aspect to the Ascendant or [in bad
aspect] to the ruler of the Ascendant.
One must not hold the opinion shared by common astrologers
that any planet will be beneficially fortified in any of the benefic
Houses in accord with the quantity of strength of that House. Such
a belief is patently false, because Saturn, when unfortunate by its
celestial state in the 1st or the 10th House, because of that [House
placement], will be much more noxious for the essential significa-
tions of those Houses.136 Thus, when Ptolemy said that planets in
the angles are greatly fortified, this must be understood as being
strengthened either to benefit or to do harm. Otherwise, it would be
erroneous because a planet occupying any House is fortified ac-
cording to the degrees [of strength] of that House, to confer bene-
fits or the contrary, according to the nature of the space, to the ex-
tent that the planet is benefic or malefic per se or by its celestial
134 Elsewhere Morin says that the 7th House is partially malefic because it refers
to lawsuits and wars.
135 Note by Robert M. Corre: [Zoltan Mason would say that the 2nd is unfortunate
because it is the 8th of the 7th, that is, the House of death of a partner. A bad 2nd
House could mean the premature death of a partner and if that partner is the bread-
winner in the family, it spells disaster for the person who does not work.]
136 Note by Robert M. Corre: [A planet does not get qualitatively better or worse
by House position.]
100

=== Page 97 ===
state. One should not understand the benefic planets to be only Ju-
piter and Venus, but rather any planet [will be benefic] when well
disposed by its celestial state: Mars and Saturn in such a [good]
state acquire power to confer benefits; and, since the planets can-
not put that ability to benefit into effect more so than in the benefic
Houses, when they are posited there [in benefic Houses] we say
that they are made fortunate by those [benefic] Houses.
Apart from this, someone might object: it is contrary to both
reason and experience that cadent Houses are considered so weak.
It is certainly contrary to reason because the 9th and the 5th Houses
are on the same half of the sky, but the 9th House lies above the
Earth with the same elevation as the 10th House; the 5th House, on
the other hand, lies below the Earth, adjoining the 4th House.
Therefore the 9th House will be more powerful than the 5th. It is
also contrary to experience because planets in the 12th and the 6th
Houses often give rise to greater and more noticeable effects than
those same planets are posited in the 5th or even the 11 th Houses.
My response is as follows:
First: This same person would have to object more strenu-
ously to Ptolemy, Cardan, and the ancients who ascribed scarcely
any strength to the cadent Houses. Also, the 5th House is
succedent but the 9th is cadent, and any House above the Earth
ought not to be considered stronger than one below the Earth; for,
the 12th would then [have to be considered] stronger than the 4th,
which is cardinal in its own triplicity, and such a conclusion is ab-
surd. Finally, the planets that produce the most noticeable effects
in the 12th or the 6th Houses are typically malefic by their own na-
ture, their celestial state, or a combination of both. According to
the congruence of the space or House with the nature or quality of
the planet posited in that House, there will arise a much greater ef-
fect, which ought to be attributed more to that conformity than to
the House itself. Thus Saturn badly disposed by celestial state in
the 12th House threatens great calamities of illness, imprisonment,
etc., and Jupiter in the 2nd well disposed presages great wealth.
101

=== Page 98 ===
The Sun exalted in the 10th House indicates great honors, and so
on for the rest.
102

=== Page 99 ===
CHAPTER XV
What is the Most Powerful Point in any House and
What Are the Proper Limits of Influence of the
Houses: a Question of Great Import for Astrology.
THE ANCIENTS defined the strength of the Houses with a certain
measure and attributed the strength of the entire House to a planet
posited in that House, regardless of whether the planet was at the be-
ginning, the middle, or the end of the House. For example, since they
granted 5 degrees of strength of the 1 st House, they said that Saturn in
the 1 st House was strengthened by 5 degrees whether it was situated
at the cusp, in the middle, or at the end of that House. This assertion,
however, is contrary to reason, as we shall demonstrate.
Further, although each House is delimited by its own circles
of position, which encompass between them 30 degrees on the
equator, nonetheless [the ancients] wanted the last five degrees of
a House, by primary movement, to belong to the following House.
For example, the last five degrees of the 9th House belong to the
10th House; thus, a planet in the last five degrees of the 9th House
is said to be in the 10th House, because it was evidently observed
that a planet in those final degrees has an influence on the mean-
ings of the following House.
Thus, when discussing the aphetic137 [prorogative] Houses
137 According to Devore's Encyclopedia of Astrology, page 9, "apheta" or
"prorogator" is the "planet or place that exercises an influence over the life and
death of the native." See also the Loeb edition of Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos, p. 270,
footnote 1.
103

=== Page 100 ===
(which in his opinion are only the 1st, 10th, 9th, and 11th), Ptol-
emy (in Chapter 11, Book 3) took the 1st House as starting from
the last 5 degrees of the 12th until the 25th of the 1st House
proper.138 Neither Ptolemy nor his commentators offer any expla-
nation for this assertion, nor do they clear up the difficulties caused
by it. Therefore we must now deal with it.
First, I assert that the cusp of any House marked by the circle
of position is the most powerful point of that House. Because of
this, any planet located on the House cusp is at its maximum
strength regarding its subordination to that House or to its essential
meanings, which are: the life, habits, and ingenuity [of the native]
for the 1st House; riches, for the 2nd House; and so on. The more
distant the planet is from the cusp within that space, the less
strength it has [within that House]. This fact is not only admitted
by all astrologers who have learned from experience, but is also
demonstrated especially by the fact that no point of that House, nor
any point in the preceding 5 degrees or in the degrees following
[the cusp] up to the 25th, is directed by the meanings of that space,
save only the point of its cusp; because it is clear that it [the cusp] is
the most efficacious, especially in directions of the Ascendant re-
garding life, and [in the directions] of the Midheaven regarding en-
terprises [actions], profession, and honors. As the cusp itself is the
ending of the preceding House and the beginning of the following
one, at the cusp the strength of the preceding House ceases com-
pletely and the strength of the next House is at its most decisive.139
138 In Ashmand's 1822 translation of the Proclus paraphrase of Ptolemy, he states
(Book III, Chapter XII): "Firstly, those places, only, are to be deemed prorogatory
[aphetic], to which the future assumption of the dominion of prorogation exclu-
sively belongs. These several places are the sign on the angle of the ascendant,
from the 5th degree above the horizon, to the 25th degree below it; the 30 degrees
in dexter sextile thereto, constituting the 11th House, called the Good Daemon;
also the 30 degrees in dexter quartile, forming the mid-heaven above the Earth;
those in dexter trine, making the 9th House, called God; and lastly, those in oppo-
sition, belonging to the angle of the west."
139 Morin seems to be drawing an analogy between the cusp of a House and the tip
of a sword. Just as the entire force of a thrusting sword is concentrated at its tip,
104

=== Page 101 ===
Thus the ancients erred in attributing the entire strength of a House
to a planet near the end of that House.
Second, I assert that it is contrary to both reason and experi-
ence to regard the last 5 degrees of the preceding House as belong-
ing to the next House, for then we would have to say that a planet
posited in those last 5 degrees occupies the next House and no lon-
ger acts on the essential meanings of the preceding one, and this
was never claimed by Ptolemy. Thus it is of great importance to as-
trology that we now explicate and eradicate this error.
Therefore, first, it is certain that the essential boundaries of
the Houses are only those two circles of position within which any
House is encompassed and in which the virtue of the planets and
the signs exists to determine with respect to the essential meanings
of the House itself, as will be explained in more detail in its time.
Outside that space or House proper no such virtue exists, at least
per se. For this reason one would not say that a planet located in the
last 5 degrees of the preceding House occupies the following
House, nor [would one say] that it is determined, at least by itself,
toward those essential meanings [i.e., the meanings of the next
House].
It does not matter, for example, that Mars, when located in the
last 5 degrees of the 6th House, signifies lawsuits and open ene-
mies, which are essential meanings of the 7th House, since that
[signification] occurs not because Mars occupies the 7th House
and is thus determined toward the meanings of the 7th, but rather
[it occurs] because Mars conjoins the degree of the ecliptic or of
the equator (which are the parts of the primum coelum or the first
physical cause) that the cusp occupies—and because of that it [the
cusp] is the most determined toward such meanings. Certainly the
signification of lawsuits and open enemies exists through the con-
junction [of the 7th House cusp] with Mars, and this signification
passing to the victim through the tip, so too the entire force of a House is concen-
trated at its cusp and affects the life of the native, at least in its directions, through
the cusp.
105

=== Page 102 ===
would also hold true if Mars were a distance of 6 degrees from the
7th House cusp (for clearly the semi-diameter of the orb of Mars is
6 degrees 30 minutes, as was explained previously); otherwise the
effect of the conjunction of Mars with that cusp, or with the parts
of the primum coelum that occupy it, would be null, and such an
opinion would be absurd and contrary to basic principles. Jupiter
and Venus, however, in the place of Mars would not signify this
[i.e., lawsuits and open enemies] but rather freedom from lawsuits
and open enemies.140
This fact can be demonstrated even more convincingly as fol-
lows. Let us suppose that Mars is in partile conjunction with the
cusp of the 7th House, and that the Sun is posited in the 6th House
at a distance of 12 degrees from Mars;141 certainly Mars would
then be conjunct the Sun or within the diameter of the Sun's orb.142
Given that Mars in the 7th House signifies lawsuits and open ene-
mies for the native, then illustrious lawsuits and prominent ene-
mies (perhaps even among kings and princes, are denoted by the
conjunction of Mars with the Sun, because the conjunction itself
cannot be ineffective), but one cannot conclude from this that the
Sun itself, at least by its own nature, is determined toward promi-
nent enemies and notable lawsuits that will befall the native—a
meaning that would not exist if one substituted Venus in place of
Mars—but rather that because Mars by its own nature and through
its determination in the 7th House formally signifies such things,
and Mars happens to be in conjunction with the Sun, which always
140 Mars conjoining the 7th cusp from within the 6th House signifies lawsuits be-
cause the nature of Mars, a malefic, is to quarrel and dispute. Venus and Jupiter
conjoining the 7th cusp from within the 6th House signify freedom from lawsuits
and quarrels because the nature of these benefic planets is to bring harmony and
ease to the matters signified by the House.
141 In this example Morin appears to be using the following traditional symbol-
ism: Sun = illustrious matters and kings; Mars = strife and conflict; the 7th House
= lawsuits and open enemies (affairs that are more analogous to the nature of
Mars than the Sun).
142 Morin maintained that the influence of the Sun extends as far as 18 degrees
from its body.
106

=== Page 103 ===
represents grand and illustrious matters, then it happens acciden-
tally that Mars, through its conjunction with the Sun, will signify
celebrated lawsuits and prominent open enemies. Thus Mars
through its corporal location [in the 7th House] is formally deter-
mined toward the significations of the 7th House, but the Sun is de-
termined [toward 7th House affairs] only accidentally through its
conjunction with Mars or with the cusp of the 7th House. And so it
is for the rest.
From that [the above discussion] there follow three points that
would be very worthwhile to keep in mind:
• First: the interval preceding the 7th House cusp, within
which a planet (at least accidentally by reason of its
conjunction or the aspect of the other) acquires the
meanings related to the 7th House, is different for each
planet because of the different semi-diameters of orb of
each of the planets. It was not without reason that Proclus
and the ancient Egyptians thought that the strength of any
cusp extended until the fifteenth degree preceding that
cusp. Clearly, they did not believe this to be true of all the
planets but only of the Sun, whose semi-diameter of orb the
ancients had fixed at 15 degrees, or they believed the same
of other planets aside from the Sun or to the Moon.
• Second: a planet near the end of any House is determined
with regard to the meanings of both Houses—obviously
formally with respect to the meanings of the House that it
physically occupies, and accidentally with respect to the
meanings of the next House, whose cusp it conjoins only in
a platic manner. Given that the closer to partile that
conjunction is, the more effectively the planet is
accidentally determined [to the meanings of the next
House], and the closer the planet is to the end of the House,
the less it is formally determined [by the preceding House],
then because of this it often happens that the accidental
determination prevails over the formal one. This may be
107

=== Page 104 ===
why the ancients believed that the last 5 degrees of a
previous House belong to the following space. Nonetheless,
the formal determination with respect to the previous space,
or House, is not abolished, nor does it cease completely.143
• Third: a planet in the 7th House is equally determined
accidentally toward the meanings of the 6th House through
the conjunction of a planet posited in that House, as, for
example, if the Sun were on the cusp of the 7th in
conjunction with a planet in the 6th, lying 12 degrees distant
from the Sun [at the 7th cusp]. Otherwise the boundaries of
the Houses [at their cusps] would [completely] abolish the
power of conjunctions and other aspects—a view that
would be absurd and contrary to experience.144
Someone might object that a planet exactly on the 7th House
cusp is centrally located and equally conditioned with respect to
both the 6th and 7th Houses, since it occupies those Houses
[equally] with the semi-diameter of its orb. Because of this, at
least, it does not stand to reason to say the planet is more in the 7th
House, determined to its meanings, than it is in the 6th.
I respond that such a conclusion is false, for although the
planet occupies equal portions of both Houses,145 it is nonetheless
143 Note by Robert M. Corre: [This is not a problem when we are dealing with the
angular Houses and the planets that precede the latter cusps and are within orb of
influence. The issue becomes relevant when we deal with the succedent and
cadent Houses as different House systems yield different values for those inter-
mediary Houses. This issue is a real slippery slope.]
144 In other words, the orb of influence of a planet does not stop at the cusp of a
House but extends across the cusp into the next House, depending on the size of
the orb. Morin's idea is inconsistent with the modem mistaken notion of the "void
of course Moon" (popularized by American astrologer A1 H. Morrison) in which
the influence of the Moon stops at the zodiacal sign's cusp. In classical astrology
the orb or the Moon's influence extends across the boundary of the zodiacal sign,
and the Moon's influence ceases only when one steps outside the sphere of influ-
ence (orb) surrounding the Moon.
145 That is, half the orb of the planet lies in each House.
108

=== Page 105 ===
not equally determined by them. In the final regions of the Houses,
the determinative force of the planets wanes, and ceases com-
pletely at the cusp of the following House, a matter of which we
have spoken. On the other hand, that force [of the House] is at its
decisive point in the first degrees of the Houses, but its point of
maximum impact is at the cusp. It is therefore reasonable to say
that a planet on the 7th cusp is in the 7th House, determined to its
[essential] meanings, more than in the 6th House, with respect to
whose meanings the planet, at least in the case where it is alone,
does not appear to have more influence. The same can be said of a
planet located equally between two signs [i.e., on the cusp of the
two signs] because certainly that point [the cusp] belongs to the
following sign and is subordinate to its rulership if the planet is di-
rect.
But again someone might object that those things in nature
that wax and wane146 do not pass [abruptly] from their maximum
[strength] to their minimum or even their null point; or from their
minimum or null point to their maximum [strength], except [by
passing through] some intermediate state, and so the determinative
force pertaining to a House or space, which is at its maximum point
at its cusp, will not begin [abruptly] from that point without some
part of it having been present in the previous House; rather it will
start at least 5 degrees before the cusp, according to the opinion of
the ancients.
But I respond: the prior axiom is true only within the same
class and therefore, from the maximum strength at the 7th cusp to
the minimum or even the zero point at the end of the 7th House [a
planet must] transit through the entire intermediate space, along
which [space] this force [of the 7th House] sensibly decreases. The
forces of the 6th and the 7th Houses, however, differ in kind; and it
is not that case that death and life, servants and children, enemies
l4f' Morin seems to have in mind natural phenomena such as ocean waves that
build continuously to a peak and then fade, or perhaps the phases of the Moon,
which waxes and wanes, passing through intermediate degrees of intensity.
109

=== Page 106 ===
and friends, relatives and spouse, etc., are of the same accidental na-
ture. Therefore it is not at all surprising that [at the cusp] one moves
immediately from the minimum virtue of one class to the maximum
virtue of the other. The same observation holds true of the signs of
the zodiac, because their forces or proper natures also differ specifi-
cally among themselves, thus, although the Jupiterian nature wanes
at the end of Pisces and the Martian nature is very much stronger at
the beginning of Aries, nonetheless, one would never say that a
planet in the 28th degree of Pisces lies in Aries or comes under the
rulership of Mars. Geometers customarily apply the same reasoning
to the step from the lesser to the greater angle, which they do not do
in the same way, on account of the different types of space encom-
passed by the semicircular and rectilinear angles.147
Jean Baptiste Morin Mola Chad (9) FebZB 1583 NS 0:47:33 arn LMT-0:ie52 Viiielranche. FR 45*N25' C04,E43' lieocemrrc Trcpicot Reg* TriwNode
13' VI . or
03'
28- ■ W 04° D 12 16-
fib 04'
T
- b
d" ITF 27*
$ 01* «Q
Morin's Natal Chart1411
14 I do not understand what Morin means by this comment about geome-
ters.—A.L.L.
148 This is a computer-calculated chartofMorin's nativity. Elsewhere Morin
110

=== Page 107 ===
In countless nativities one can prove even in practice that
this ancient opinion is contrary to experience. For example, in
my own natal chart, Mars (whose semi-diameter of orb is 6 de-
grees 30 minutes) rules the Ascendant and is only 4 degrees 57
minutes distant in perpendicular arc from the meridian under
the Earth [the I.C.]. Therefore, according traditional opinion,
Mars should be in the 4th House149 and thus must not be judged
by the significations of the 3rd, even though Mars is posited in
the 3rd House. But my own experience with my siblings demon-
strates the contrary. Thus, given that on my Ascendant is the
dominating sign [Aries]—Domicile of Mars and Exaltation of
the Sun—and that Mars is formally, according to our theory, in
the 3rd House, not only was I thereby inclined to love my sib-
lings and be generous with them, except insofar as my poverty
prevented it, but also, by celestial right, I was the first among
them and I was superior to them even in adolescence, even
though one of my two brothers was older than me. And they [my
siblings] not only venerated me and followed my advice in mat-
ters of custom and religion, but they were also afraid to dis-
please me almost as much as [they were afraid to displease] our
father. Finally, of the three brothers and three sisters [in my
family], only I have survived, for they are all deceased. No one
who is steeped in the principles of astrology would say that all
these circumstances proceed from any cause other than Mars,
ruler of the Ascendant, in the 3rd House. But, given that this
same Mars is conjunct the cusp of the 4th House through the
semi-diameter [radius] of its orb and thereby Mars is deter-
mined accidentally to the significations of the 4th House, for
comments that his natal Mars lies at 8 degrees 10 minutes of Cancer (the com-
puter gives 8 degrees 7 minutes) in the 3rd House. Morin used 45N25 as the lati-
tude of Villefranche, but a modem atlas lists it as 45N59. The chart above seeks to
replicate the natal chart that Morin used for himself.
149 Traditionally, any planet within 5 degrees of the cusp of the next House is re-
garded as occupying that House. Morin appears to have made an error in arithme-
tic. His comments would be true if his Mars were at 8 Cancer 10 and his I.C. were
at 13 Cancer 07.
Ill

=== Page 108 ===
that reason I also lavished my parents with love and favors;150
but I spent my maternal inheritance to study medicine and obtain
my doctorate. On the other hand, I gave the paternal inheritance to
my older brother because, while I was away on my travels, on my
orders he had filially cared for my father, who was already old and,
above all, ill with the ailment from which he died. Both inheri-
tances consisted of good quality lands and properties, certainly
also caused by the conjunction of Mars with the 4th cusp, and in
that way it eminently supports my entire life and the prior doc-
trine.151
Duke of Montmorency Mole Chart |7| Apr 30 1595 NS 10 06:45 prr L>/T -0 09.20 Pons.FR 48'N52' OOZ'EZO'
TropKa/ Regtomon/anf/fi TmeNode
01 ffP
■*2
nu 17! 14" 14
$
m.
13"
\ ti... 4 '■ 59' O
a 09' r or O «?«■
^ b ^ WE . 04* /
05*
24* or 17«4
O T
3€
Natal Chart of the Duke of Montmorency
150 Morin's mother reportedly died hating him.
151 Note by Robert M. Corre; [Morin's reasoning is sound on both the issues he
raised. He did not have knowledge of Pluto, which sends a square from the 12th
into the 3rd, nor did he know about Neptune in the 4th, disposing all the 12th
House planets.]
152 This chart is based on the one presented on page 175 of Astrosynthesis, which I
was unable to recreate exactly with modem computer software.
112

=== Page 109 ===
In a similar way, in the natal chart of Gustavus Adolphus,
king of Sweden,153 Saturn is formally in the 8th House and acci-
dentally in the 9th House,154 exiled [in Detriment] in Leo, a fire
sign, damaged by an almost partile square from Mars in the 12th
House and also opposite to the ruler of the Ascendant in an almost
partile manner. Therefore, to the extent that the 9th House was af-
fected, it signified unfortunate and deadly long journeys away
from his homeland; to the extent that it [Saturn] pertains to the 8th
House, damaged by the square from Mars, [it signified] a violent
death by burning lead because, among the metals, Saturn signifies
lead and among the elements Leo signifies fire; also with iron, be-
cause of the square from Mars.155 For this reason, after two wounds
153 Here is a brief biographical note on King Gustavus Adolphus: "Gustavus
Adolphus organized the strongest army of the early seventeenth century, coura-
geously led his forces from the front, and earned the title of the "Father of Modem
Warfare" because of his innovative skills in the tactical integration of infantry,
cavalry, artillery, and logistics. His advancements in military science made Swe-
den the dominant Baltic power for the next one hundred years. Future command-
ers who studied and admired Gustavus included Napoleon I."—Source;
http;//www.carpenoctem.tv/military/gustavus.html
154 Saturn accidentally in the 9th House refers to Saturn being in the ninth sign
(Leo) away from the first sign (Sagittarius) on the Ascendant. Morin is apparently
using the whole sign method of house division to determine accidental houses.
The cusp of the 9th House at 5° Virgo is too far from Saturn at 24° Leo to be within
orb of a conjunction.
155 Note by Robert M. Corre: [Morin was unaware of Uranus and the role it may
have played in the death of the king. I have observed the charts of several people
who died accidentally and violently with Uranus in the 3rd (car crashes and one
fireman). Moreover, the King of Sweden has a fire sign rising, with Uranus send-
ing a trine to the Ascendant. In addition, Uranus is the dispositor of Jupiter, the
ruler of the Ascendant. While the Uranus will give alertness and charismatic
charm, it will also incline to rash, impulsive, or careless behavior. It could give a
cavalier attitude under the wrong circumstances. Furthermore, Mars disposes of
Uranus into the 12th and is final dispositor of Jupiter, ruler of the Ascendant and
ofVenus, ruler of his 10th, his destiny. In the end, he's led to the 12th House Mars
that receives the square from Saturn, the Saturn as co-ruler of Aquarius, the sign
in which Jupiter and Venus are placed. He played it to the hilt and fate finally
caught up with him one day.
In any case, 1 [R.M.C.] do consider Uranus working for the 4th House and so Ura
113

=== Page 110 ===
Gustavo Adolphe Male Chart (3) Dec 91594 OS 7:11.34 ari LMT-l 12 20 .SWSO 59,N0r019'E05'
Tmpical Repow&Maous TnfNo.-te
■rrp
\ 16' i* 16-
06 fTlr $ 1 H
\ ITU
cr 25 lib
v-
. S
O
06* 14°
16-
\ \
T
05° Mf
Chart of King Gustave Adolphe used by Morin'58
(Regiomontanus Houses)
inflicted by flaming bullets, he [the king] was riddled with blows
and piercing of swords, and he even received contemptible verbal
treatment. In addition, the king, partially naked and filthy with
blood and powder, could hardly be found on the following day
nus also has an impact on the 10th by ricochet. Zoltan Mason taught that if a
planet precedes an angular House cusp by less than 8.5 degrees, it is actually
working for the angular House, which in this case would be the 10th. Thus the in-
fluence of Uranus is felt on the 1 st and 10th Houses two times; first by aspect and
ricochet; and second by disposing of Jupiter and Venus, the respective rulers.
Actually, Uranus influences all four angular House cusps. Also, Jupiter rules his
[Cancer] 8th House by Exaltation and thus also determines death, and as 8th ruler
Jupiter is at the disposal of Uranus.
But if we look into the issue more deeply, there are issues dealing with feelings of
being servile coupled with dramatic over compensation. The cadent ruler, Jupiter
comes out through disposition in an angular House. We have to always consider
the nature of the planet first, and in this case, the dispositor is Uranus.]
114

=== Page 111 ===
Gustavo Adolphe Nits) Chart Die 8 ISM OS 7:11:3* im LMT -I 12 20 . Smrttn 59* NOI'OIS' EOS' Oioointrlc Tropical VVhola Siena Tma Noda
oo- fTFoo
oo-
**' IB" i n
i * or rru \»
Q*25' nU29
00- Q w 14- » ov 2"
14- 3i.
9 V
00- x00"
ar
.T
Whole Sign Chart of Guslave Adolphe with "Accidental" Houses
among the mounds of cadavers and, once located, could scarcely
be recognized—a shameful end156 that was presaged by Saturn very
badly disposed in the 8th House, as is confirmed also by the natal
chart and the death of the duke of Montmorancy.157 Thus Saturn
carried the meaning of both the 8 th and the 9th Houses.
156 The king was siain in the battle at Liitzen on November 6, 1632.
157 On page 44 of Astrosynthesis Morin writes: "For example, Saturn in Leo in the
eighth House of the Due of Montmorency showed his violent death in disgrace."
158 Note by James Holden: [The chart in Astrosynthesis agrees with the one in the
Astrologia Gallica; and in Book 23, Chapter 7 of Astrologia Gallica (p. 17 of
Holden's translation), Morin says, 'Saturn was in Exile in Leo in the eighth House
with Cor Leonis,' and in my footnote, I mention that the star Regulus was at 24
Leo 43. There Morin says nothing about Saturn's being in the 9th House, but per-
haps in Book 18 when he says it is "accidentally" in the 9th House, he may be
thinking that Leo is the 9th sign from the rising sign Sagittarius. The date 18 De
115

=== Page 112 ===
Continuing with the natal chart of the King of Sweden,159 we
see that the Sun, ruler of the 8th and 9th Houses, is formally in the
1 st and accidentally in the 2nd House.160 Insofar as the Sun is in the
1 st House, it represents an illustrious and famous individual on the
entire orb of the Earth; insofar as the Sun, as ruler of the 8th [of
death], is in the 1st, [it signifies] a celebrated and public death
through his own fault, because he did not want to put on arms for
battle, despite the fact that his friends begged him with many en-
treaties, for he would not have been killed had he been properly
armed; insofar as [the Sun] ruler of the 9th is in the 1 st House and
in trine with the 9th House,161 he took many distant and glorious
journeys; but to the extent that it is in the 2nd House, it refers to
splendid riches acquired in foreign lands through Mars162 itself and
through the effort by the Sun itself, ruler of the 9th in trine with the
9th. Therefore the Sun also carries the meanings of both the 1st and
cember in Astrosynthesis is from the chart in the Astrologia Gallica, and like all
dates in the Astrologia Gallica it is measured from the preceding noon, so from
Morin's point of view the King was bom on the 18th (astronomical), which is of
course equivalent to the 19th (civil, measured from the preceding midnight).]
159 On page 78 of Astrosynthesis Morin writes about the King of Sweden; "... Sat-
urn, ruler of II, signified, by the trine aspect which it received from the Sun in I,
great riches which the King acquired in fact by wars (this because of the presence
of Mercury, Ruler of VII, in II) and in which acquisition he was helped by very
good luck due to the fact that Jupiter, Mercury, Venus, and the Part of Fortune
were in II under the Rulership of this Saturn." Morin apparently used the daytime
formula for the Part of Fortune, which gives a value of 26 Aquarius 47.
160 Morin seems to be arguing as follows. Leo is the 9th sign away from Sagittar-
ius, making the Sun accidental ruler of the 9th. The Sun at 27 Sagittarius lies
within 5 degrees of the cusp of the 2nd sign Capricorn. Thus the Sun is acciden-
tally determined toward the meanings of 2nd sign from Sagittarius, that is, it car-
ries an accidental 2nd House meaning and acts as if it were in the 2nd House.
Modem astrologers call this technique the "whole sign" method of house divi-
sion. A glance at the whole sign chart of Gustave Adolphe should make matters
clear.
161 The Sun in Sagittarius is in trine with Leo, the 9th sign from Sagittarius. Also,
the Sun at 27 Sagittarius is in trine with the Regiomontanus 9th cusp at 5 Virgo.
162 Because Mars rules Capricorn on the 2nd cusp by Exaltation.
116

=== Page 113 ===
the 2nd Houses. The same observation holds true of other natal
charts, as I have always observed.
Finally, Ptolemy does not say that the 5 degrees [of the 12th
House] preceding the Ascendant do not belong to the domain of
the 12th, but rather that those degrees are only to be considered for
the selection of the Apheta, if the Sun or the Moon are found in
them, because clearly the Sun or the Moon are determined, at least
accidentally, and more so, effectively, for the essential meanings
of the Ascendant, to which they are conjoined very closely, and be-
cause of that they merit aphetic power.
117

=== Page 114 ===
CHAPTER XVI163
How One Should Measure the Final 5 Degrees
Before the Cusp of the Ancients, or, in my view,
the Semi-Diameter of the Orb of Influence
of the Planets. Also, that Cardan should be
Criticized in that Regard.
REGARDING THE 5 degrees that precede the cusp, as discussed
by the ancients, or in my view, the semi-diameter of the orb of in-
fluence of any planet, one can rightfully ask why the distance is
measured starting at the cusp. Schoner,164 a proponent of equal
House division through the ecliptic, believed that the Houses
should be reckoned on the ecliptic, in accord with the view of Ptol-
emy, but Cardan in his Commentary, Chapter 11, Book 3, states
that Ptolemy believed the 5 degrees before the cusp and the 25 de-
grees following it to be degrees along the equator. For that reason
the beginning of the 11th House would be 25 equatorial165 degrees
distant from the Midheaven. When Cardan offers his own natal
chart166 as an example, given that the right ascension of his
163 My translation of Chapter 16 and some notes on this chapter were revised by
James Holden on 19 March 2002.—A.L.L.
164 Note by James Holden: [Johann Schoner (1477-1547), a professor of mathe-
matics who wrote several books on astrology. He was undoubtedly right, and ev-
eryone else was wrong. Ptolemy simply recommended a modification of the
Equal House system. If he had had any idea of measuring arcs on the equator to es-
tablish the Houses, he would certainly have said so. And he didn't!]
165 That is, measured in Right Ascension in the plane of the Equator.
166 Note by James Holden; [Jerome Cardan was bom Sept. 24,1501, in Pavia,
119

=== Page 115 ===
Midheaven is 289 degrees 47 minutes, then the oblique167 ascen-
sion of that cusp will be 314 degrees 47 minutes.168 Having located
that point, he looks for the degree of the ecliptic corresponding to
that cusp and erroneously finds it to be 7 degrees of Aquarius; and
it can be clearly seen how false this is by the fact that the cusp of
the 11 th House would be, for him, in the 8th degree of Aquarius.169
But the 7th and the 8th degrees of Aquarius on the ecliptic are not
five equatorial degrees distant from one another. Whether the dis-
tance of the 7th degree of Aquarius from the MC is taken by right
ascension or by oblique ascension, it is not found to be 25 equato-
rial degrees distant, but by right ascension it will be a distance of
19 degrees 38 minutes, and by oblique ascension [it will be a dis-
tance of] about 29 degrees, because the pole of the world is ele-
vated above the circle of position of the seventh degree of Aquar-
ius by about 25 degrees, and therefore the oblique ascension of the
seventh degree of Aquarius would be 318 degrees 25 minutes,
which Cardan did not notice.170
duchy of Milan [Italy] and died on September 21, 1576 in Rome. His horoscope
is given in his Book of Twelve Nativities. Interestingly, it has Alchabitius cusps,
which he said gave House positions more in accordance with his own life, al-
though he usually used Equal House for the horoscopes that he cast.]
167 In context, this should probably be right ascension, since he is adding 25 de-
grees on the equator to the right ascension of theM.C., which is also measured on
the equator, to produce a point 25 degrees further along the equator. It may be
that Morin is criticizing Cardan for confusing right and oblique ascension, but
this seems unlikely since Cardan was an accomplished astrologer,
168 Because 289 + 25 =314.
169 Note by James Holden: [Cardan, bearing in mind Ptolemy's injunction to use
semi-arcs in calculating primary directions, actually calculated fairly closely the
point that is at 25/30 of the Placidian 10th House, for the Placidian cusp of the
11th House would be 11 Aquarius 20. Morin, on the other hand, calculates 25/30
of the Regiomontanus 10th House, and of course gets a different figure, since the
Regiomontanus cusp of the 11th House is at 8 Aquarius 00 (both cusps calculated
with the latitude of 44N30 mentioned on the next page, rather than the true lati-
tude of Pavia).]
170 Because he was not calculating a Regiomontanus position.
120

=== Page 116 ===
Jerome Cardan Male Ctiart (5) SepaalBOl OS 626 <2om lMT-0 36 «) PMO iTALY «'N10'OOS'EIO' fcoretwrc TmpKt! ftflyamarlonui True Node
07- V3 02- w K Ai 7) ,12" 00' 10*
T II '0 Lie"
. B
12/
^ 02° M e ! nb ?4' P. 10° o n 10" jr —26° M | 14 —23° * " 9 , 16 ' 6. 10° n io o ^ n*
Cf 19
02 fTP $
$
A'a/a/ Chart of Jerome Cardan with the MC at 289 degrees
47 minutes of right ascension.
But that degree should be found as follows: given that the
oblique ascension of the cusp cited above was 314 degrees 47 min-
utes, then since the distance from that point of the equator to the
Midheaven is 25 degrees with zero declination, one must find the cir-
cle of position and the elevation of the pole above it, at the latitude of
the birth place, which is 44 degrees and 30 minutes, and one will find
22 degrees171 for that elevation [of the Earth's pole above the circle of
position]. Finally, in the table of oblique ascensions for a latitude of
22 degrees, one looks for that point which has an oblique ascension of
314 degrees 47 minutes, and one finds 4 degrees 17 minutes of
Aquarius for the start of that House [the 11th].172
171 Actually, 22 degrees and 33 minutes.
172 Note by James Holden: [That is, for the point that is "5 degrees" before the
cusp of the Regiomontanus 11 th House.]
121

=== Page 117 ===
Since, however, I have rejected those boundaries of 5 degrees
for all the planets and have introduced in their place the semi-di-
ameter of the orb of influence of any planet, because obviously
those [5 degree] boundaries had been fixed by the ancients only
because they had observed that the planets posited a little before
the cusp also influenced those things essentially signified by that
cusp. But [the planets] influence by their own conjunction with the
cusp, as we have said above, and that conjunction must be mea-
sured by the semi-diameter of the orb of the conjoined planet.
Therefore, having taken the value of that semi-diameter as in
Chapter 1, the distance of the planet from that cusp will have to be
found. This can be done in one of two ways: either by directing a
planet to the cusp and taking the arc of direction for the distance
sought, or by dropping a perpendicular arc from the planet to the
circle of position of the cusp itself and taking that arc for the dis-
tance. Certainly, the second method is truer and more accurate, be-
cause that arc is part of the said semi-diameter, or vice versa [i.e.,
the semi-diameter is part of that arc], or the two are equal. In Book
17, Section 3, Chapter 6 of Astrologia Gallica, we demonstrated
how to find that arc.
It remains for us only to criticize Cardan again [for what he
says] at the end of his Book 3, Chapter 11, about the boundaries [of
the Houses] mentioned earlier. There, when speaking of the
aphetic Houses, which according to Ptolemy are the 1st, 10th, 7th,
9th, and 11th, Cardan write:
"That when a proper House follows a proper
House, those last 5 degrees should not be dis-
carded because, even though they are not properly
considered to be part of that House, they are none-
theless part of the House following. For example,
the last 5 degrees of the 9th House, even though
they are not good for the 9th, are still good be-
cause they are part of the 10th; and the last 5 de-
grees of the 10th, even though they are not good
122

=== Page 118 ===
for the 10th, are good for the 11th House, which
follows; and so we can consider the 9th and the
10th [to be] without the loss of these 5 degrees.
Therefore it will be necessary only to take them
away from the 1st, 7th, and 11th because the
Houses that follow them, which are the 2nd, 8th,
and 12th, are not aphetic [Houses].
By which statement two things are signified:
First; that those 5 degrees are to be under-
stood only of the aphetic Houses cited previously,
but not of the remaining [Houses], which is never-
theless contrary to the express words of Ptolemy,
who in Chapter 11 subtracts those 5 final degrees
of the 12th [House] in favor of the 1st, joining
them indeed to the following 25 degrees of the 1 st
[House], whose own final 5 degrees will conse-
quently have to be, in turn, joined to the following
25 degrees of the 2nd [House], and so on [around
the circle], so that each House may consist of 30
degrees.173
Second: that when one proper aphetic House
succeeds another proper House, one need not sub-
tract those 5 final degrees from the preceding
House, [according to Cardan,] "because, (he says)
even though by good logic they belong to the
House of which they are a part, nonetheless they
are by good logic [part] of the one following." But
I say, if they are by good logic [part] of the one
following because it is aphetic, why are they not
173 Morin apparently means that each House consists of 30 degrees on the equator.
Pepita Sanchis Llacer notes that Morin did not use the equal House system, but in-
stead used the system of Regiomontanus. Other authors cited did use equal
Houses, and Morin is trying to demonstrate the illogic of the equal House theory.
123

=== Page 119 ===
by good logic [part] of the one preceding, which is
also aphetic? But, more importantly, we will dem-
onstrate in its own place that the Apheta of Ptol-
emy and his manner of selecting it are fictions.
That is why one must place the accidental bound-
aries of the Houses, which we are dealing with
here, not only for those spaces [i.e., the aphetic
spaces] but for all of them.
Thus a matter of great importance for astrology, one that has
never been understood until now, appears to have been resolved by
us in a way that not only makes its veracity most evident but also
leaves no objection to be raised against the doctrine which we have
propounded that cannot be very easily resolved.
124

=== Page 120 ===
CHAPTER XVII
How One Should Distribute the Inherent Strength
of Each Space [House] Among Its Parts
[Degrees], or How One Should Find the
Strength of Any Planet bg House.
ACCORDING TO Chapter 15 of this book, because each House
or space is differentiated from its fellow Houses by its essential
characteristics, but the entire strength of any House ought to be
granted to its cusp, and that strength diminishes sensibly within the
House in inverse proportion to the distance from the cusp in such a
way that the strength of that House ceases at the end of the House,
then if one seeks to know how much strength can be attributed by
House position to a planet located in the 11th House, one would
find this [strength] in the following manner:
One takes, on the circle of the prime vertical, the elevation of
both circles of position that delimit the 11th House, according to
the table of Campanus, devised by him for the division of the
Houses. The difference of altitude is the distance of one circle [of
position] from the other [on the prime vertical] and to the higher al-
titude—that is, to the cusp of the 11th House—there correspond 4
degrees of strength—which is clearly the strength of the 11th
House—and to the lower altitude174 there correspond zero degrees
of strength. Next, one also takes the height of the circle of position
of the planet posited within the 11th House (but it will also be evi-
174 The circle of position of lower altitude on the prime vertical is the very end of
the 11th House.
125

=== Page 121 ===
dent if it stands out, if the pole is higher above that circle than
above the circle of the 12th House) and one notes the two differ-
ences in elevation: the first, that of the circles of the 11th and 12th
House cusps, which would be 28 degrees in the table of Campanus;
the second, that of the circles of the planet and the 12th House
cusp, which would be 6 degrees. And one asks: if at 28 degrees of
distance, counted from the height of the circle of the 12th until the
height of the circle of the 11 th, there should be 4 degrees of
strength, then [proportionately] how much strength must one at-
tribute to the 6 degrees of distance counted from the height of the
circle of the 12th until the height of the circle of the planet? Doing
the calculation, one arrives at an answer of 0.51, which will be the
[degrees of] strength of that planet in the space or House. And one
works the same way with the rest.
Because, however, it does not seem necessary to determine it
[planetary strength by House] precisely and it is of no great impor-
tance to do so, especially in a question of the strength of the plan-
ets, which is only surmised by conjecture, it will be sufficient to re-
solve the matter with a proportion that is equally hypothetical and
valid,175 and to remember that the strength of any House increases
from the following cusp back toward the preceding one, and for
that reason I established a proportion like the previous one, and not
on the contrary.
175 Morin is advocating that we simply eyeball the planet's position in the House.
The closer the planet is to the initial cusp, the greater its strength by position in
that House.
126

=== Page 122 ===
Appendix
A. The Friends and Enemies of the Planets
by Pepita Sanchis Llacer (P.S.L.)
Below is what I (P.S.L.) have deduced from Morin's com-
ments and from other texts;
• The Sun is compatible with all but Saturn, which extin-
guishes and cools him. The Sun confers brilliance and dig-
nity to all.
• The Moon is incompatible with Saturn and Mars. Both
these malefics harm her, although she doesn't damage
them. With Mercury, the Moon has a difficult relationship,
because, as the Moon signifies the emotions and Mercury
represents reason, the Moon has a tendency to diminish
Mercury's capacity for logic. The Moon contributes emo-
tion and changeability to all the planets. The Moon goes
specially well with Venus and with Jupiter, who are her
great friends.
• Mercury is compatible with all except Mars, who harms
Mercury (though Mercury does not harm Mars). Mercury
goes especially well with Saturn and Uranus in intellectual
matters. Mercury contributes reason and logic to all. Never-
theless, since the Moon and Venus are very emotional plan-
ets and Mercury is extremely rational, there is difficulty in
bringing harmony between them.
• Venus is incompatible with Saturn and Mars, which harm
her. To the other planets Venus contributes softness and
beauty, and she appeases and tames them. Her best friends
are the Moon and Jupiter.
127

=== Page 123 ===
• Mars is incompatible with all the planets except the Sun,
and upon all he confers his negative effect. With Venus he
can be compatible, but only under certain especially favor-
able conditions. The effect of Mars is to confer aggressive-
ness, therefore:
• Mars with the Moon alters it, because Mars alters the
emotions (as when you are angry, your emotions are
very upset in that moment).
• Mars with Venus instills aggressiveness in those mat-
ters that Venus rules (like someone who seeks affection
by screaming and kicking and clearly does not succeed
in getting affection).
• Mars with Mercury (the faculty of speech) confers
abruptness and also aggressiveness.
• It is Mars who speaks loudly, in a precipitate way and
says things that offend.
• Mars brings the same thing to the other planets: abrupt-
ness, precipitate action, aggressiveness, and violence.
• Jupiter is compatible with all the planets except Mars. Ju-
piter's effect is to magnify, to increase, and to enlarge. Jupi-
ter with Mars does not turn out well, because what enlarges
is the anger! Jupiter very much enjoys being with the Moon
and Venus.
• Saturn is incompatible and harmtlil with all the planets ex-
cept Jupiter and Mercury (and with Mercury it is compati-
ble only in the intellectual realm, but Saturn does not give
him luck). Saturn harms the other planets, but they do not
harm Saturn.
• The planets that Saturn harms the most are the Sun and
the Moon. Recall that the basic effect of Saturn is to
harden, to chill, or to extinguish (turn off), therefore:
• Saturn extinguishes the Sun and removes its glow.
• Saturn dries the Moon and hardens it.
• Saturn hardens and cools the other planets and puts ob-
stacles in their path.
128

=== Page 124 ===
B. Morin's Table of the Ratios of Primitive Qualities of the
Planets176
PLANET HOT COLD WET DRY
Sun 5.5 - - 2
Moon - 5 6 -
Saturn - 3.5 - 3
Jupiter 1.5
Mars 2.5 3
Venus 0.5 4
Mercury 1.5 -
C. The Planets Listed in Order of the Quantity of a Primi-
tive Quality According to Morin177
• Hot Planets: Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Venus
• Cold Planets: Moon, Saturn, Mercury
• Wet Planets: Moon, Venus
• Dry Planets: Saturn & Mars, Sun, Jupiter & Mercury
176 See page 24 of Cornerstones of Astrology by Schwickert and Weiss, 1972.
177 In Classical Astrology for Modern Living, p. 30, Lee Lehman gives a slightly
different table of the primitive qualities of the planets. Morin regards Jupiter as
dry, but Lehman regards Jupiter as wet. William Lilly considered Venus to be
cold, but Morin considered Venus to be hot. Here is Lehman's list of qualities:
Saturn Cold Dry
Jupiter Hot Wet
Mars Hot Dry
Sun Hot Dry
Venus Hot Wet
Mercury Variable Variable Variable Variable
Moon Cold Wet
129

=== Page 125 ===
D: Morin's Conception of the Meanings of the Angles and
the Twelve Houses of the Horoscope178
Morin regarded each House as having an essential significa-
tion as well as sharing, in a weaker way, in the meanings of the
House opposite. Following is a list of Morin's key words for the
Angles and the Houses.
The Angles:
• Ascendant: Birth, life.
• Midheaven; Vigor, action.
• Descendant: Decline, marriage.
• Imum Caeli: Suffering, Burial
The Houses:
1. Life, temperament, state of health, moral nature, mental
qualities.
2. Wealth, gold, goods of the acquired estate.
3. Brothers, relations.
4. Parents, successions.
5. Children, bodily pleasures.
6. Servants, subordinates, domestic animals.
7. Marriage, open enemies, lawsuits.
8. Death.
9. Religion, journeys.
10. Action, profession, dignity, fame.
11. Friends.
12. Sickness, imprisonment, exile, secret enemies, hardships.
178 From Astrologica Gallica Book Twenty-Two Directions translated by James
Holden, pp 241-242.
130

=== Page 126 ===
References
Ashmand, J.M. (1822), translator. Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos or Quad-
ripartite Being Four Books of the Influence of the Stars.
Montana: Kessinger Publishing Company (1993).
Corre, Robert (2001). Forum on Astrology: A distance-learning
program based on the methods of Morin de Villefranche.
http;//www.forumonastrology.com/
DeVore, Nicholas (1947). Encyclopedia of Astrology. New York:
Philosophical Library.
Holden, James H (1994), translator. Astrologia Gallic a, Book
Tweny-Two Directions by Jean-Baptiste Morin. Tempe,
Arizona; American Federation of Astrologers.
Lehman, J Lee (1996). Classical Astrology for Modern Living.
West Chester, Pennsylvania; Whitford Press.
Lilly, William (1647). Christian Astrology. Regulus edition.
Exeter: A. Wheaton & Co., Ltd.
Louis, Anthony (1998). Horaiy Astrology Plain & Simple. St.
Paul, Minnesota; Llewellyn.
Mason, Zoltan (1974). Astrosynthesis. A translation of Book 21 of
Morin's Astrologia Gallica by Lucy Little. New York:
Emerald Books.
Robbins, FE (1980), translator. Ptolemy Tetrabiblos. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Schwickert and Weiss (1972). Cornerstones of Astrology. Dallas,
Texas; Sangreal Foundation, Inc.
131

=== Page 127 ===
About the Translator
Anthony Louis LaBruzza has translated several texts from
Spanish to English. He also has published numerous articles about
astrology and related topics under the pen name Anthony Louis.
His books include Horaty Astrology Plain & Simple and the very
popular Tarot Plain & Simple, both published by Llewellyn.
132
